UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019
or
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from                          to                         
Commission file number 1-442
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
 
91-0425694
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
100 N. Riverside Plaza,
Chicago,
IL
 
60606-1596
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (312)-544-2000
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Common Stock, $5.00 Par Value
BA
New York Stock Exchange
(Title of each class)
(Trading Symbol)
(Name of each exchange on which registered)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§
232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-
K.Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated  filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth
company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large Accelerated Filer
☒
Accelerated filer 
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial
accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes ☐ No ☒
As of June 30, 2019, there were 562,702,606 common shares outstanding held by nonaffiliates of the registrant, and the aggregate market value of the common shares (based
upon the closing price of these shares on the New York Stock Exchange) was approximately $204.8 billion.
The number of shares of the registrant’s common stock outstanding as of January 24, 2020 was 563,152,208.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference to the registrant’s definitive proxy statement, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 120 days after the
close of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.

Table of Contents
THE BOEING COMPANY
Index to the Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
 
PART I
 
 
Page
Item  1.
Business
1
Item  1A.
Risk Factors
5
Item  1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
15
Item  2.
Properties
15
Item  3.
Legal Proceedings
16
Item  4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
16
PART II
Item  5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
17
Item  6.
Selected Financial Data
18
Item  7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
19
Item  7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
48
Item  8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
50
Item  9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
123
Item  9A.
Controls and Procedures
123
Item  9B.
Other Information
123
PART III
Item  10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
124
Item  11.
Executive Compensation
127
Item  12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
128
Item  13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
128
Item  14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
128
PART IV
Item  15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
129
Item  16.
Form 10-K Summary
131
Signatures
132

Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1. Business
The Boeing Company, together with its subsidiaries (herein referred to as “Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our”), is one of the world’s major
aerospace firms.
We are organized based on the products and services we offer. We operate in four reportable segments:
•
Commercial Airplanes (BCA);
•
Defense, Space & Security (BDS);
•
Global Services (BGS);
•
Boeing Capital (BCC).
Commercial Airplanes Segment
This  segment  develops,  produces  and  markets  commercial  jet  aircraft  and  provides  fleet  support  services,  principally  to  the  commercial  airline
industry worldwide. We are a leading producer of commercial aircraft and offer a family of commercial jetliners designed to meet a broad spectrum
of global passenger and cargo requirements of airlines. This family of commercial jet aircraft in production includes the 737 narrow-body model and
the 747, 767, 777 and 787 wide-body models. Development continues on the 777X program and certain 737 MAX derivatives.
Defense, Space & Security Segment
This segment engages in the research, development, production and modification of manned and unmanned military aircraft and weapons systems
for  strike,  surveillance  and  mobility,  including  fighter  and  trainer  aircraft;  vertical  lift,  including  rotorcraft  and  tilt-rotor  aircraft;  and  commercial
derivative aircraft,  including anti-submarine and tanker aircraft.  In addition, this segment engages in the research, development,  production and
modification  of  the  following  products  and  related  services:  strategic  defense  and  intelligence  systems,  including  strategic  missile  and  defense
systems, command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR), cyber and information solutions,
and intelligence systems; satellite systems, including government and commercial satellites and space exploration.
BDS'  primary  customer  is  the United  States  Department  of  Defense (U.S.  DoD).  Revenues  from  the  U.S.  DoD,  including  foreign  military  sales
through  the  U.S.  government,  accounted  for  approximately 84% of  its 2019 revenues.  Other  significant BDS customers  include  the  National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and customers in international defense, civil and commercial satellite markets.
This segment's primary products include the following fixed-wing military aircraft: F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, F-15 programs, P-8 programs, KC-46A
Tanker,  and  T-7A  Red  Hawk.  This  segment  produces  rotorcraft  and  rotary-wing  programs,  such  as  CH-47  Chinook,  AH-64  Apache,  and  V-22
Osprey. Unmanned vehicles include the MQ-25, QF-16, and Insitu’s Scan Eagle aircraft. In addition, this segment's products include space and
missile  systems  including:  government  and  commercial  satellites,  NASA’s  Space  Launch  System  (SLS),  the  International  Space  Station,
Commercial Crew, missile defense and weapons programs, and Joint Direct Attack Munition, as well as the United Launch Alliance joint venture.
Global Services Segment
This segment provides services to our commercial and defense customers worldwide. BGS sustains aerospace platforms and systems with a full
spectrum of products and services, including supply chain
1

Table of Contents
and logistics management,  engineering,  maintenance  and modifications,  upgrades and conversions,  spare parts,  pilot and maintenance  training
systems and services, technical and maintenance documents, and data analytics and digital services.
Boeing Capital Segment
BCC seeks to ensure that Boeing customers have the financing they need to buy and take delivery of their Boeing product and manages overall
financing exposure. BCC’s portfolio consists of equipment under operating leases, sales-type/finance leases, notes and other receivables, assets
held for sale or re-lease and investments.
Intellectual Property
We own numerous patents and have licenses for the use of patents owned by others, which relate to our products and their manufacture. In addition
to owning a large portfolio of intellectual property, we also license intellectual property to and from third parties. For example, the U.S. government
has licenses in our patents that are developed in performance of government contracts, and it may use or authorize others to use the inventions
covered by such patents for government purposes. Unpatented research, development and engineering skills, as well as certain trademarks, trade
secrets,  and  other  intellectual  property  rights,  also  make  an  important  contribution  to  our  business.  While  our  intellectual  property  rights  in  the
aggregate  are  important  to  the  operation  of  each  of  our  businesses,  we  do  not  believe  that  our  business  would  be  materially  affected  by  the
expiration of any particular intellectual property right or termination of any particular intellectual property patent license agreement.
Employees
Total workforce level at December 31, 2019 was approximately 161,100. As of December 31, 2019, our principal collective bargaining agreements
were with the following unions:
Union
Percent of our
Employees
Represented
Status of the Agreements with Major Union
The International Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers (IAM)
22%
We have two major agreements; one expiring in June 2022 and
one in September 2024.
The Society of Professional Engineering Employees in
Aerospace (SPEEA)
11%
We have two major agreements expiring in October 2022.
The United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural
Implement Workers of America (UAW)
1%
We have one major agreement expiring in October 2022.
Competition
The commercial jet aircraft  market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive.  We face aggressive international competitors  who are
intent  on  increasing  their  market  share,  such  as  Airbus  and  other  entrants  from  Russia,  China  and  Japan.  We  are  focused  on  improving  our
processes and continuing cost reduction efforts. We intend to continue to compete with other airplane manufacturers by providing customers with
greater value products.
BDS  faces  strong  competition  in  all  market  segments,  primarily  from  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation,  Northrop  Grumman  Corporation,  Raytheon
Company, General Dynamics Corporation and SpaceX. Non-U.S.
2

Table of Contents
companies such as BAE Systems and Airbus Group continue to build a strategic presence in the U.S. market by strengthening their North American
operations and partnering with U.S. defense companies. In addition, certain competitors have occasionally formed teams with other competitors to
address specific customer requirements. BDS expects the trend of strong competition to continue into 2020.
The  commercial  and  defense  services  market  is  an  extremely  challenging  landscape  made  up  of  many  of  the  same  strong  U.S.  and  non-U.S.
competitors facing BCA and BDS along with other competitors in those markets. BGS leverages our extensive services network offering products
and services which span the life cycle of our defense and commercial airplane programs: training, fleet services and logistics, maintenance and
engineering,  modifications  and  upgrades  -  as  well  as  the  daily  cycle  of  gate-to-gate  operations.  BGS  expects  the  market  to  remain  highly
competitive in 2020, and intends to grow market share by leveraging a high level of customer satisfaction and productivity.
Regulatory Matters
Our businesses are heavily regulated in most of our markets. We deal with numerous U.S. government agencies and entities, including but not
limited  to  all  of  the  branches  of  the  U.S.  military,  NASA,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  and  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security.
Similar government authorities exist in our non-U.S. markets.
Government Contracts. The U.S. government, and other governments, may terminate any of our government contracts at their convenience, as well
as for default based on our failure to meet specified performance requirements. If any of our U.S. government contracts were to be terminated for
convenience, we generally would be entitled to receive payment for work completed and allowable termination or cancellation costs. If any of our
government contracts were to be terminated for default, generally the U.S. government would pay only for the work that has been accepted and
could require us to pay the difference between the original contract price and the cost to re-procure the contract items, net of the work accepted from
the original contract. The U.S. government can also hold us liable for damages resulting from the default.
Commercial Aircraft. In the U.S., our commercial aircraft products are required to comply with FAA regulations governing production and quality
systems, airworthiness and installation approvals, repair procedures and continuing operational safety. Outside the U.S., similar requirements exist
for airworthiness, installation and operational approvals. These requirements are generally administered by the national aviation authorities of each
country and, in the case of Europe, coordinated by the European Joint Aviation Authorities.
Environmental. We are subject to various federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations relating to environmental protection, including the
discharge, treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We continually assess our compliance status and
management  of  environmental  matters  to  ensure  our  operations  are  in  compliance  with  all  applicable  environmental  laws  and  regulations.
Investigation, remediation, and operation and maintenance costs associated with environmental compliance and management of sites are a normal,
recurring part of our operations. These costs often are allowable costs under our contracts with the U.S. government. It is reasonably possible that
costs incurred to ensure continued environmental compliance could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition or cash
flows  if  additional  work  requirements  or  more  stringent  clean-up  standards  are  imposed  by  regulators,  new  areas  of  soil,  air  and  groundwater
contamination are discovered and/or expansions of work scope are prompted by the results of investigations.
A Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) has joint and several liability under existing U.S. environmental laws. Where we have been designated a PRP
by the Environmental Protection Agency or a state environmental agency, we are potentially liable to the government or third parties for the full cost
of remediating contamination at our facilities or former facilities or at third-party sites. If we were required to fully fund the remediation of a site for
which we were originally assigned a partial share, the statutory
3

Table of Contents
framework would allow us to pursue rights to contribution from other PRPs. For additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see
Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-U.S.  Sales. Our  non-U.S.  sales  are  subject  to  both  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  governmental  regulations  and  procurement  policies  and  practices,
including regulations relating to import-export control, tariffs, investment, exchange controls, anti-corruption, and repatriation of earnings. Non-U.S.
sales are also subject to varying currency, political and economic risks.
Raw Materials, Parts, and Subassemblies
We  are  highly  dependent  on  the  availability  of  essential  materials,  parts  and  subassemblies  from  our  suppliers  and  subcontractors.  The  most
important raw materials required for our aerospace products are aluminum (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions), titanium (sheet, plate, forgings
and extrusions) and composites (including carbon and boron). Although alternative sources generally exist for these raw materials, qualification of
the sources could take a year or more. Many major components and product equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a sole-source basis
with a number of companies.
Suppliers
We are dependent upon the ability of a large number of U.S. and non-U.S. suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance specifications, quality
standards and delivery schedules at our anticipated costs. While we maintain an extensive qualification and performance surveillance system to
control  risk  associated  with  such  reliance  on  third  parties,  failure  of  suppliers  or  subcontractors  to  meet  commitments  could  adversely  affect
production  schedules  and  program/contract  profitability,  thereby  jeopardizing  our  ability  to  fulfill  commitments  to  our  customers.  We  are  also
dependent on the availability of energy sources, such as electricity, at affordable prices.
Seasonality
No material portion of our business is considered to be seasonal.
Executive Officers of the Registrant
See “Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance” in Part III.
Other Information
Boeing was originally incorporated in the State of Washington in 1916 and reincorporated in Delaware in 1934. Our principal executive offices are
located at 100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60606 and our telephone number is (312) 544-2000.
General information about us can be found at www.boeing.com. The information contained on or connected to our website is not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K and should not be considered part of this or any other report filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission  (SEC).  Our  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  Quarterly  Reports  on  Form  10-Q  and  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K,  as  well  as  any
amendments to those reports, are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish
them  to,  the SEC. The SEC maintains  a website  at  www.sec.gov  that  contains  reports,  proxy  statements  and other information  regarding  SEC
registrants, including Boeing.
4

Table of Contents
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, as well as our annual report to shareholders, quarterly reports, and other filings we make with the SEC, press and earnings releases
and other written and oral communications, contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of  1995.  Words  such  as  “may,”  “should,”  “expects,”  “intends,”  “projects,”  “plans,”  “believes,”  “estimates,”  “targets,”  “anticipates”  and  similar
expressions generally identify these forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements include statements relating to our future
financial condition and operating results, as well as any other statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact.
Forward-looking statements are based on expectations and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable when made, but that may not prove to be
accurate. These statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict.
Many factors, including those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section below and other important factors disclosed in this report and from time to time in
our other filings with the SEC, could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from these forward-looking statements. Any forward-
looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we assume no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Item 1A. Risk Factors
An investment in our common stock or debt securities involves risks and uncertainties and our actual results and future trends may differ materially
from our past or projected future performance. We urge investors to consider carefully the risk factors described below in evaluating the information
contained in this report.
The 737 MAX fleet is currently grounded, and we have temporarily suspended production of the 737 MAX. We are subject to a number of
risks  and  uncertainties  related  to  the  737  MAX.  These  risks  include  uncertainties  regarding  the  timing  and  conditions  of  737  MAX
regulatory  approvals,  delays  in  the  resumption  of  production,  lower  than  planned  production  rates  and/or  delivery  rates,  increased
considerations to customers, increased supplier costs and supply chain health, changes to the assumptions and estimates made in our
financial statements regarding the 737 program, and potential outcomes of various 737 MAX-related legal proceedings and government
investigations.
On March 13, 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued an order to suspend operations of all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S.
aircraft operators following two fatal 737 MAX accidents. Non-U.S. civil aviation authorities have issued directives to the same effect. Deliveries of
the  737  MAX  have  been  suspended  until  clearance  is  granted  by  the  appropriate  regulatory  authorities.  The  grounding  has  reduced  revenues,
operating margins, and cash flows, and will continue to do so until production and deliveries resume and production rates return to pre-grounding
levels. In connection with the effort  to return the 737 MAX to service,  we have developed software updates for the 737 MAX, together with an
associated pilot training and supplementary education program. We continue to work with the FAA and other non-U.S. civil aviation authorities to
complete remaining steps toward certification and readiness for return to service, including addressing their questions on the software updates and
how  pilots  will  interact  with  the  airplane  controls  and  displays  in  different  flight  scenarios.  Any  delays  in  certification  and/or  the  resumption  of
deliveries or other liabilities associated with the accidents or grounding could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of
operations, and/or cash flows. In addition, multiple legal actions have been filed against us related to the 737 MAX. We also are fully cooperating
with U.S. government investigations related to the accidents and the 737 MAX, including investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice and the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Any adverse results with respect to any such litigation or investigation could have a further material impact
on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
5

Table of Contents
During the second quarter of 2019, we announced plans to reduce the 737 production rate from 52 aircraft per month to 42 per month. During the
fourth  quarter  of  2019,  we  announced  plans  to  temporarily  suspend  737  MAX  production  beginning  in  January  2020.  Impacts  related  to  the
reduction in production rate followed by the production suspension have significantly  increased costs to produce aircraft  included in the current
accounting quantity and will result in reduced 737 program and overall BCA segment operating margins when deliveries resume. We have also
made significant assumptions regarding estimated costs expected to be incurred in 2020 and 2021 that should be included in program inventory and
those estimated costs that will be expensed when incurred as abnormal production costs. If we are unable to return the 737 MAX aircraft to service
in one or more jurisdictions or begin deliveries to customers on the schedule and/or at a pace consistent with our current expectations, we will incur
significant additional costs and/or delay the resumption and subsequent ramp-up of 737 production. These delays would also result in significant
additional disruption to the 737 production system once production resumes and would further delay efforts to restore and/or implement previously
planned increases in the 737 production rate. Cash flows continue to be negatively impacted by delayed payments from customers, higher costs
and inventory levels, and payments made to customers in connection with disruption to their operations. In addition, we have experienced claims
and assertions from customers in connection with the grounding, and we recorded an earnings charge of $8,259 million, net of insurance recoveries
of $500 million, in 2019, in connection with an estimate of potential concessions and other considerations to customers for disruptions related to the
grounding and associated delivery delays.
Any further delays in regulatory approval of the 737 MAX, the resumption of 737 production and/or deliveries, further disruptions to suppliers and/or
the long-term health of the production system, supplier claims or assertions, or changes to estimated concessions or other considerations we expect
to provide to customers could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and/or cash flows. The FAA and other
non-U.S. civil aviation authorities will determine the timing and conditions of return to service in each relevant jurisdiction. We have assumed that
regulatory approval will enable 737 MAX deliveries to resume during mid-2020. This assumption reflects our best estimate at this time based on
factors such as the estimated duration of regulatory approval and final pilot training requirements. In the event of unanticipated additional training
requirements in one or more jurisdictions, delays in regulatory approval, and/or delays in our ability to resume deliveries, we may be required to take
actions  with  longer-term  impact,  such  as  further  changes  to  our  production  plans,  employment  reductions  and/or  the  expenditure  of  significant
resources to support our supply chain and/or customers.
We have made significant estimates with respect to the 737 program regarding the number of units to be produced, the period during which those
units are likely to be produced, and the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and routine
warranty costs. In addition to the estimated  timing  of the resumption  of deliveries,  we have made assumptions  regarding  outcomes of accident
investigations and other government inquiries, timing of future 737 production rate increases, timing and sequence of future deliveries, supply chain
health  as  we  implement  our  production  plans,  as  well  as  outcomes  of  negotiations  with  customers.  Any  changes  in  these  estimates  and/or
assumptions with respect to the 737 program could have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations, and/or cash flows. For
additional  information,  see  our  discussion  under  “Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis-Critical  Accounting  Policies  and  Estimates-737  MAX
Grounding” on page 45.
Our Commercial Airplanes and Global Services businesses depend heavily on commercial airlines, and are subject to unique risks.
Market  conditions  have  a  significant  impact  on  demand  for  our  commercial  aircraft  and  related  services. The  commercial  aircraft  market  is
predominantly  driven  by  long-term  trends  in  airline  passenger  and  cargo  traffic.  The  principal  factors  underlying  long-term  traffic  growth  are
sustained economic growth and political stability both in developed and emerging markets. Demand for our commercial aircraft is further influenced
by airline profitability, availability of aircraft financing, world trade policies, government-to-government relations, technological advances, price and
other competitive factors, fuel prices, terrorism, epidemics
6

Table of Contents
and environmental regulations. Traditionally, the airline industry has been cyclical and very competitive and has experienced significant profit swings
and constant challenges to be more cost competitive. Significant deterioration in the global economic environment, the airline industry generally, or
the financial stability of one or more of our major customers could result in fewer new orders for aircraft or services, or could cause customers to
seek  to  postpone  or  cancel  contractual  orders  and/or  payments  to  us,  which  could  result  in  lower  revenues,  profitability  and  cash  flows  and  a
reduction in our contractual backlog. In addition, because our commercial aircraft backlog consists of aircraft scheduled for delivery over a period of
several years, any of these macroeconomic, industry or customer impacts could unexpectedly affect deliveries over a long period.
We enter into firm fixed-price aircraft sales contracts with indexed price escalation clauses which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns
or if increases in our costs exceed the applicable escalation rate. Commercial aircraft sales contracts are often entered into years before the aircraft
are delivered. In order to help account for economic fluctuations between the contract date and delivery date, aircraft pricing generally consists of a
fixed amount as modified by price escalation formulas derived from labor, commodity and other price indices. Our revenue estimates are based on
current expectations with respect to these escalation formulas, but the actual escalation amounts are outside of our control. Escalation factors can
fluctuate  significantly  from  period  to  period.  Changes  in  escalation  amounts  can  significantly  impact  revenues  and  operating  margins  in  our
Commercial Airplanes business.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from a limited number of commercial airlines. We can make no assurance that any customer will
exercise purchase options, fulfill existing purchase commitments or purchase additional products or services from us. In addition, fleet decisions,
airline consolidations or financial challenges involving any of our major commercial airline customers could significantly reduce our revenues and
limit our opportunity to generate profits from those customers.
Our Commercial Airplanes business depends on our ability to maintain a healthy production system, achieve planned production rate
targets, successfully develop new aircraft or new derivative aircraft, and meet or exceed stringent performance and reliability standards.
The commercial aircraft business is extremely complex, involving extensive coordination and integration with U.S and non-U.S. suppliers, highly-
skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners, and stringent regulatory requirements and performance and reliability standards. In
addition,  the  introduction  of  new  aircraft  programs  and/or  derivatives,  such  as  the  777X,  involves  increased  risks  associated  with  meeting
development, testing, production, and certification schedules. The 737 program has also experienced significant disruption due to the grounding of
the 737 MAX and associated suspension of 737 MAX production. As a result, our ability to deliver aircraft on time, satisfy regulatory and customer
requirements, and achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject to significant risks.
We  must  minimize  disruption  caused  by  production  changes  and  achieve  productivity  improvements  in  order  to  meet  customer  demand  and
maintain our profitability. We have plans to adjust production rates on several of our commercial aircraft programs, as well as to resume 737 MAX
production at low levels once timing and conditions of return to service are better understood. At the same time we are engaging in significant
ongoing development, testing and production of the 777X aircraft. In addition, we continue to seek opportunities to reduce the costs of building our
aircraft, including working with our suppliers to reduce supplier costs, identifying and implementing productivity improvements, and optimizing how
we manage inventory. If production rate changes at any of our commercial aircraft assembly facilities are delayed or create significant disruption to
our production system, or if our suppliers cannot timely deliver components to us at the cost and rates necessary to achieve our targets, we may be
unable to meet delivery schedules and/or the financial performance of one or more of our programs may suffer.
Operational  challenges  impacting  the  production  system  for  one  or  more  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs  could  result  in  production  delays
and/or failure to meet customer demand for new aircraft, either
7

Table of Contents
of which would negatively impact our revenues and operating margins. Our commercial aircraft production system is extremely complex. Operational
issues, including delays or defects in supplier components, failure to meet internal performance  plans, or delays or failures to achieve required
regulatory approval, such as the with the 737 MAX, could result in significant out-of-sequence work and increased production costs, as well as
delayed deliveries to customers, impacts to aircraft performance and/or increased warranty or fleet support costs.
If our commercial airplanes fail to satisfy performance and reliability requirements, we could face additional costs and/or lower revenues. Developing
and manufacturing commercial aircraft that meet or exceed our performance and reliability standards, as well as those of customers and regulatory
agencies, can be costly and technologically challenging. These challenges are particularly significant with newer aircraft programs. Any failure of any
Boeing aircraft to satisfy performance or reliability requirements could result in disruption to our operations, higher costs and/or lower revenues.
Changes in levels of U.S. government defense spending or overall acquisition priorities could negatively impact our financial position
and results of operations.
We derive a substantial portion of our revenue from the U.S. government, primarily from defense related programs with the U.S. DoD. Levels of U.S.
defense spending are very difficult to predict and may be impacted by numerous factors such as the evolving nature of the national security threat,
U.S. foreign policy, the domestic political environment, macroeconomic conditions and the ability of the U.S. government to enact relevant legislation
such as authorization and appropriations bills.
The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 raised preexisting spending limits on federal discretionary defense and non-defense spending for fiscal years
2020 and 2021 (FY20 and FY21), reducing budget uncertainty and the risk of sequestration. Although FY20 appropriations have been enacted and
FY21  topline  funding  levels  have  been  agreed  to,  the  timeliness  of  FY21  and  future  appropriations  for  government  departments  and  agencies
remains a recurrent risk. A lapse in appropriations for government department or agencies would result in a full or partial government shutdown,
which  could  impact  the  Company’s  operations.  Alternatively,  Congress  may  fund  government  departments  and  agencies  with  one  or  more
Continuing Resolutions; however, this could restrict the execution of certain program activities and delay new programs or competitions. In addition,
long-term uncertainty remains with respect to overall levels of defense spending beyond FY21 and it is likely that the U.S. government discretionary
spending levels will continue to be subject to pressure.
In addition, there continues to be uncertainty with respect to future acquisition priorities and program-level appropriations for the U.S. DoD and other
government  agencies  (including  NASA),  including  tension  between  modernization  and  sustainment  investments,  within  the  overall  budgetary
framework  described  above.  Future  budget  cuts  or  investment  priority  changes,  including  changes  associated  with  the  authorizations  and
appropriations process could result in reductions, cancellations, and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could have a
material effect on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
In  addition,  as  a  result  of  the  significant  ongoing  uncertainty  with  respect  to  both  U.S.  defense  spending  levels  and  the  nature  of  the  threat
environment,  we  also  expect  the U.S.  DoD to  continue  to  emphasize  affordability,  innovation,  cybersecurity,  and  delivery  of  technical  data  and
software in its procurement processes. If we can no longer adjust successfully to these changing acquisition policies our revenues and market share
could be impacted.
8

Table of Contents
We conduct a significant portion of our business pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which are subject to unique risks.
In 2019, 39% of our revenues were earned pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which include foreign military sales (FMS) through the U.S.
government. Business conducted pursuant to such contracts is subject to extensive procurement regulations and other unique risks.
Our sales to the U.S. government are subject to extensive procurement regulations, and changes to those regulations could increase our costs. New
procurement regulations, or changes to existing requirements, could increase our compliance costs or otherwise have a material impact on the
operating margins of our BDS and BGS businesses. These requirements may result in increased compliance costs, and we could be subject to
additional  costs  in  the  form  of  withheld  payments  and/or  reduced  future  business  if  we  fail  to  comply  with  these  requirements  in  the  future.
Compliance costs attributable to current and potential future procurement regulations such as these could negatively impact our financial condition
and operating results.
The U.S. government may modify, curtail or terminate one or more of our contracts. The U.S. government contracting party may modify, curtail or
terminate its contracts and subcontracts with us, without prior notice and either at its convenience or for default based on performance. In addition,
funding pursuant to our U.S. government contracts may be reduced or withheld as part of the U.S. Congressional appropriations process due to
fiscal constraints, changes in U.S. national security strategy and/or priorities or other reasons. Further uncertainty with respect to ongoing programs
could also result in the event that the U.S. government finances its operations through temporary funding measures such as “continuing resolutions”
rather than full-year appropriations. Any loss or anticipated loss or reduction of expected funding and/or modification, curtailment, or termination of
one or more large programs could have a material adverse effect on our earnings, cash flow and/or financial position.
We are subject to U.S. government inquiries and investigations, including periodic audits of costs that we determine are reimbursable under U.S.
government contracts. U.S. government agencies, including the Defense Contract Audit Agency and the Defense Contract Management Agency,
routinely  audit government  contractors.  These agencies review our performance  under contracts,  cost  structure  and compliance  with applicable
laws, regulations, and standards, as well as the adequacy of and our compliance with our internal control systems and policies. Any costs found to
be misclassified or inaccurately allocated to a specific contract will be deemed non-reimbursable, and to the extent already reimbursed, must be
refunded.  Any  inadequacies  in  our  systems  and  policies  could  result  in  withholds  on  billed  receivables,  penalties  and  reduced  future  business.
Furthermore,  if  any  audit,  inquiry  or  investigation  uncovers  improper  or  illegal  activities,  we  could  be  subject  to  civil  and  criminal  penalties  and
administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, forfeiture of profits, suspension of payments, fines, and suspension or debarment from
doing business with the U.S. government. We also could suffer reputational harm if allegations of impropriety were made against us, even if such
allegations are later determined to be false.
We enter into fixed-price contracts which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns.
Our BDS and BGS defense businesses generated approximately 70% and 73% of their 2019 revenues from fixed-price contracts. While fixed-price
contracts enable us to benefit from performance improvements, cost reductions and efficiencies, they also subject us to the risk of reduced margins
or incurring losses if we are unable to achieve estimated costs and revenues. If our estimated costs exceed our estimated price, we recognize
reach-forward losses which can significantly affect our reported results. For example, in 2019, we recorded reach-forward losses of $489 million on
the  Commercial  Crew  contract  primarily  reflecting  higher  estimated  costs  associated  with  spacecraft  completion,  certification  and  testing,  and
additional reach-forward losses of $148 million on the KC-46A Tanker contract reflecting higher manufacturing costs. New programs could also have
risk for reach-forward loss upon contract award and during the period of contract performance. For example, in 2018, in connection with winning the
T-7A Red
9

Table of Contents
Hawk and MQ-25 competitions, we recorded a loss of $400 million associated with options for 346 T-7A Red Hawk aircraft and a loss of $291 million
related  to  the  MQ-25  Engineering,  Manufacturing  and  Development  (EMD)  contract.  The  long  term  nature  of  many  of  our  contracts  makes  the
process of estimating costs and revenues on fixed-price contracts inherently risky. Fixed-price contracts often contain price incentives and penalties
tied to performance which can be difficult to estimate and have significant impacts on margins. In addition, some of our contracts have specific
provisions relating to cost, schedule and performance.
Fixed-price  development  contracts  are  generally  subject  to  more  uncertainty  than  fixed-price  production  contracts.  Many  of  these  development
programs have highly complex designs. In addition, technical or quality issues that arise during development could lead to schedule delays and
higher costs to complete, which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. Examples of significant BDS
fixed-price  development  contracts  include  Commercial  Crew, KC-46A  Tanker,  T-7A  Red  Hawk,  VC-25B  Presidential  Aircraft,  MQ-25,  and
commercial and military satellites.
We enter into cost-type contracts which also carry risks.
Our BDS and BGS defense businesses generated approximately 30% and 27% of their 2019 revenues from cost-type contracting arrangements.
Some of these are development programs that have complex design and technical challenges. These cost-type programs typically have award or
incentive fees that are subject to uncertainty and may be earned over extended periods. In these cases the associated financial risks are primarily in
reduced fees, lower profit rates or program cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance  issues arise. Programs  whose contracts  are
primarily cost-type include Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD), Proprietary and SLS programs.
We enter into contracts that include in-orbit incentive payments that subject us to risks.
Contracts in the commercial satellite industry and certain government satellite contracts include in-orbit incentive payments. These in-orbit payments
may be paid over time after final satellite acceptance or paid in full prior to final satellite acceptance. In both cases, the in-orbit incentive payment is
at risk if the satellite does not perform to specifications for up to 15 years after acceptance. The net present value of in-orbit incentive fees we
ultimately  expect  to  realize  is  recognized  as  revenue  in  the  construction  period.  If  the  satellite  fails  to  meet  contractual  performance  criteria,
customers  will not  be obligated  to  continue  making  in-orbit  payments  and/or  we  may  be  required  to  provide  refunds  to  the  customer  and  incur
significant charges.
Our ability to deliver products and services that satisfy customer requirements is heavily dependent on the performance and financial
stability of our subcontractors and suppliers, as well as on the availability of raw materials and other components.
We rely on other companies including U.S. and non-U.S. subcontractors and suppliers to provide and produce raw materials, integrated components
and sub-assemblies, and production commodities and to perform some of the services that we provide to our customers. If one or more of our
suppliers  or  subcontractors  experiences  financial  difficulties,  delivery  delays  or  other  performance  problems,  we  may  be  unable  to  meet
commitments to our customers or incur additional costs. In addition, if one or more of the raw materials on which we depend (such as aluminum,
titanium or composites) becomes unavailable or is available only at very high prices, we may be unable to deliver one or more of our products in a
timely  fashion  or  at  budgeted  costs.  In  some  instances,  we  depend  upon  a  single  source  of  supply.  Any  service  disruption  from  one  of  these
suppliers, either due to circumstances beyond the supplier’s control, such as geo-political developments, or as a result of performance problems or
financial difficulties, could have a material adverse effect on our ability to meet commitments to our customers or increase our operating costs.
10

Table of Contents
We use estimates in accounting for many contracts and programs. Changes in our estimates could adversely affect our future financial
results.
Contract and program accounting require judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating revenues and costs and making assumptions for schedule
and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of many of our contracts and programs, the estimation of total revenues and cost at completion is
complicated and subject to many variables. Assumptions have to be made regarding the length of time to complete the contract or program because
costs also include expected increases in wages and employee benefits, material prices and allocated fixed costs. Incentives or penalties related to
performance on contracts are considered in estimating sales and profit rates, and are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess
anticipated performance. Supplier claims and assertions are also assessed and considered in estimating costs and profit rates. Estimates of award
fees are also used in sales and profit rates based on actual and anticipated awards.
With  respect  to  each  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs,  inventoriable  production  costs  (including  overhead),  program  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring costs and routine warranty costs are accumulated and charged as cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. A
program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for
delivery under existing and anticipated contracts limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates. To establish the relationship of
sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period over
which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced and (c) the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other
non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program. Several factors determine accounting quantity, including firm orders, letters of
intent from prospective customers and market studies. Changes to customer or model mix, production costs and rates, learning curve, changes to
price escalation indices, costs of derivative aircraft, supplier performance, customer and supplier negotiations/settlements, supplier claims and/or
certification issues can impact these estimates. Any such change in estimates relating to program accounting may adversely affect future financial
performance.
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes described above, materially different sales and profit amounts could be
recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. Changes in underlying assumptions, circumstances or
estimates may adversely affect future period financial performance. For additional information on our accounting policies for recognizing sales and
profits, see our discussion under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis – Critical Accounting Policies – Contract Accounting/Program Accounting”
on pages 44 – 45 and Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 57 – 69 of this Form 10-K.
Competition within our markets and with respect to the products we sell may reduce our future contracts and sales.
The  markets  in  which  we  operate  are  highly  competitive  and  one  or  more  of  our  competitors  may  have  more  extensive  or  more  specialized
engineering, manufacturing and marketing capabilities than we do in some areas. In our Commercial Airplanes business, we anticipate increasing
competition among non-U.S. aircraft manufacturers of commercial jet aircraft. In our BDS business, we anticipate that the effects of defense industry
consolidation, fewer large and new programs and new priorities, including near and long-term cost competitiveness, of our U.S. DoD and non-U.S.
customers will intensify competition for many of our BDS products. Our BGS segment faces competition from many of the same strong U.S. and
non-U.S.  competitors  facing  BCA  and  BDS.  Furthermore,  we  are  facing  increased  international  competition  and  cross-border  consolidation  of
competition.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  compete  successfully  against  our  current  or  future  competitors  or  that  the
competitive pressures we face will not result in reduced revenues and market share.
11

Table of Contents
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from non-U.S. sales and are subject to the risks of doing business in other countries.
In 2019, non-U.S. customers, which includes FMS, accounted for approximately 55% of our revenues. We expect that non-U.S. sales will continue
to account for a significant portion of our revenues for the foreseeable future. As a result, we are subject to risks of doing business internationally,
including:
•
changes in regulatory requirements;
•
U.S. and non-U.S. government policies, including requirements to expend a portion of program funds locally and governmental industrial
cooperation or participation requirements;
•
fluctuations in international currency exchange rates;
•
volatility in international political and economic environments and changes in non-U.S. national priorities and budgets, which can lead to
delays or fluctuations in orders;
•
the complexity and necessity of using non-U.S. representatives and consultants;
•
the uncertainty of the ability of non-U.S. customers to finance purchases, including the availability of financing from the Export-Import Bank
of the United States;
•
uncertainties and restrictions concerning the availability of funding credit or guarantees;
•
imposition of domestic and international taxes, export controls, tariffs, embargoes, sanctions and other trade restrictions;
•
the difficulty of management and operation of an enterprise spread over many countries;
•
compliance with a variety of non-U.S. laws, as well as U.S. laws affecting the activities of U.S. companies abroad; and
•
unforeseen developments and conditions, including terrorism, war, epidemics and international tensions and conflicts.
While the impact of these factors is difficult to predict, any one or more of these factors could adversely affect our operations in the future.
Unauthorized access to our or our customers’ information and systems could negatively impact our business.
We face certain security threats, including threats to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and systems. We maintain an extensive
network of technical security controls, policy enforcement mechanisms, monitoring systems and management oversight in order to address these
threats.  While  these  measures  are  designed  to  prevent,  detect  and  respond  to  unauthorized  activity  in  our  systems,  certain  types  of  attacks,
including cyber-attacks, could result in significant financial or information losses and/or reputational harm. In addition, we manage information and
information technology systems for certain customers. Many of these customers face similar security threats. If we cannot prevent the unauthorized
access, release and/or corruption of our customers’ confidential, classified or personally identifiable information, our reputation could be damaged,
and/or we could face financial losses.
The  outcome  of  litigation  and  of  government  inquiries  and  investigations  involving  our  business  is  unpredictable  and  an  adverse
decision in any such matter could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
We are involved in a number of litigation matters. These matters may divert financial and management resources that would otherwise be used to
benefit our operations. No assurances can be given that the results of these matters will be favorable to us. An adverse resolution of any of these
lawsuits, or future lawsuits, could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In addition, we
12

Table of Contents
are subject to extensive regulation under the laws of the United States and its various states, as well as other jurisdictions in which we operate. As a
result, we are sometimes subject to government inquiries and investigations of our business due, among other things, to our business relationships
with the U.S. government, the heavily regulated nature of our industry, and in the case of environmental proceedings, our current or past ownership
of certain property. Any such inquiry or investigation could potentially result in an adverse ruling against us, which could have a material impact on
our financial position and results of operations.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in certain types of Boeing aircraft,
which exposes us to concentration risks.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in distinct geographic regions. Our portfolio is
also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing aircraft product types, most notably 717 and 747-8 aircraft, and among customers that we
believe have less than investment-grade credit. If one or more customers holding a significant portion of our portfolio assets experiences financial
difficulties or otherwise defaults on or does not renew its leases with us at their expiration, and we are unable to redeploy the aircraft on reasonable
terms, or if the types of aircraft that are concentrated in our portfolio suffer greater than expected declines in value, our earnings, cash flows and/or
financial position could be materially adversely affected.
We may be unable to obtain debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments at competitive rates, on commercially reasonable
terms or in sufficient amounts.
We  depend, in  part,  upon the issuance of  debt to  fund our  operations and contractual commitments.  As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, our
airplane financing commitments totaled $13,377 and $19,462. In addition, our debt balances increased significantly in 2019, and we expect further
increases in 2020, in order to manage liquidity impacts related to the 737 MAX grounding. This has also resulted in downgrades to our credit ratings.
If we require additional funding in order to fund outstanding financing commitments,  address further 737 MAX impacts, or meet other business
requirements, our market liquidity may not be sufficient. A number of factors could cause us to incur increased borrowing costs and to have greater
difficulty accessing public and private markets for debt. These factors include disruptions or declines in the global capital markets and/or a decline in
our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings, including impacts related to the 737 MAX grounding The occurrence of any or all of these events
may adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and contractual or financing commitments.
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures/strategic alliances or divestitures.
As part of our business strategy, we may merge with or acquire businesses and/or form joint ventures and strategic alliances. For example, in 2018
we  completed  the  acquisition  of  KLX  Inc.,  a  provider  of  aviation  parts  and  services.  Whether  we  realize  the  anticipated  benefits  from  these
acquisitions and related activities depends, in part, upon our ability to integrate the operations of the acquired business, the performance of the
underlying  product  and  service  portfolio,  and  the  performance  of  the  management  team  and  other  personnel  of  the  acquired  operations.
Accordingly, our financial results could be adversely affected by unanticipated performance issues, legacy liabilities, transaction-related charges,
amortization  of  expenses  related  to  intangibles,  charges  for  impairment  of  long-term  assets,  credit  guarantees,  partner  performance  and
indemnifications. Consolidations of joint ventures could also impact our reported results of operations or financial position. While we believe that we
have established appropriate and adequate procedures and processes to mitigate these risks, there is no assurance that these transactions will be
successful.  We  also may  make  strategic  divestitures  from  time  to  time.  These  transactions  may  result  in continued  financial involvement  in the
divested businesses, such as through guarantees or other financial arrangements,
13

Table of Contents
following  the  transaction.  Nonperformance  by  those  divested  businesses  could  affect  our  future  financial  results  through  additional  payment
obligations, higher costs or asset write-downs.
Our insurance coverage may be inadequate to cover all significant risk exposures.
We  are  exposed  to  liabilities  that  are  unique  to  the  products  and  services  we  provide.  We  maintain  insurance  for  certain  risks  and,  in  some
circumstances,  we  may  receive  indemnification  from  the  U.S.  government.  The  amount  of  our  insurance  coverage  may  not  cover  all  claims  or
liabilities and we may be forced to bear substantial costs. For example, liabilities arising from the use of certain of our products, such as aircraft
technologies, missile systems, border security systems, anti-terrorism technologies, and/or air traffic management systems may not be insurable on
commercially reasonable terms. While some of these products are shielded from liability within the U.S. under the SAFETY Act provisions of the
2002 Homeland Security Act, no such protection is available outside the U.S., potentially resulting in significant liabilities. The amount of insurance
coverage we maintain may be inadequate to cover these or other claims or liabilities.
Business disruptions could seriously affect our future sales and financial condition or increase our costs and expenses.
Our business may be impacted by disruptions including threats to physical security, information technology or cyber-attacks or failures, damaging
weather or other acts of nature and pandemics or other public health crises. Any of these disruptions could affect our internal operations or our
ability to deliver products and services to our customers. Any significant production delays, or any destruction, manipulation or improper use of our
data, information systems or networks could impact our sales, increase our expenses and/or have an adverse effect on the reputation of Boeing and
of our products and services.
Some of our and our suppliers’ workforces are represented by labor unions, which may lead to work stoppages.
Approximately 57,000 employees, which constitute 35% of our total workforce, were union represented as of December 31, 2019. We experienced a
work stoppage in 2008 when a labor strike halted commercial aircraft and certain BDS program production. We may experience additional work
stoppages in the future, which could adversely affect our business. We cannot predict how stable our relationships, currently with 11 U.S. labor
organizations  and 13 non-U.S.  labor  organizations,  will  be  or  whether  we  will  be  able  to  meet  the  unions’  requirements  without  impacting  our
financial  condition.  The  unions  may  also  limit  our  flexibility  in  dealing  with  our  workforce.  Union  actions  at  suppliers  can  also  affect  us.  Work
stoppages and instability in our union relationships could delay the production and/or development of our products, which could strain relationships
with customers and cause a loss of revenues which would adversely affect our operations.
Substantial pension and other postretirement benefit obligations have a material impact on our earnings, shareholders’ equity and cash
flows from operations, and could have significant adverse impacts in future periods.
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Potential pension contributions include both mandatory
amounts required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and discretionary contributions to improve the plans' funded status. The
extent of future contributions depends heavily on market factors such as the discount rate and the actual return on plan assets. We estimate future
contributions to these plans using assumptions with respect to these and other items. Changes to those assumptions could have a significant effect
on future contributions as well as on our annual pension costs and/or result in a significant change to shareholders' equity. For U.S. government
contracts, we allocate pension costs to individual contracts based on U.S. Cost Accounting Standards
14

Table of Contents
which can also affect contract profitability. We also provide other postretirement benefits to certain of our employees, consisting principally of health
care  coverage  for  eligible  retirees  and  qualifying  dependents.  Our  estimates  of  future  costs  associated  with  these  benefits  are  also  subject  to
assumptions, including estimates of the level of medical cost increases. For a discussion regarding how our financial statements can be affected by
pension and other postretirement plan accounting policies, see “Management's Discussion and Analysis-Critical Accounting Policies-Pension Plans”
on page 48 of this Form 10-K. Although Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States of America (GAAP) expense and pension or
other postretirement benefit contributions are not directly related, the key economic factors that affect GAAP expense would also likely affect the
amount of cash or stock we would contribute to our plans.
Our operations expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities.
We are subject to various U.S. federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations related to environmental protection, including the discharge,
treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs, fines
and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if we were to violate or become liable under
environmental laws or regulations. In some cases, we may be subject to such costs due to environmental impacts attributable to our current or past
manufacturing  operations  or  the  operations  of  companies  we  have  acquired.  In  other  cases,  we  may  become  subject  to  such  costs  due  to  an
indemnification  agreement  between  us  and  a  third  party  relating  to  such  environmental  liabilities.  In  addition,  new  laws  and  regulations,  more
stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or the imposition of new remediation
requirements could result in additional costs. For additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 14 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Not applicable
Item 2. Properties
We  occupied  approximately 86  million square  feet  of  floor  space  on December  31,  2019 for  manufacturing,  warehousing,  engineering,
administration and other productive uses, of which approximately 93% was located in the United States. The following table provides a summary of
the floor space by business as of December 31, 2019:
(Square feet in thousands)
Owned
Leased
Government
Owned(1)
Total
Commercial Airplanes
41,098
2,471
43,569
Defense, Space & Security
23,401
5,651
29,052
Global Services
686
7,596
8,282
Other(2)
2,504
2,214
318
5,036
Total
67,689
17,932
318
85,939
(1) Excludes rent-free space furnished by U.S. government landlord of 49 square feet.
(2) Other includes BCC, sites used for common internal services, and our Corporate Headquarters.
15

Table of Contents
At December 31, 2019, we occupied in excess of 78.9 million square feet of floor space at the following major locations:
•
Commercial Airplanes – Greater Seattle, WA; Greater Charleston, SC; Portland, OR; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Salt Lake City, UT;
Canada; and Australia
•
Defense, Space & Security – Greater St. Louis, MO; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Seattle, WA; Philadelphia, PA; Mesa, AZ; Huntsville, AL;
Oklahoma City, OK; Heath, OH; Greater Washington, DC; Australia; and Houston, TX
•
Global  Services  –  San  Antonio,  TX;  Greater  Miami,  FL;  Dallas,  TX;  Jacksonville,  FL;  Germany;  Greater  Los  Angeles,  CA;  Mesa,  AZ;  and
Greater Denver, CO
•
Other – Chicago, IL; Greater Seattle, WA; Greater Los Angeles, CA ; Greater Washington, DC; India; and Greater St. Louis, MO
Most runways and taxiways that we use are located on airport properties owned by others and are used jointly with others. Our rights to use such
facilities are provided for under long-term leases with municipal, county or other government authorities. In addition, the U.S. government furnishes
us certain office space, installations and equipment at U.S. government bases for use in connection with various contract activities.
We believe that our major properties are adequate for our present needs and, as supplemented by planned improvements and construction, expect
them to remain adequate for the foreseeable future.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
Currently, we are involved in a number of legal proceedings. For a discussion of contingencies related to legal proceedings, see Note 22 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable
16

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The principal market for our common stock is the New York Stock Exchange where it trades under the symbol BA. As of January 24, 2020, there
were 100,750 shareholders of record.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The  following  table  provides  information  about  purchases  we  made  during  the  quarter  ended December  31,  2019 of  equity  securities  that  are
registered by us pursuant to Section 12 of the Exchange Act:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Total Number
of Shares
Purchased(1)
Average
Price Paid per
Share
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
as Part of Publicly
Announced Plans
or Programs
Approximate Dollar
Value of Shares That May Yet
be Purchased Under the
Plans or Programs(2)
10/1/2019 thru 10/31/2019
3,521
$365.32
$17,349
11/1/2019 thru 11/30/2019
10,739
347.54
17,349
12/1/2019 thru 12/31/2019
5,459
346.06
17,349
Total
19,719
$350.31
—
(1) 
A  total  of 19,719 shares  were  transferred  to  us  from  employees  in  satisfaction  of  minimum  tax  withholding  obligations  associated  with  the
vesting of restricted stock units during the period. We did not purchase any shares of our common stock in the open market pursuant to our
repurchase program or in swap transactions.
(2) 
On December 17, 2018, the Board approved a repurchase plan for up to $20 billion of common stock. Share repurchases under this plan are
currently suspended.
17

Table of Contents
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
Five-Year Summary (Unaudited)
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
2019
2018
2017
2016
2015
(2)
Revenues
$76,559
$101,127
$94,005
$93,496
$96,114
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
$5,034
$5,176
Basic (loss)/earnings per share
($1.12)
$18.05
$14.03
$7.92
$7.52
Diluted (loss)/earnings per share
(1.12)
17.85
13.85
7.83
7.44
Dividends declared per share(1)
8.22
7.19
5.97
4.69
3.82
Cash and cash equivalents
$9,485
$7,637
$8,813
$8,801
$11,302
Short-term and other investments
545
927
1,179
1,228
750
Total assets
133,625
117,359
112,362
109,076
94,408
Total debt
27,302
13,847
11,117
9,952
9,964
Operating cash flow
($2,446)
$15,322
$13,346
$10,496
$9,363
Total backlog
$463,403
$490,481
$474,640
$473,492
(2)
$489,299
Year-end workforce
161,100
153,000
140,800
150,500
161,400
(1) Cash dividends have been paid on common stock every year since 1942.
(2) Amounts prior to 2016, along with 2016 Backlog, do not reflect impact of the adoption of ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606); ASU No.
2017-07, Compensation - Retirement Benefits (Topic 715): Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost; ASU
2016-18 Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230) Restricted Cash; in the first quarter of 2018.
18

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Overview
We are a global market leader in the design, development, manufacture, sale, service and support of commercial jetliners, military aircraft, satellites,
missile defense, human space flight and launch systems and services. We are one of the two major manufacturers of 100+ seat airplanes for the
worldwide commercial  airline industry  and one of the largest  defense contractors  in the U.S.  While our principal operations are in the U.S.,  we
conduct operations in an expanding number of countries and rely on an extensive network of non-U.S. partners, key suppliers and subcontractors.
Our strategy is centered on successful execution in healthy core businesses – Commercial Airplanes (BCA), Defense, Space & Security (BDS), and
Global Services (BGS) – supplemented and supported by Boeing Capital (BCC). Taken together, these core businesses have historically generated
substantial earnings and cash flow that permit us to invest in new products and services. We focus on producing the products and providing the
services that the market demands, and continue to find new ways to improve efficiency and quality to provide a fair return for our shareholders. BCA
is committed to being the leader in commercial aviation by offering airplanes and services that deliver superior design, safety, efficiency and value to
customers  around  the  world. BDS integrates  its  resources  in  defense,  intelligence,  communications,  security,  space  and  services  to  deliver
capability-driven  solutions  to  customers  at  reduced  costs.  Our BDS strategy  is  to  leverage  our  core  businesses  to  capture  key  next-generation
programs while expanding our presence in adjacent and international markets, underscored by an intense focus on growth and productivity. BGS
provides  support  for  commercial  and  defense  through  innovative,  comprehensive,  and  cost-competitive  product  and  service  solutions. BCC
facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
On March 13, 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued an order to suspend operations of all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S.
aircraft operators following two fatal 737 MAX accidents. Non-U.S. civil aviation authorities have issued directives to the same effect. Deliveries of
the  737  MAX  have  been  suspended  until  clearance  is  granted  by  the  appropriate  regulatory  authorities.  The  grounding  is  having  a  significant
adverse impact on our operations and creates significant uncertainty. We are focused on safely returning the 737 MAX to service.
19

Table of Contents
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key indicators of consolidated results of operations:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenues
$76,559
$101,127
$94,005
GAAP
(Loss)/earnings from operations
($1,975)
$11,987
$10,344
Operating margins
(2.6)%
11.9%
11.0%
Effective income tax rate
71.8 %
9.9%
16.3%
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Diluted (loss)/earnings per share
($1.12)
$17.85
$13.85
Non-GAAP (1)
Core operating (loss)/earnings
($3,390)
$10,660
$8,906
Core operating margins
(4.4%)
10.5%
9.5%
Core (loss)/earnings per share
($3.47)
$16.01
$12.33
(1)
These measures exclude certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. See page 42 - 43 for important information
about these non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
Revenues
The following table summarizes Revenues:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Commercial Airplanes
$32,255
$57,499
$54,612
Defense, Space & Security
26,227
26,392
23,938
Global Services
18,468
17,056
14,611
Boeing Capital
244
274
307
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(635)
(94)
537
Total
$76,559
$101,127
$94,005
Revenues decreased by $24,568 million in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to lower revenues at BCA, partially offset by higher revenues at
BGS.  Lower  BCA  revenues  are  primarily  driven  by  lower  737  MAX  deliveries  and  a  revenue  reduction  of $8,259  million recorded  in  2019  for
estimated  potential  concessions  and  other  considerations  to  customers  for  disruptions  and  associated  delivery  delays  related  to  the  737  MAX
grounding, net of insurance recoveries.
Revenues increased by $7,122 million in 2018 compared with 2017 due to higher revenues at BCA, BDS, and BGS. BCA revenues increased by
$2,887 million due to higher 737 and 787 deliveries and favorable 737 and 787 model mix, which more than offset lower 777 and 747 deliveries.
BDS revenues increased by $2,454 million primarily due to non-US contract awards for fighters, higher weapons revenue, the final C-17 aircraft sale
and higher satellites revenue. BGS revenues increased by $2,445 million due to higher parts revenue, including the acquisition of KLX, Inc. (KLX) in
the fourth quarter of 2018.
20

Table of Contents
The changes in Unallocated items, eliminations and other in 2019, 2018 and 2017 primarily reflect the timing of eliminations for intercompany aircraft
deliveries and the sale of aircraft previously leased to customers.
Earnings From Operations
The following table summarizes Earnings from operations:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Commercial Airplanes
($6,657)
$7,830
$5,285
Defense, Space & Security
2,608
1,657
2,383
Global Services
2,697
2,536
2,251
Boeing Capital
28
79
114
Segment operating (loss)/profit
(1,324)
12,102
10,033
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
1,071
1,005
1,127
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
344
322
311
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(2,066)
(1,442)
(1,127)
(Loss)/earnings from operations (GAAP)
($1,975)
$11,987
$10,344
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment *
(1,415)
(1,327)
(1,438)
Core operating (loss)/earnings (Non-GAAP) **
($3,390)
$10,660
$8,906
*
The FAS/CAS service cost adjustment represents the difference between the FAS pension and postretirement service costs calculated under
GAAP and costs allocated to the business segments.
**
Core operating earnings is a Non-GAAP measure that excludes the FAS/CAS service cost adjustment. See page 42.
Loss from operations was $1,975 million in 2019 compared with earnings from operations of $11,987 million in 2018. The decrease of $13,962
million is primarily due to a loss from operations at BCA of $6,657 million in 2019 compared to earnings from operations of $7,830 million in 2018,
partially offset by higher earnings at BDS and BGS in 2019 compared with 2018. BCA decreased by $14,487 million due to lower 737 deliveries and
the earnings charge for the 737 MAX grounding of $8,259 million, net of insurance recoveries. BDS earnings from operations increased by $951
million primarily due to lower charges in 2019 for development programs. BGS earnings from operations increased by $161 million primarily due to
higher revenues, which was partially offset by less favorable performance and mix.
Earnings from operations increased by $1,643 million in 2018 compared with 2017 primarily due to higher earnings at BCA and BGS, which more
than offset the decrease at BDS and the change in Unallocated items, eliminations and other. BCA earnings from operations increased by $2,545
million due to higher revenues and improved operating margins. The increase in operating margins is primarily due to higher 787 margins, improved
cost performance and favorable delivery mix. BGS earnings from operations increased by $285 million primarily due to higher revenues, partially
offset by higher period costs. BDS earnings from operations decreased by $726 million as earnings growth from higher revenues was more than
offset by charges of $691 million related to winning the T-7A Red Hawk and MQ-25 competitions, as well as higher KC-46A Tanker reach-forward
losses.
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, we recorded reach-forward losses on the KC-46A Tanker program of $148 million, $736 million, and $445 million,
respectively.
Core operating earnings decreased by $14,050 million in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to a loss from operations at BCA in 2019, partially
offset by higher earnings at BDS and BGS.
21

Table of Contents
Core operating earnings increased by $1,754 million in 2018 compared with 2017 primarily due to higher earnings at BCA and BGS, partially offset
by lower earnings at BDS and higher unallocated expenses.
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and Other The most significant items included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the
following table:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Share-based plans
($65)
($76)
($77)
Deferred compensation
(174)
(19)
(240)
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
(89)
(92)
(96)
Research and development expense, net
(384)
(132)
42
Customer financing impairment
(250)
Litigation
(109)
(148)
Eliminations and other unallocated items
(995)
(975)
(756)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
($2,066)
($1,442)
($1,127)
Deferred compensation expense increased by $155 million in 2019 and decreased by $221 million in 2018, primarily driven by changes in broad
stock market conditions and our stock price.
Research and development expense increased by $252 million in 2019 and increased by $174 million in 2018 primarily due to spending by Boeing
NeXt on product development.
In 2019, we recorded a $250 million charge related to the impairment of lease incentives with one customer that experienced liquidity issues, and a
$109 million charge related to ongoing litigation associated with recoverable costs on U.S. government contracts. In 2018, we recorded a $148
million charge related to the outcome of the Spirit litigation.
Eliminations and other unallocated expense increased by $20 million in 2019 and $219 million in 2018 primarily due to timing of expense allocations.
Net periodic pension benefit costs included in Earnings from operations were as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Pension
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Allocated to business segments
($1,384)
($1,318)
($1,637)
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
1,071
1,005
1,127
Net periodic benefit cost included in (Loss)/earnings from operations
($313)
($313)
($510)
The pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment recognized in Earnings from operations in 2019, 2018, and 2017 was largely consistent across all
periods. The net periodic benefit cost included in Earnings from operations in 2019 was consistent with 2018, as reductions in current year service
cost were offset by higher amortization of prior year service costs. The decrease in net periodic benefit cost included in Earnings from operations in
2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to a lower portion of service cost recognized in Earnings from operations.
For additional discussion related to Postretirement Plans, see Note 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
22

Table of Contents
Other Earnings Items
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
(Loss)/earnings from operations
($1,975)
$11,987
$10,344
Other income, net
438
92
123
Interest and debt expense
(722)
(475)
(360)
(Loss)/earnings before income taxes
(2,259)
11,604
10,107
Income tax benefit/(expense)
1,623
(1,144)
(1,649)
Net (loss)/earnings from continuing operations
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Other income, net increased by $346 million in 2019 primarily due to higher non-operating pension income. Other income, net decreased by $31
million in 2018 primarily due to lower gains from foreign exchange, partially offset by higher interest income.
The non-operating pension income included in Other income, net was $374 million in 2019, $143 million in 2018, and $117 million in 2017. The
increased income in 2019 compared to 2018 was due to lower amortization of actuarial losses, partially offset by decreases in expected return on
assets and increases in interest cost. The increase in 2018 compared to 2017 was due to decreases in interest cost and increases in estimated
return on assets, partially offset by higher amortization of actuarial losses.
Interest and debt expense increased by $247 million in 2019 and increased by $115 million in 2018 as a result of higher debt balances.
For additional discussion related to Income Taxes, see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Total Costs and Expenses (“Cost of Sales”)
Cost of sales, for both products and services, consists primarily of raw materials, parts, sub-assemblies, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs.
Our  BCA  segment  predominantly  uses  program  accounting  to  account  for  cost  of  sales.  Under  program  accounting,  cost  of  sales  for  each
commercial airplane program equals the product of (i) revenue recognized in connection with customer deliveries and (ii) the estimated cost of sales
percentage  applicable to the total  remaining  program.  For long-term  contracts,  the amount  reported  as cost  of  sales  is recognized  as incurred.
Substantially all contracts at our BDS segment and certain contracts at our BGS segment are long-term contracts with the U.S. government and
other customers that generally extend over several years. Costs on these contracts are recorded as incurred. Cost of sales for commercial spare
parts is recorded at average cost.
The following table summarizes cost of sales:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31
2019
2018
Change
2018
2017
Change
Cost of sales
$72,093
$81,490
($9,397)
$81,490
$76,612
$4,878
Cost of sales as a % of revenues
94.2%
80.6%
13.6%
80.6%
81.5%
(0.9)%
Cost of sales decreased by $9,397 million in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to lower revenue and lower reach-forward losses. Cost of
sales as a percentage of Revenues increased in 2019 primarily due to the 737 MAX grounding.
Cost of sales increased by $4,878 million in 2018 compared with 2017, primarily due to higher revenue and higher reach-forward losses.
23

Table of Contents
Research and Development The following table summarizes our Research and development expense:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Commercial Airplanes
$1,956
$2,188
$2,247
Defense, Space & Security
758
788
834
Global Services
121
161
140
Other
384
132
(42)
Total
$3,219
$3,269
$3,179
Research and development expense decreased by $50 million in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to lower spending on 777X and 737 MAX,
partially offset by higher spending by BCA and Boeing NeXt on product development.
Research and development expense increased by $90 million in 2018 compared with 2017 due to investment in product development, partially
offset by lower spending on 777X and 787-10.
Backlog
Our backlog at December 31 was as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
Commercial Airplanes
$376,593
$408,140
Defense, Space & Security
63,908
61,277
Global Services
22,902
21,064
Total Backlog
$463,403
$490,481
Contractual backlog
$436,473
$462,070
Unobligated backlog
26,930
$28,411
Total Backlog
$463,403
$490,481
Contractual backlog of unfilled orders excludes purchase options, announced orders for which definitive contracts have not been executed, and
unobligated U.S. and non-U.S. government contract funding. The decrease in contractual backlog during 2019 was primarily due to BCA deliveries
in excess of new orders  and a reduction  in backlog related to orders  from  a customer  that  experienced  liquidity issues,  partially offset  by BDS
current year contract awards in excess of revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years
Unobligated  backlog  includes  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  government  definitive  contracts  for  which  funding  has  not  been  authorized.  The decrease in
unobligated  backlog  in 2019 was  primarily  due  to  reclassifications  to  contractual  backlog  related  to  BDS  and  BGS  contracts  partially  offset  by
contract awards.
Additional Considerations
Export-Import  Bank  of  the  United  States Many  of  our  non-U.S.  customers  finance  purchases  through  the  Export-Import  Bank  of  the  United
States. The bank is authorized through December 31, 2026.
24

Table of Contents
Global Trade We continually monitor the global trade environment for changes in tariffs, trade agreements, sanctions or other potential geopolitical
economic developments that may impact the company.
Beginning in June 2018, the U.S. Government has imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum imports. In response to these tariffs, several major U.S.
trading  partners  have  imposed,  or  announced  their  intention  to  impose,  tariffs  on  U.S.  goods.  In  May  2019,  the  U.S.  Government,  Mexico  and
Canada reached an agreement to end the steel and aluminum tariffs between these countries. Passage of the U.S./Mexico/Canada Free Trade
Agreement (USMCA) will also result in lower tariffs. We continue to monitor the potential for any extra costs that may result from the remaining
global tariffs.
Since  2018,  the  U.S.  and  China  imposed  tariffs  on  approximately  $34  billion  of  each  other's  exports  in  July  2018.  Certain  aircraft  parts  and
components that Boeing procures are subject to these tariffs. Subsequently, the U.S. imposed tariffs on an additional $216 billion in Chinese goods,
and China imposed tariffs on an additional $76 billion worth of U.S goods. The U.S. and China Phase I agreement in January 2020 is a positive
development for overall trade with China. Negotiations to resolve remaining trade issues continue.
Overall global trade tensions and increased market uncertainty have resulted in fewer orders than anticipated for our commercial aircraft.
The  U.S.  Government  continues  to  impose  and/or  consider  imposing  sanctions  on  certain  businesses  and  individuals  in  Russia.  Although  our
operations  or  sales  in  Russia  have  not  been  impacted  to  date,  we  continue  to  monitor  additional  sanctions  that  may  be  imposed  by  the  U.S.
Government and any responses from Russia that could affect our supply chain, business partners or customers.
Segment Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Commercial Airplanes
Business Environment and Trends
Airline Industry Environment Global economic growth, a primary driver for air travel, was 2.6% in 2019, slightly below the long-term average of
approximately 3%. Passenger traffic is estimated to grow by 4% to 5% in 2019, close to the long-term average of approximately 5%. The grounding
of the 737 MAX and suspension of 737 MAX deliveries has slowed growth at certain airlines. While growth was solid across most major world
regions,  there  continues  to  be  variation  between  regions  and  airline  business  models.  Despite  some  moderation  in  the  growth  rates,  airlines
operating in Asia Pacific and Europe, as well as low-cost-carriers globally, are leading the 2019 growth in passenger traffic. Air cargo traffic growth is
expected to contract this year due to weak global trade growth.
Airline financial performance also plays a role in the demand for new capacity. Airlines continue to focus on increasing revenue through alliances,
partnerships, new marketing initiatives, and effective leveraging of ancillary services and related revenues. Airlines are also focusing on reducing
costs and renewing fleets to leverage more efficient airplanes. Net profits in 2019 are expected to approximate $26 billion.
The long-term outlook for the industry continues to remain positive due to the fundamental drivers of air travel demand: economic growth and the
increasing propensity to travel due to increased trade, globalization, and improved airline services driven by liberalization of air traffic rights between
countries. Our 20-year forecast projects a long-term average growth rate of 4.6% per year for passenger traffic and 4.2% for cargo traffic. Based on
long-term global economic growth projections of 2.7% average annual GDP growth, we project a $6.8 trillion market for approximately 44,000 new
airplanes over the next 20 years. The industry remains vulnerable to exogenous developments including fuel price spikes, credit market shocks, acts
of terrorism, natural disasters, conflicts, epidemics and increased global environmental regulations.
25

Table of Contents
Industry  Competitiveness The  commercial  jet  airplane  market  and  the  airline  industry  remain  extremely  competitive.  Market  liberalization  in
Europe, the Middle East and Asia is enabling low-cost  airlines to continue gaining market  share. These airlines are increasing the pressure on
airfares. This results in continued cost pressures for all airlines and price pressure on our products. Major productivity gains are essential to ensure
a favorable market position at acceptable profit margins.
Continued access to global markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales potential and long-term investment returns. Approximately
80% of Commercial Airplanes’ total backlog, in dollar terms, is with non-U.S. airlines.
We face aggressive international competitors who are intent on increasing their market share. They offer competitive products and have access to
most of the same customers and suppliers. The grounding of the 737 MAX and the associated suspension of 737 MAX deliveries have significantly
reduced our market share with respect to deliveries of single aisle aircraft in 2019 and may provide competitors with an opportunity to obtain more
orders and increase market share. We are continuing to monitor the impact of the 737 MAX grounding on our suppliers and working to ensure that
our supply chain can support our production plans once production resumes. With government support, Airbus has historically invested heavily to
create a family of products to compete with ours. After the acquisition of a majority share of Bombardier’s C Series (now A220) in 2018, Airbus
continues to  expand in the 100-150 seat transcontinental  market.  Additionally,  other  competitors  from  Russia,  China and Japan are developing
commercial jet aircraft. Some of these competitors have historically enjoyed access to government-provided financial support, including “launch aid,”
which greatly reduces the cost and commercial risks associated with airplane development activities. This has enabled the development of airplanes
without commercial viability; others to be brought to market more quickly than otherwise possible; and many offered for sale below market-based
prices. Many competitors have continued to make improvements in efficiency, which may result in funding product development, gaining market
share and improving earnings. This market environment has resulted in intense pressures on pricing and other competitive factors, and we expect
these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years.
We are focused on safely returning the 737 MAX to service, improving our products and services and continuing our cost-reduction efforts, which
enhances our ability to compete. We are also focused on taking actions to ensure that Boeing is not harmed by unfair subsidization of competitors.
26

Table of Contents
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenues
$32,255
$57,499
$54,612
% of total company revenues
42%
57%
58%
(Loss)/earnings from operations
($6,657)
$7,830
$5,285
Operating margins
(20.6)%
13.6%
9.7%
Research and development
$1,956
$2,188
$2,247
Revenues
BCA revenues decreased by $25,244 million in 2019 compared with 2018 driven by lower 737 MAX deliveries and a revenue reduction of $8,259
million that was recorded in 2019 for estimated potential concessions and other considerations to customers for disruptions and associated delivery
delays related to the 737 MAX grounding, net of $500 million of insurance recoveries. BCA revenues increased by $2,887 million in 2018 compared
with 2017 primarily  due  to higher  737  and  787  deliveries  and  favorable  737  and  787  model  mix,  which  more  than  offset  lower  777  and  747
deliveries. The 737 MAX grounding will continue to have a significant impact on revenues until deliveries resume.
Commercial Airplanes deliveries as of December 31 were as follows:
737 *
747
†
767 *
777
†
787
Total
2019
Cumulative deliveries
7,439
1,555
1,176
1,627
939
Deliveries
127
(19) 
7
43
(23) 
45
(2) 
158
380
2018
Cumulative deliveries
7,312
1,548
1,133
1,582
781
Deliveries
580 (18) 
6
27 (10) 
48
145
806
2017
Cumulative deliveries
6,732
1,542
1,106
1,534
636
Deliveries
529 (17) 
14 (1) 
10
74
136
763
* Intercompany deliveries identified by parentheses
† Aircraft accounted for as revenues by BCA and as operating leases in consolidation identified by parentheses
Loss/Earnings From Operations
BCA loss from operations was $6,657 million in 2019 compared with earnings from operations of $7,830 million in 2018. The decrease of $14,487
million is primarily due to lower 737 deliveries and earnings charges related to the 737 MAX. The 737 MAX grounding and associated changes to
our production rate will continue to adversely impact 737 program and overall BCA margins.
BCA  earnings  from  operations increased by $2,545  million in 2018 compared  with 2017.  The  increase  in  operating  earnings  reflects higher
revenues and improved operating margins. The increase in operating margins is primarily due to higher 787 margins, improved cost performance
and favorable delivery mix.
27

Table of Contents
Backlog
Our total backlog represents the estimated transaction prices on unsatisfied and partially satisfied performance obligations to our customers where
we believe it is probable that we will collect the consideration due and where no contingencies remain before we and the customer are required to
perform. Backlog does not include prospective orders where customer controlled contingencies remain, such as the customer receiving approval
from its board of directors, shareholders or government or completing financing arrangements. All such contingencies must be satisfied or have
expired prior to recording a new firm order even if satisfying such conditions is highly certain. Backlog excludes options and BCC orders. A number
of our customers may have contractual remedies, including rights to reject individual airplane deliveries if the actual delivery date is significantly later
than  the  contractual  delivery  date.  We  address  customer  claims  and  requests  for  other  contractual  relief  as  they  arise.  The  value  of  orders  in
backlog is adjusted as changes to price and schedule are agreed to with customers and is reported in accordance with the requirements of ASU No.
2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606).
BCA total backlog of $376,593 million at December 31, 2019 decreased from $408,140 million at December 31, 2018, primarily due to deliveries in
excess of new orders and a reduction in backlog related to orders from a customer that experienced liquidity issues. We are experiencing fewer new
737  MAX  orders  than  we  were  receiving  prior  to  the  grounding.  If  737  MAX  aircraft  remain  grounded  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  we  may
experience  reductions  to  backlog  and/or  significant  order  cancellations.  To  date,  the  737  MAX  grounding  has  not  resulted  in  significant  order
cancellations.
Accounting Quantity The accounting quantity is our estimate of the quantity of airplanes that  will be produced for delivery under existing and
anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue
and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. It is a key determinant of the gross margins we recognize on sales of individual airplanes throughout a
program’s  life.  Estimation  of  each  program’s  accounting  quantity  takes  into  account  several  factors  that  are  indicative  of  the  demand  for  that
program,  including  firm  orders,  letters  of  intent  from  prospective  customers  and  market  studies.  We  review  our  program  accounting  quantities
quarterly.
The accounting quantity for each program may include units that have been delivered, undelivered units under contract, and units anticipated to be
under contract in the reasonable future (anticipated orders). In developing total program estimates, all of these items within the accounting quantity
must be considered.
28

Table of Contents
The following table provides details of the accounting quantities and firm orders by program as of December 31. Cumulative firm orders represent
the cumulative number of commercial jet aircraft deliveries plus undelivered firm orders.
Program
737
†
747*
767
777
†
777X
787
†
2019
Program accounting quantities
10,400
1,574
1,195
1,690
**
1,600
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,398
17
94
68
309
520
(29) 
Cumulative firm orders
11,837
1,572
1,270
1,695
309
1,459
(29) 
2018
Program accounting quantities
10,400
1,574
1,195
1,680
**
1,600
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,708
(75) 
24
111
100
(2) 
326
604
(30) 
Cumulative firm orders
12,020
1,572
1,244
1,682
326
1,385
2017
Program accounting quantities
9,800
1,570
1,171
1,625
**
1,400
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,613
12
98
97
326
640
Cumulative firm orders
11,345
1,554
1,204
1,631
326
1,276
† Aircraft ordered by BCC are identified in parentheses.
* At December 31, 2019, the 747 accounting quantity includes one already completed aircraft that has not been sold and is being remarketed.
** The accounting quantity for the 777X will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery.
Program Highlights
737  Program See  the  discussion  of  the  737  MAX  Grounding  and  737NG  Structure  (Pickle  Fork)  in  Note 14 to  our  Consolidated  Financial
Statements.
747 Program We are currently producing at a rate of 0.5 aircraft per month. We believe that ending production of the 747 at the end of the current
accounting quantity would not have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
767 Program The  767  assembly  line includes  the  commercial  program  and a  derivative  to  support  the  tanker  program.  We  are  increasing  our
combined production rate from 2.5 to 3 per month in 2020.
777 Program The accounting quantity for the 777 program increased by 10 units during 2019 due to the program’s normal progress of obtaining
additional orders and delivering airplanes. In 2013, we launched the 777X, which features a new composite wing, new engines and folding wing-tips.
We have experienced issues in engine design and development on the 777X. The first flight of the 777X was completed on January 25, 2020, and
first delivery is targeted for 2021. The 777 and 777X programs have a combined production rate of 5 per month. We plan to produce more 777
models and fewer 777X models in the near term than previously planned. We expect to deliver at an average rate of 3 per month in 2020. The 777X
will have a separate program accounting quantity, which will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery.
787 Program At the end of the first quarter of 2019, we increased the production rate from 12 per month to 14 per month. As a result of fewer
orders than anticipated, we plan to reduce the 787 production rate to 12 per month in late 2020 and to 10 per month in early 2021. We plan to return
to a production rate of 12 per month in 2023.
29

Table of Contents
Fleet Support We provide the operators of our commercial airplanes with assistance and services to facilitate efficient and safe airplane operation.
Collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services begin prior to airplane delivery and continue throughout the operational life
of  the  airplane.  They  include  flight  and  maintenance  training,  field  service  support,  engineering  services,  information  services  and  systems  and
technical  data  and  documents.  The  costs  for  fleet  support  are  expensed  as  incurred  and  have  historically  been  approximately  1%  of  total
consolidated costs of products and services.
Program  Development The  following  chart  summarizes  the  time  horizon  between  go-ahead  and  planned  initial  delivery  for  major  Commercial
Airplanes derivatives and programs.
Go-ahead and Initial Delivery
737 MAX 7
2011
2020
737 MAX 8
2011
2017
737 MAX 9
2011
2018
737 MAX 10
2017
2021
787-10
2013
2018
777X
2013
2021
Reflects models in development during 2019
We launched the 737 MAX 7, 8 and 9 in August 2011 and the 737 MAX 10 in June 2017. We launched the 787-10 in June 2013 and the 777X in
November 2013.
Additional Considerations
The  development  and  ongoing  production  of  commercial  aircraft  is  extremely  complex,  involving  extensive  coordination  and  integration  with
suppliers and highly-skilled labor from employees and other partners. Meeting or exceeding our performance and reliability standards, as well as
those of customers and regulators, can be costly and technologically challenging. In addition, the introduction of new aircraft and derivatives, such
as the 777X, involves increased risks associated with meeting development, production and certification schedules. As a result, our ability to deliver
aircraft on time, satisfy performance and reliability standards and achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject to significant
risks. Factors that could result in lower margins (or a material charge if an airplane program has or is determined to have reach-forward losses)
include the following: changes to the program accounting quantity, customer and model mix, production costs and rates, changes to price escalation
factors  due  to  changes  in  the  inflation  rate  or  other  economic  indicators,  performance  or  reliability  issues  involving  completed  aircraft,  capital
expenditures  and  other  costs  associated  with  increasing  or  adding  new  production  capacity,  learning  curve,  additional  change  incorporation,
achieving anticipated cost reductions,  flight test and certification  schedules, costs,  schedule and demand for new airplanes and derivatives and
status  of  customer  claims,  supplier  claims  or  assertions  and  other  contractual  negotiations.  While  we  believe  the  cost  and  revenue  estimates
incorporated in the consolidated financial statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of our airplane programs creates financial risk as
additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could trigger termination provisions, order
cancellations or other financially significant exposure.
Defense, Space & Security
Business Environment and Trends
United States Government Defense Environment Overview
The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 raised the Budget Control Act limits on federal discretionary defense and non-defense spending for fiscal years
2020 and 2021 (FY20 and FY21), reducing budget uncertainty
30

Table of Contents
and  the  risk  of  sequestration.  The  consolidated  appropriations  acts  for  FY20,  enacted  in  December  2019,  provided  FY20  appropriations  for
government  departments  and  agencies,  including  the  United  States  Department  of  Defense  (U.S.  DoD),  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space
Administration (NASA) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
The enacted FY20 appropriations included funding for Boeing’s major programs, such as the F/A-18 Super Hornet, F-15EX, CH-47 Chinook, AH-64
Apache, V-22 Osprey, KC-46A Tanker, P-8 Poseidon and Space Launch System. However, there continues to be uncertainty with respect to future
program-level appropriations for the U.S. DoD and other government agencies, including NASA. Future budget cuts or investment priority changes,
including changes associated with the authorizations and appropriations process, could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing
contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could have a material effect on our results of operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
Non-U.S. Defense Environment Overview The non-U.S. market continues to be driven by complex and evolving security challenges and the need
to modernize aging equipment and inventories. BDS expects that it will continue to have a wide range of opportunities across Asia, Europe and the
Middle East given the diverse regional threats. At the end of 2019, 29% of BDS backlog was attributable to non-U.S. customers.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenues
$26,227
$26,392
$23,938
% of total company revenues
34%
26%
25%
Earnings from operations
$2,608
$1,657
$2,383
Operating margins
9.9%
6.3%
10.0%
Since  our  operating  cycle  is  long-term  and  involves  many  different  types  of  development  and  production  contracts  with  varying  delivery  and
milestone schedules, the operating results of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of revenues, earnings and backlog may not be indicative
of future operating results. In addition, depending on the customer and their funding sources, our orders might be structured as annual follow-on
contracts, or as one large multi-year order or long-term award. As a result, period-to-period comparisons of backlog are not necessarily indicative of
future workloads. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context.
31

Table of Contents
Deliveries of units for new-build production aircraft, including remanufactures and modifications were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
F/A-18 Models
23
17
23
F-15 Models
11
10
16
C-17 Globemaster III
1
CH-47 Chinook (New)
13
13
9
CH-47 Chinook (Renewed)
22
17
35
AH-64 Apache (New)
37
11
AH-64 Apache (Remanufactured)
74
23
57
KC-46 Tanker
28
P-8 Models
18
16
19
C-40A
2
Total
229
96
170
New-build satellite deliveries were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Commercial and civil satellites
2
1
3
Military satellites
1
1
Revenues
BDS revenues in 2019 decreased by $165 million compared with 2018 due to timing associated with non-U.S. contract awards for fighters and the
final C-17 sale in 2018, lower revenue related to charges on Commercial Crew, and lower volume from certain unmanned and vertical lift programs.
These reductions were partially offset by increases from new programs, including E-7 early warning aircraft, VC-25B, T-7A Red Hawk, and MQ-25,
as well as from satellites and weapons. The unfavorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2019 was $163 million higher than
the comparable period in the prior year, reflecting unfavorable adjustments on the Commercial Crew contract and less favorable performance.
BDS  revenues  in  2018 increased by $2,454  million compared  with  2017  primarily  due  to non-US  contract  awards  for  fighters,  higher  weapons
revenue, the final C-17 aircraft sale and higher satellites revenue. The unfavorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2018 was
$359 million higher than the comparable period in the prior year, reflecting increased unfavorable adjustments on the KC-46A Tanker recorded in
2018.
Earnings From Operations
BDS earnings from operations in 2019 increased by $951 million compared with 2018 primarily due to lower net charges on development programs.
In 2019, BDS recorded charges of $143 million compared with $722 million in 2018 related to the KC-46A Tanker contract. Also during 2019, BDS
recorded charges of $489 million compared with $57 million in 2018 related to the Commercial Crew contract. In 2018, we recorded charges of $691
million related to losses on the T-7A Red Hawk and MQ-25 contracts. The unfavorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2019
was $62 million lower than the comparable period in the prior year, reflecting lower net unfavorable adjustments on development programs.
BDS earnings from operations in 2018 decreased by $726 million compared with 2017 as earnings growth from higher revenues was more than
offset by the higher charges on development programs in 2018. In
32

Table of Contents
2017,  BDS  recorded  charges  of $401  million related  to  the  KC-46A  Tanker  contract.  The  unfavorable  impact  of  cumulative  contract  catch-up
adjustments in 2018 was $412 million higher than the comparable period in the prior year, driven by higher charges on development programs in
2018.
BDS earnings from operations include equity earnings of $128 million, $147 million and $183 million primarily  from our ULA and non-U.S. joint
ventures in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Backlog
Total backlog of $63,908 million at December 31, 2019 increased by 4% from $61,277 million at December 31, 2018, primarily due to current year
contract awards in many of our programs greater than revenue recognized. Significant orders included F/A-18 fighters, Space Launch System, P-8A
Poseidon, KC-46A Tanker, and E-7 Airborne Early Warning & Control, partially offset by revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years.
Additional Considerations
Our BDS business includes a variety of development programs which have complex design and technical challenges. Many of these programs have
cost-type  contracting  arrangements.  In  these  cases,  the  associated  financial  risks  are  primarily  in  reduced  fees,  lower  profit  rates  or  program
cancellation  if  cost,  schedule  or  technical  performance  issues  arise.  Examples  of  these  programs  include Ground-based  Midcourse  Defense,
Proprietary and Space Launch System programs.
Some of our development programs are contracted on a fixed-price basis and BDS customers are increasingly seeking fixed priced proposals for
new programs.  Examples  of significant  fixed-price  development  programs  include Commercial  Crew,  KC-46A Tanker,  T-7A Red Hawk, VC-25B
Presidential Aircraft, MQ-25, and commercial and military satellites. New programs could also have risk for reach-forward loss upon contract award
and  during  the  period  of  contract  performance.  Many  development  programs  have  highly  complex  designs.  As  technical  or  quality  issues  arise
during development, we may experience schedule delays and cost impacts, which could increase our estimated cost to perform the work or reduce
our  estimated  price,  either  of  which  could  result  in  a  material  charge  or  otherwise  adversely  affect  our  financial  condition.  These  programs  are
ongoing, and while we believe the cost and fee estimates incorporated in the financial statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of these
programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could
trigger termination provisions, the loss of satellite in-orbit incentive payments, or other financially significant exposure. These programs have risk for
reach-forward losses if our estimated costs exceed our estimated contract revenues.
KC-46A Tanker The KC-46A Tanker is a derivative of our 767 commercial aircraft. In 2011, we were awarded a contract from the U.S. Air Force
(USAF) to design, develop, manufacture and deliver next generation aerial refueling tankers. The contract contains production options for both low
rate initial production (LRIP) aircraft and full rate production aircraft. Since 2016, the USAF has authorized five LRIP lots for a total of 67 aircraft. The
Engineering, Manufacturing and Development (EMD) contract and the five authorized LRIP lots are valued at approximately $15 billion. If all options
under the contract are exercised, we expect to deliver 179 aircraft for a total expected contract value of approximately $30 billion. In January 2019,
we delivered the first KC-46A to the USAF, and by December 2019, we had delivered a total of 28 aircraft.
During 2017, we recorded reach-forward losses of $445 million related to this program, primarily reflecting higher estimated costs associated with
certification  and  incorporating  changes  into  LRIP  aircraft.  During  2018,  we  recorded  additional  reach-forward  losses  of $736  million primarily
reflecting higher estimated costs associated with certification, flight testing and change incorporation on aircraft, as well as higher than expected
effort to meet customer requirements in order to support delivery of the initial aircraft. During 2019, we recorded additional reach-forward losses of
$148 million reflecting higher manufacturing costs.
33

Table of Contents
As with any development program, this program remains subject to additional reach-forward losses and/or delivery delays if we experience further
production, technical or quality issues.
Commercial Crew NASA has contracted us to design and build the CST-100 Starliner spacecraft to transport crews to the International Space
Station. On December 20, 2019 the Starliner launched and successfully landed two days later completing an abbreviated uncrewed flight test that
performed many mission objectives before returning to Earth as the first orbital land touchdown of a human-rated capsule in U.S. history. The flight
test was abbreviated, however, because anomalies experienced during the mission prevented docking with the International Space Station. In the
fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded an increase to the reach-forward loss of $410 million, primarily to provision for another uncrewed mission. Root
cause analysis is underway and NASA is evaluating the data received during the mission to determine if another uncrewed mission is required.
T-7A Red Hawk In September 2018, we were selected by the USAF to build the next generation training capability, known as T-7A Red Hawk
(formerly T-X Trainer). The program includes aircraft and simulators as well as support and ground equipment. The contract is structured as an
indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity fixed-price contract with a minimum of 206 aircraft and a maximum of 475 aircraft. The EMD contract is a fixed-
price contract valued at $813 million and includes five aircraft and seven simulators, with a period of performance that runs through 2022. The
production and support contracts are structured as options that begin with authorization from fiscal year 2022 to 2034. In connection with winning
this competition in 2018, we recorded a reach-forward loss of $400 million associated with anticipated losses on the options for 346 aircraft that we
believe are probable of being exercised.  During 2019, we completed the aircraft’s  critical  design review. We believe that  our investment  in this
contract positions us for additional market opportunities for both trainer and light attack aircraft.
MQ-25 In August 2018, we were awarded an EMD contract to build the MQ-25 for the U.S. Navy. The EMD contract is a fixed-price contract that
includes development and delivery of four aircraft and test articles at a contract price of $805 million. In connection with winning this competition, we
recognized a reach-forward loss of $291 million. The period of performance runs from 2018 through 2024. In 2019, we conducted a successful first
flight. The MQ-25 is the U.S. Navy’s first operational carrier-based unmanned aircraft, and we believe that our investment in this contract positions
us for long-term leadership in autonomy and artificial intelligence technologies along with additional market opportunities.
United  Launch  Alliance See  the  discussion  of  Indemnifications  to ULA and  Financing  Commitments  in  Notes 7 and 15 to  our  Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Sea Launch See the discussion of the Sea Launch receivables in Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Global Services
Business Environment and Trends
The aerospace markets we serve include parts distribution, logistics, and other inventory services; maintenance, engineering, and upgrades; training
and professional services; and information services. We expect the market to grow by around 3.5% annually.
As the size of the worldwide commercial airline fleet continues to grow, so does demand for aftermarket services designed to increase efficiency and
extend  the  economic  lives  of  airplanes.  Airlines  are  using  data  analytics  to  plan  flight  operations  and  predictive  maintenance  to  improve  their
productivity and efficiency. Airlines continue to look for opportunities to reduce the size and cost of their spare parts inventory, frequently outsourcing
spares management to third parties.
34

Table of Contents
Government services market segments are growing on pace with related fleets, but vary based on the utilization and age of the aircraft. The U.S.
government services market is the single largest individual market, comprising over 50 percent of the government services markets served. Over the
next  decade,  we  expect  U.S.  growth  to  remain  flat  and  non-U.S.  fleets,  led  by  Middle  East  and  Asia  Pacific  customers,  to  add  rotorcraft  and
commercial derivative aircraft at the fastest rates. We expect less than 20 percent of the worldwide fleet of military aircraft to be retired and replaced
over the next ten years, driving increased demand for services to maintain aging aircraft and enhance aircraft capability.
BGS’ major customer, the U.S. government, remains subject to the spending limits and uncertainty described on page 30, which could restrict the
execution of certain program activities and delay new programs or competitions.
Industry Competitiveness Aviation services is a competitive market with many domestic and international competitors. This market environment
has resulted in intense pressures on pricing and we expect these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years. Continued access to global
markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales growth potential and long-term investment returns.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenues
$18,468
$17,056
$14,611
% of total company revenues
24%
17%
16%
Earnings from operations
$2,697
$2,536
$2,251
Operating margins
14.6%
14.9%
15.4%
Revenues
BGS revenues in 2019 increased by $1,412 million compared with 2018 due to the acquisition of KLX in the fourth quarter of 2018 and government
services revenue, partially offset by lower commercial services revenue. The favorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2019
was $80 million higher than the comparable period in the prior year.
BGS revenues in 2018 increased by $2,445 million compared with 2017 due to growth across our services portfolio, primarily driven by higher parts
revenue, including the acquisition of KLX. The favorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2018 was $63 million lower than the
comparable period in the prior year.
Earnings From Operations
BGS earnings from operations in 2019 increased by $161 million compared with 2018. The increase in earnings from operations reflects higher
revenues, which was partially offset by less favorable performance and mix. Earnings from operations for 2019 also includes a divestiture gain of
$395 million and a charge of $293 million related to our decision in the fourth quarter to retire the Aviall brand and trade name. The favorable impact
of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2019 was $21 million higher than the comparable period in the prior year.
BGS earnings from operations in 2018 increased by $285 million compared with 2017 primarily due to higher revenues, partially offset by higher
period costs. The favorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2018 was $25 million lower than the comparable period in the
prior year.
35

Table of Contents
Backlog
BGS total backlog of $22,902 million at December 31, 2019 increased by 9% from $21,064 million at December 31, 2018, primarily due to current
year contract awards, partially offset by revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years.
Boeing Capital
Business Environment and Trends
BCC’s gross customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2019 totaled $2,254 million. A substantial portion of BCC’s portfolio is
related to customers that we believe have less than investment-grade credit. BCC’s portfolio is also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing
aircraft product types, most notably 717 and 747-8 aircraft.
BCC provided customer financing of $419 million and $601 million during 2019 and 2018. While we may be required to fund a number of new
aircraft deliveries in 2020 and/or provide refinancing for existing bridge debt, we expect alternative financing will be available at reasonable prices
from broad and globally diverse sources.
Aircraft values and lease rates are impacted by the number and type of aircraft that are currently out of service. Approximately 2,200 western-built
commercial jet aircraft (8.5% of current world fleet) were parked at the end of 2019, including both in-production and out-of-production aircraft types.
Of these parked aircraft, approximately 20% are not expected to return to service. At the end of 2018 and 2017, 6.7% and 8.3% of the western-built
commercial jet aircraft were parked. Aircraft valuations could decline if significant numbers of additional aircraft, particularly types with relatively few
operators, are placed out of service.
Results of Operations    
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenues
$244
$274
$307
Earnings from operations
$28
$79
$114
Operating margins
11%
29%
37%
Revenues
BCC segment revenues consist principally of lease income from equipment under operating lease, interest income from financing receivables and
notes, and other income. BCC’s revenues in 2019 decreased by $30 million compared with 2018 primarily due to lower gains on the sale of assets.
BCC’s revenues in 2018 decreased by $33 million compared with 2017 primarily due to lower lease income driven by a smaller portfolio, partially
offset by gains on asset sales.
Earnings From Operations
BCC’s earnings from operations are presented net of interest expense, provision for (recovery of) losses, asset impairment expense, depreciation
on leased equipment and other operating expenses. Earnings from operations in 2019 decreased by $51 million primarily due to lower revenues and
higher asset impairment expenses. Earnings from operations in 2018 decreased by $35 million primarily due to lower revenues.
36

Table of Contents
Financial Position
The following table presents selected financial data for BCC as of December 31:
(Dollars in millions)
2019
2018
Customer financing and investment portfolio, net
$2,251
$2,790
Other assets, primarily cash and short-term investments
535
717
Total assets
$2,786
$3,507
Other liabilities, primarily deferred income taxes
$432
$523
Debt, including intercompany loans
1,960
2,487
Equity
394
497
Total liabilities and equity
$2,786
$3,507
Debt-to-equity ratio
5.0-to-1
5.0-to-1
BCC’s customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2019 decreased from December 31, 2018, primarily due to $720 million of note
payoffs and portfolio run-off and $250 million related to the impairment of lease incentives, partially offset by new volume.
BCC enters into certain transactions with Boeing, reflected in Unallocated items, eliminations and other, in the form of intercompany guarantees and
other subsidies that mitigate the effects of certain credit quality or asset impairment issues on the BCC segment. The $250 million impairment of
lease incentives did not result in an earnings charge in the BCC segment because of an intercompany guarantee.
Leased aircraft with a carrying value of approximately $58 million are scheduled to be returned off lease during 2020. We are seeking to remarket
these aircraft or have the leases extended.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Non-cash items
2,819
2,578
2,636
Changes in working capital
(4,629)
2,284
2,252
Net cash (used)/provided by operating activities
(2,446)
15,322
13,346
Net cash used by investing activities
(1,530)
(4,621)
(2,058)
Net cash provided/(used) by financing activities
5,739
(11,722)
(11,350)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(5)
(53)
80
Net increase/(decrease) in cash & cash equivalents, including restricted
1,758
(1,074)
18
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at beginning of year
7,813
8,887
8,869
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at end of year
$9,571
$7,813
$8,887
Operating Activities Net cash used by operating activities was $2.4 billion during 2019, compared with net cash provided by operating activities of
$15.3 billion during 2018 and $13.3 billion in 2017. The decrease in operating cash flows in 2019 primarily reflects the impacts of the 737 MAX
grounding that is resulting
37

Table of Contents
in lower earnings, higher inventory and lower advances and progress payments. In addition, compensation payments to 737 MAX customers of $1.2
billion for disruption to their operations also reduced 2019 cash from operating activities. Cash used to fund Inventory was $12.4 billion during 2019
as we continued to produce aircraft while deliveries were suspended. Cash provided by Advances and progress billings was $0.7 billion in 2019, as
compared with $2.6 billion in 2018. In December 2019, we announced plans to temporarily suspend production of the 737 MAX beginning in January
2020. This will enable us to prioritize the delivery of stored aircraft. Net cash from operating activities in future quarters is expected to continue to be
adversely impacted by the 737 MAX grounding.
Discretionary contributions to our pension plans were insignificant in 2019 and 2018. During 2017, our discretionary contributions to our pension
plans included 14.4 million shares of our common stock with an aggregate value of $3.5 billion and $0.5 billion in cash.
Investing Activities Cash used by investing activities during 2019, 2018 and 2017 was $1.5 billion, $4.6 billion and $2.1 billion. The reduction in
2019 compared with 2018 is primarily due to acquisitions completed in the second half of 2018 and the timing of investments. Acquisitions net of
cash acquired were $0.5 billion in 2019, compared with $3.2 billion in 2018, primarily related to the acquisition of KLX. Proceeds from dispositions
was $0.5 billion in 2019 as a result of the divestiture of two businesses. Capital expenditures totaled $1.8 billion in 2019, relatively consistent with
$1.7 billion in 2018 and 2017. We expect capital expenditures in 2020 to be relatively consistent with 2019. Net proceeds from investments was $0.1
billion in 2019, $0.3 billion in 2018, and was insignificant in 2017.
Financing Activities Cash provided by financing activities was $5.7 billion during 2019, compared with cash used by financing activities of $11.7
billion in 2018. The increase of $17.5 billion compared with 2018 primarily reflects higher net borrowings and lower share repurchases, partially
offset by higher dividend payments in 2019. Cash used by financing activities was $11.7 billion during 2018, an increase of $0.4 billion compared
with 2017, primarily due to higher dividend payments partially offset by higher net borrowings. Net borrowings were $13.2 billion in 2019, $1.4 billion
in 2018 and $1.1 billion in 2017.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018 the recorded balance of debt was $27.3 billion and $13.8 billion of which $7.3 billion and $3.2 billion was classified
as short-term. At December 31, 2019 and 2018 this included $2.0 billion and $2.5 billion of debt attributable to BCC, of which $0.5 billion and $0.5
billion were classified as short-term.
During 2019 and 2018 we  repurchased 6.9  million and 26.1  million shares  totaling $2.7  billion and $9.0  billion through  our  open  market  share
repurchase program. In 2019 and 2018, we had 0.6 million shares transferred to us from employees for tax withholdings. At December 31, 2019, the
amount available under the share repurchase plan, announced on December 17, 2018, totaled $17.3 billion. Share repurchases under this plan are
currently suspended. We increased our quarterly dividend from $1.71 to $2.055 in December 2018, which resulted in $684 million of higher dividend
payments in 2019 compared with 2018.
Capital Resources We have substantial borrowing capacity. Any future borrowings may affect our credit ratings and are subject to various debt
covenants as described below. We have a commercial paper program that serves as a source of short-term liquidity. At December 31, 2019, 2018,
and 2017, commercial paper borrowings totaling $6,109 million, $1,895 million and $600 million, respectively,  which were supported by unused
commitments under the revolving credit agreement. At December 31, 2019, we had $9.6 billion of unused borrowing capacity on revolving credit line
agreements. We anticipate that these credit lines will primarily serve as backup liquidity to support our general corporate borrowing needs.
Customer financing commitments totaled $13.4 billion and $19.5 billion at December 31, 2019 and 2018. The decrease primarily relates to financing
commitment expirations and terminations. We anticipate that we will not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments as we
continue to work with third party financiers to provide alternative financing to customers. Historically, we have not been
38

Table of Contents
required to fund significant amounts of outstanding commitments. However, there can be no assurances that we will not be required to fund greater
amounts than historically required.
As  previously  announced,  we  plan  to  acquire  an  80%  ownership  stake  in  a  joint  venture  comprised  of  the  commercial  aircraft  and  services
operations of Embraer for $4.2 billion. We expect the transaction to close in the first half of 2020.
In the event we require additional funding to support strategic business opportunities, our commercial aircraft financing commitments, unfavorable
resolution of litigation or other loss contingencies, or other business requirements, including impacts related to the 737 MAX grounding, we expect to
meet increased funding requirements by issuing commercial paper or term debt. We believe our ability to access external capital resources should
be sufficient to satisfy existing short-term and long-term commitments and plans, and also to provide adequate financial flexibility to take advantage
of potential strategic business opportunities should they arise within the next year. However, there can be no assurance of the cost or availability of
future borrowings under our commercial paper program or in the debt markets.
As of January 31, 2020, we have received commitments from a syndicate of banks sufficient for us to enter into a $12 billion delayed draw two-year
term loan credit facility. This facility may be increased at the Company’s option if the facility is oversubscribed. The facility will enhance our liquidity
and is expected to close in February 2020.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, our pension plans were $15.9 billion and $15.3 billion underfunded as measured under GAAP. On an Employee
Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) basis our plans are more than 100% funded at December 31, 2019. We do not expect to make significant
contributions to our pension plans in 2020. We may be required to make higher contributions to our pension plans in future years.
At December  31,  2019,  we  were  in  compliance  with  the  covenants  for  our  debt  and  credit  facilities.  The  most  restrictive  covenants  include  a
limitation  on  mortgage  debt  and  sale  and  leaseback  transactions  as  a  percentage  of  consolidated  net  tangible  assets  (as  defined  in  the  credit
agreements), and a limitation on consolidated debt as a percentage of total capital (as defined). When considering debt covenants, we continue to
have substantial borrowing capacity.
39

Table of Contents
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our known obligations to make future payments pursuant to certain contracts as of December 31, 2019, and the
estimated timing thereof.
(Dollars in millions)
Total
Less
than 1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
After 5
years
Long-term debt (including current portion)
$27,476
$7,306
$2,698
$1,780
$15,692
Interest on debt
12,408
803
1,479
1,341
8,785
Pension and other postretirement cash requirements
9,717
621
1,307
3,719
4,070
Finance lease obligations
238
71
98
26
43
Operating lease obligations
1,574
287
429
249
609
Purchase obligations not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of
Financial Position
115,411
52,685
33,550
19,246
9,930
Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated Statements of
Financial Position
22,315
20,867
1,423
3
22
Acquisition not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position (2)
4,200
4,200
Total contractual obligations (1)
$193,339
$86,840
$40,984
$26,364
$39,151
(1) Excludes income tax matters. As of December 31, 2019, our net liability for income taxes payable, including uncertain tax positions of $1,409 million, was $1,262 million.
Aside from $670 million of income taxes payable expected to be paid in 2020, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows related to the
remaining net liability for income taxes payable. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)
 We plan to acquire an 80% ownership stake in a joint venture comprised of the commercial aircraft and services operations of Embraer. For additional information, see Note
2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pension  and  Other  Postretirement  Benefits Pension  cash  requirements  are  based  on  an  estimate  of  our  minimum  funding  requirements,
pursuant to ERISA regulations, although we may make additional discretionary contributions. Estimates of other postretirement benefits are based
on both our estimated future benefit payments and the estimated contributions to plans that are funded through trusts.
Purchase Obligations Purchase obligations represent contractual agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding; specify a
fixed,  minimum  or  range  of  quantities;  specify  a  fixed,  minimum,  variable,  or  indexed  price  provision;  and  specify  approximate  timing  of  the
transaction. Purchase obligations include amounts recorded as well as amounts that are not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position.
40

Table of Contents
Purchase  Obligations  Not  Recorded  on  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position Purchase  obligations  not  recorded  on  the
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position include agreements for inventory procurement, tooling costs, electricity and natural gas contracts,
property,  plant  and  equipment,  customer  financing  equipment,  and  other  miscellaneous  production  related  obligations.  The  most  significant
obligation  relates  to  inventory  procurement  contracts.  We  have  entered  into  certain  significant  inventory  procurement  contracts  that  specify
determinable prices and quantities, and long-term delivery timeframes. In addition, we purchase raw materials on behalf of our suppliers. These
agreements require suppliers and vendors to be prepared to build and deliver items in sufficient time to meet our production schedules. The need for
such arrangements with suppliers and vendors arises from the extended production planning horizon for many of our products. A significant portion
of these inventory commitments is supported by firm contracts and/or has historically resulted in settlement through reimbursement from customers
for penalty payments to the supplier should the customer not take delivery. These amounts are also included in our forecasts of costs for program
and contract accounting. Some inventory procurement contracts may include escalation adjustments. In these limited cases, we have included our
best estimate of the effect of the escalation adjustment in the amounts disclosed in the table above.
Purchase Obligations Recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated
Statements  of  Financial  Position  primarily  include  accounts  payable  and  certain  other  current  and  long-term  liabilities  including  accrued
compensation.
Industrial Participation Agreements We have entered into various industrial participation agreements with certain customers outside of the U.S. to
facilitate economic flow back and/or technology or skills transfer to their businesses or government agencies as the result of their procurement of
goods and/or services from us. These commitments may be satisfied by our local operations there, placement of direct work or vendor orders for
supplies, opportunities to bid on supply contracts, transfer of technology or other forms of assistance. However, in certain cases, our commitments
may be satisfied through other parties (such as our vendors) who purchase supplies from our non-U.S. customers. In certain cases, penalties could
be imposed if we do not meet our industrial participation commitments. During 2019, we incurred no such penalties. As of December 31, 2019, we
have outstanding industrial participation agreements totaling $24.8 billion that extend through 2034. Purchase order commitments associated with
industrial participation agreements are included in purchase obligations in the table above. To be eligible for such a purchase order commitment
from us, a non-U.S. supplier must have sufficient capability to meet our requirements and must be competitive in cost, quality and schedule.
Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our commercial commitments outstanding as of December 31, 2019.
(Dollars in millions)
Total Amounts
Committed/Maximum
Amount of Loss
Less than
1 year
1-3
years
4-5
years
After 5
years
Standby letters of credit and surety bonds
$3,769
$1,657
$1,224
$180
$708
Commercial aircraft financing commitments
13,377
3,506
4,324
3,570
1,977
Total commercial commitments
$17,146
$5,163
$5,548
$3,750
$2,685
Commercial  aircraft  financing  commitments  include  commitments  to  provide  financing  related  to  aircraft  on  order,  under  option  for  deliveries  or
proposed as part of sales campaigns or refinancing with respect to delivered aircraft, based on estimated earliest potential funding dates. Based on
historical experience, we anticipate that we will not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments. However, there can be no
assurances that we will not be required to fund greater amounts than historically required. See Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
41

Table of Contents
Contingent Obligations
We have significant contingent obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business, which include the following:
Legal Various  legal  proceedings,  claims  and  investigations  are  pending  against  us.  Legal  contingencies  are  discussed  in  Note 22 to  our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Remediation We are involved with various environmental  remediation  activities  and have recorded  a liability of $570 million at
December 31, 2019. For additional information, see Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to certain off-balance sheet arrangements including certain guarantees. For discussion of these arrangements, see Note 15 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Measures
Core Operating Earnings, Core Operating Margin and Core Earnings Per Share
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States of America
(GAAP) which we supplement with certain non-GAAP financial information. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as
a substitute for the related GAAP measures, and other companies may define such measures differently. We encourage investors to review our
financial  statements  and  publicly-filed  reports  in  their  entirety  and  not  to  rely  on  any  single  financial  measure.  Core  operating  earnings,  core
operating margin and core earnings per share exclude the FAS/CAS service cost adjustment. The FAS/CAS service cost adjustment represents the
difference between the FAS pension and postretirement service costs calculated under GAAP and costs allocated to the business segments. Core
earnings per share excludes both the FAS/CAS service cost adjustment and non-operating pension and postretirement expenses. Non-operating
pension and postretirement expenses represent the components of net periodic benefit costs other than service cost. Pension costs, comprising
service  and  prior  service  costs  computed  in  accordance  with  GAAP  are  allocated  to  BCA  and  certain  BGS  businesses  supporting  commercial
customers.  Pension  costs  allocated  to  BDS  and  BGS  businesses  supporting  government  customers  are  computed  in  accordance  with  U.S.
Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), which employ different actuarial assumptions and accounting conventions than GAAP. CAS costs
are allocable to government contracts. Other postretirement benefit costs are allocated to all business segments based on CAS, which is generally
based on benefits paid.
The Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment recognized in (loss)/earnings from operations during 2019 was a benefit of $1,071 million, largely
consistent with a benefit of $1,005 million in 2018 and $1,127 million in 2017. The non-operating pension expense included in Other income, net was
a benefit of $374 million in 2019, $143 million in 2018 and $117 million in 2017. The benefits in 2019, 2018, and 2017 reflect expected returns in
excess of interest cost and amortization of actuarial losses. 
For further discussion of pension and other postretirement costs see the Management’s Discussion and Analysis on page 22 of this Form 10-K and
see Note 23 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Management uses core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per
share for purposes of evaluating and forecasting underlying business performance. Management believes these core earnings measures provide
investors additional insights into operational performance as unallocated
42

Table of Contents
pension  and  other  postretirement  benefit  cost,  primarily  represent  costs  driven  by  market  factors  and  costs  not  allocable  to  U.S.  government
contracts.
Reconciliation of GAAP Measures to Non-GAAP Measures
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share with
the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures of earnings from operations, operating margins and diluted earnings per share.
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenues
$76,559
$101,127
$94,005
(Loss)/earnings from operations, as reported
($1,975)
$11,987
$10,344
Operating margins
(2.6)%
11.9%
11.0%
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment(1)
($1,071)
($1,005)
($1,127)
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment(1)
($344)
($322)
($311)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment(1)
($1,415)
($1,327)
($1,438)
Core operating (loss)/earnings (non-GAAP)
($3,390)
$10,660
$8,906
Core operating margins (non-GAAP)
(4.4)%
10.5%
9.5%
Diluted (loss)/earnings per share, as reported
($1.12)
$17.85
$13.85
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment(1)
($1.89)
($1.71)
($1.84)
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment(1)
($0.61)
($0.55)
($0.51)
Non-operating pension expense(2)
($0.66)
($0.24)
($0.19)
Non-operating postretirement expense(2)
$0.19
$0.17
$0.20
Provision for deferred income taxes on adjustments (3)
$0.62
$0.49
$0.82
Core (loss)/earnings per share (non-GAAP)
($3.47)
$16.01
$12.33
Weighted average diluted shares (in millions)
566.0
586.2
610.7
(1)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment represents the difference between the FAS pension and postretirement service costs calculated under GAAP
and costs allocated to the business segments. This adjustment is excluded from Core operating (loss)/earnings (non-GAAP).
(2) 
Non-operating  pension and postretirement  expenses represent  the  components  of net periodic  benefit  costs  other than  service  cost.  These
expenses are included in Other income, net and are excluded from Core (loss)/earnings per share (non-GAAP).
(3) 
The income tax impact is calculated using the U.S. corporate statutory tax rate.
43

Table of Contents
Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates
Accounting for long-term contracts
Substantially all contracts at BDS and certain contracts at BGS are long-term contracts. Our long-term contracts typically represent a single distinct
performance obligation due to the highly interdependent and interrelated nature of the underlying goods and/or services and the significant service
of integration that we provide.
Accounting for long-term contracts involves a judgmental process of estimating the total sales, costs, and profit for each performance obligation.
Cost of sales is recognized as incurred and revenue is determined by adding a proportionate amount of the estimated profit to the amount reported
as cost of sales.
Due to the size, duration and nature of many of our long-term contracts, the estimation of total sales and costs through completion is complicated
and subject to many variables. Total sales estimates are based on negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding
contract  options,  change  orders,  incentive  and  award  provisions  associated  with  technical  performance,  and  price  adjustment  clauses  (such  as
inflation or index-based clauses). The majority of these long-term contracts are with the U.S. government where the price is generally based on
estimated  cost to produce the product  or service  plus profit.  Federal Acquisition  Regulations provide guidance on the types of cost that will be
reimbursed  in establishing  contract  price.  Total  cost  estimates  are  largely  based  on  negotiated  or  estimated  purchase  contract  terms,  historical
performance trends, business base and other economic projections. Factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and
schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset utilization, and anticipated labor agreements.
Revenue and cost estimates for all significant long-term contract performance obligations are reviewed and reassessed quarterly. Changes in these
estimates could result in recognition of cumulative catch-up adjustments to the performance obligation’s inception to date revenues, cost of sales
and profit, in the period in which such changes are made. Changes in revenue and cost estimates could also result in a reach-forward loss or an
adjustment  to  a  reach-forward  loss,  which  would  be  recorded  immediately  in  earnings.  For  the  years  ended  December  31, 2019 and 2018 net
unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward losses, across all long-term contracts decreased Earnings from operations by
$111 million and $190 million. For the year ended December 31, 2017, net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward
losses, across all long-term contracts increased Earnings from operations by $250 million.
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is likely that materially different earnings could be recorded if we
used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. Changes in underlying assumptions/estimates, supplier performance,
or circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods. If the combined gross margin for all long-term contract
performance obligations for all of 2019 had been estimated to be higher or lower by 1%, it would have increased or decreased pre-tax income for
the year by approximately $330 million. In addition, a number of our fixed price development contracts are in a reach-forward loss position. Changes
to estimated losses are recorded immediately in earnings.
44

Table of Contents
Program Accounting
Program  accounting  requires  the  demonstrated  ability  to  reliably  estimate  the  relationship  of  sales  to  costs  for  the  defined  program  accounting
quantity.  A  program  consists  of  the  estimated  number  of  units  (accounting  quantity)  of  a  product  to  be  produced  in  a  continuing,  long-term
production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make
reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. For each program, the amount reported as cost of
sales  is  determined  by  applying  the  estimated  cost  of  sales  percentage  for  the  total  remaining  program  to  the  amount  of  sales  recognized  for
airplanes delivered and accepted by the customer.
Factors that must be estimated include program accounting quantity, sales price, labor and employee benefit costs, material costs, procured part
costs, major component costs, overhead costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and warranty costs. Estimation of the accounting
quantity for each program takes into account several factors that are indicative of the demand for the particular program, such as firm orders, letters
of intent from prospective customers, and market studies. Total estimated program sales are determined by estimating the model mix and sales
price for all unsold units within the accounting quantity, added together with the sales prices for all undelivered units under contract. The sales prices
for all undelivered units within the accounting quantity include an escalation adjustment for inflation that is updated quarterly. Cost estimates are
based  largely  on  negotiated  and  anticipated  contracts  with  suppliers,  historical  performance  trends,  and  business  base  and  other  economic
projections.  Factors  that  influence  these  estimates  include  production  rates,  internal  and  subcontractor  performance  trends,  customer  and/or
supplier claims or assertions, asset utilization, anticipated labor agreements, and inflationary or deflationary trends.
To ensure  reliability  in our estimates,  we employ  a rigorous  estimating  process  that  is reviewed  and updated  on a quarterly  basis.  Changes in
estimates are normally recognized on a prospective basis; however, when estimated costs to complete a program exceed estimated revenues from
undelivered units in the accounting quantity, a loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the
accounting quantity.
The program method of accounting allocates tooling and other non-recurring and production costs over the accounting quantity for each program.
Because of the higher unit production costs experienced at the beginning of a new program and substantial investment required for initial tooling and
other  non-recurring  costs,  new  commercial  aircraft  programs,  such  as  the  777X  program,  typically  have  lower  initial  margins  than  established
programs. In addition, actual costs incurred for earlier units in excess of the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity
are included within program inventory as deferred production costs. Deferred production, unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs are
expected to be fully recovered when all units in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is below the
estimated average cost as learning curve and other improvements are realized.
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is reasonably possible that changes in underlying circumstances or
assumptions  could  have  a  material  effect  on  program  gross  margins.  If  the  combined  gross  margin  percentages  for  our  commercial  airplane
programs had been estimated to be 1% higher or lower it would have an approximately $400 million impact on operating earnings for the year ended
December 31, 2019.
737 MAX Grounding
On March 13, 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued an order to suspend operations of all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S.
aircraft operators following two fatal 737 MAX accidents. Non-U.S. civil aviation authorities have issued directives to the same effect. The grounding
is having a significant adverse impact on our operations and creates significant uncertainty.
45

Table of Contents
Multiple legal actions have been filed against us as a result of the October 29, 2018 accident of Lion Air Flight 610 and the March 10, 2019 accident
of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. Further, we are fully cooperating with all ongoing governmental and regulatory investigations and inquiries relating to
the accidents and the 737 MAX, including investigations  by the U.S. Department  of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission.  We
cannot reasonably estimate a range of loss, if any, not covered by available insurance that may result given the ongoing status of these lawsuits,
investigations, and inquiries. We have also experienced claims and/or assertions from customers and suppliers in connection with the grounding. As
a result of the grounding, we reduced the 737 production rate from 52 per month to 42 per month in 2019 and in December 2019, we announced
plans to temporarily suspend 737 production beginning in January 2020. We have concluded that the suspension of production and the gradual
resumption  of  production  at  low  production  rates  will  result  in  abnormal  production  costs  which  will  be  expensed  when  incurred  rather  than
inventoried. Prior to the grounding, we had planned to increase the production rate to 57 per month in 2019.
In the preparation of our financial statements, we have made assumptions regarding outcomes of accident investigations and other government
inquiries, timing and conditions of return to service, the duration of the 737 MAX production suspension and timing of future 737 production rate
increases,  supplier  readiness  to  support  production  rate  changes,  timing  and  sequence  of  future  customer  deliveries  as  well  as  outcomes  of
negotiations  with  customers  impacted  by the  grounding.  We  have also made  significant  assumptions  regarding  estimated  costs  expected  to be
incurred  in 2020 and 2021 that  should be included in program  inventory  and those  costs  that  should  be expensed  when incurred  as abnormal
production costs. While these assumptions reflect our best estimate at this time, they are highly uncertain and significantly affect the estimates
inherent in our financial statements.
The FAA and other non-U.S. civil aviation authorities will determine the timing and conditions of the 737 MAX return to service in each relevant
jurisdiction. We have assumed that regulatory approval of the 737 MAX will enable deliveries to resume during mid-2020. We have also assumed
that, as a condition of return to service, regulators will require 737 MAX pilots to undergo computer and simulator training. We have assumed that
we will resume 737 MAX aircraft production at low rates in 2020 as timing and conditions of return to service are better understood, and then we
expect  to  gradually  increase  to  previously  planned  production  rates  over  the  next  few  years. We  are  also  assuming  that  737  MAX  airplanes
produced during the grounding and included within inventory will be delivered over several quarters with the majority of them delivering during the
first year after the resumption of deliveries. The cumulative impacts of changes to assumptions regarding timing of return to service and timing of
planned production rates have increased the estimated costs to produce aircraft included in the current accounting quantity by approximately $6.3
billion, which will be recorded in program inventory. In addition, the suspension of 737 MAX production and lower production rates is expected to
result in approximately $4.0 billion of abnormal production costs in 2020 and 2021 that will be expensed as incurred. The increases in the estimated
costs accounted for as program inventory will reduce 737 program and overall BCA segment operating margins in future periods after deliveries
resume. Production costs incurred while production is suspended and a portion of production costs incurred while we gradually increase production
rates to a normal level will be expensed as incurred as abnormal costs and will not be included in program inventory. We may face additional costs,
delays in regulatory approval of the 737 MAX and/or the resumption of deliveries, and/or further delays in planned production rate increases which
may result in further increases in program costs and/or abnormal production costs.
We recorded an earnings charge and corresponding liability of $6.1 billion, in the second quarter of 2019, in connection with an estimate of potential
concessions and other considerations to customers for disruptions related to the 737 MAX grounding and associated delivery delays. The second
quarter estimate of $6.1 billion was updated in the third and fourth quarters of 2019. The remaining liability of $7.4 billion at December 31, 2019
represents our current best estimate of future concessions and other considerations we expect to provide to customers. This estimate relies on the
exercise of judgment by management and is significantly impacted by the assumptions described above, as well as the status of negotiations with
46

Table of Contents
our  customers.  Any  delays  in  our  ability  to  resume  deliveries,  prolonged  production  suspension,  further  disruptions  to  our  production  system,
supplier  claims  or  assertions,  or  changes  to  estimated  concessions  and  other  considerations  we  expect  to  provide  to  customers  could  have  a
material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and/or cash flows.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Impairments
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  two-step  impairment  process.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a
qualitative assessment, we evaluate economic, industry and company-specific factors as an initial step in assessing the fair value of operations. If
we determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related operations, the two-step
impairment process is then performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. For operations where the two-step impairment process is used, we
first compare the book value of net assets to the fair value of the related operations. If the fair value is determined to be less than book value, a
second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. In this process, a fair value for goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair
value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. The shortfall of the fair value below carrying value represents the amount of goodwill
impairment.
We estimate the fair values of the related operations using discounted cash flows. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of
future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements and
general market conditions. Changes in these forecasts could significantly change the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
The cash flow forecasts are adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from our market capitalization plus a suitable control premium at the
date of evaluation. Therefore, changes in the stock price may also affect the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
We completed our assessment of goodwill as of April 1, 2019 and determined that there is no impairment of goodwill. As of December 31, 2019, we
estimated that the fair value of each reporting unit significantly exceeded its corresponding carrying value. Changes in our forecasts, or decreases in
the value of our common stock could cause book values of certain operations to exceed their fair values which may result in goodwill impairment
charges in future periods.
As  of  December  31,  2018,  we  had $490  million of  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  related  to  the  Jeppesen  and  Aviall  brand  and  trade  names
acquired in business combinations. During 2019, we changed the name of the Aviall business to Boeing Distribution Inc. and, in the fourth quarter,
decided to retire the Aviall brand and trade name. As a result we recorded an earnings charge of $293 million to write-off the Aviall indefinite-lived
intangible asset. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2019, we had an indefinite-lived intangible asset with a carrying value of $197 million related to
the Jeppesen brand and trade name.
We test these intangibles for impairment by comparing their carrying value to current projections of discounted cash flows attributable to the brand
and trade names. Any excess carrying value over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment. A 10% decrease in
the discounted cash flows would not impact the carrying value of the Jeppesen indefinite-lived intangible asset.
47

Table of Contents
Pension Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Additional union
employees transitioned to company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plans effective January 1, 2019. Accounting rules require an
annual measurement of our projected obligation and plan assets. These measurements are based upon several assumptions, including the discount
rate and the expected long-term rate of asset return. Future changes in assumptions or differences between actual and expected outcomes can
significantly affect our future annual expense, projected benefit obligation and Shareholders’ equity.
The following table shows the sensitivity of our pension plan liability and net periodic cost to a 25 basis point change in the discount rate as of
December 31, 2019.
(Dollars in millions)
Change in discount rate
Increase 25 bps
Change in discount rate
Decrease 25 bps
Pension plans
Projected benefit obligation
($2,231)
$2,778
Net periodic pension cost
(10)
20
Pension cost is also sensitive to changes in the expected long-term rate of asset return. A decrease or increase of 25 basis points in the expected
long-term rate of asset return would have increased or decreased 2019 net periodic pension cost by $149 million.
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Interest Rate Risk
We  have  financial  instruments  that  are  subject  to  interest  rate  risk,  principally  fixed-rate  debt  obligations,  and  customer  financing  assets  and
liabilities. Historically, we have not experienced material gains or losses on our customer financing assets and liabilities due to interest rate changes.
As of December 31, 2019, the impact over the next 12 months of a 100 basis point rise in interest rates to our pre-tax  earnings would not be
significant. The investors in our fixed-rate debt obligations do not generally have the right to demand we pay off these obligations prior to maturity.
Therefore, exposure to interest rate risk is not believed to be material for our fixed-rate debt.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
We are subject to foreign currency exchange rate risk relating to receipts from customers and payments to suppliers in foreign currencies. We use
foreign  currency  forward  contracts  to  hedge  the  price  risk  associated  with  firmly  committed  and  forecasted  foreign  denominated  payments  and
receipts  related  to  our  ongoing  business.  Foreign  currency  forward  contracts  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  At
December  31,  2019,  a  10%  increase  or  decrease  in  the  exchange  rate  in  our  portfolio  of  foreign  currency  contracts  would  have  increased  or
decreased our unrealized losses by $226 million. Consistent with the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations,
such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions
being hedged. When taken together, these forward currency contracts and the offsetting underlying commitments do not create material market risk.
48

Table of Contents
Commodity Price Risk
We are subject to commodity price risk relating to commodity purchase contracts for items used in production that are subject to changes in the
market  price.  We  use  commodity  swaps  to  hedge  against  these  potentially  unfavorable  price  changes.  Our  commodity  purchase  contracts  and
derivatives  are  both  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  market  price.  At December  31,  2019,  a  10%  increase  or  decrease  in  the  market  price  in  our
commodity  derivatives  would  have  increased  or  decreased  our  unrealized  losses  by  $63  million.  Consistent  with  the  use  of  these  contracts  to
neutralize the effect of market price fluctuations, such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in
the  remeasurement  of  the  underlying  transactions  being  hedged.  When  taken  together,  these  commodity  purchase  contracts  and  the  offsetting
swaps do not create material market risk.
49

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Index to the Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations
51
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
52
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
53
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
54
Consolidated Statements of Equity
55
Summary of Business Segment Data
56
Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
57
Note 2 - Acquisitions and Joint Ventures
69
Note 3 - Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
71
Note 4 - Earnings Per Share
72
Note 5 - Income Taxes
73
Note 6 - Accounts Receivable
76
Note 7 - Inventories
77
Note 8 - Contracts with Customers
78
Note 9 - Customer Financing
78
Note 10 - Property, Plant and Equipment
81
Note 11 - Investments
82
Note 12 - Other Assets
82
Note 13 - Leases
83
Note 14 - Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
84
Note 15 - Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
89
Note 16 - Debt
90
Note 17 - Postretirement Plans
92
Note 18 - Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
101
Note 19 - Shareholders’ Equity
105
Note 20 - Derivative Financial Instruments
106
Note 21 - Fair Value Measurements
109
Note 22 - Legal Proceedings
111
Note 23 - Segment and Revenue Information
111
Note 24 - Quarterly Financial Data
117
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
118
50

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Sales of products
$66,094
$90,229
$83,740
Sales of services
10,465
10,898
10,265
Total revenues
76,559
101,127
94,005
Cost of products
(62,877)
(72,922)
(68,879)
Cost of services
(9,154)
(8,499)
(7,663)
Boeing Capital interest expense
(62)
(69)
(70)
Total costs and expenses
(72,093)
(81,490)
(76,612)
4,466
19,637
17,393
(Loss)/income from operating investments, net
(4)
111
204
General and administrative expense
(3,909)
(4,567)
(4,095)
Research and development expense, net
(3,219)
(3,269)
(3,179)
Gain on dispositions, net
691
75
21
(Loss)/earnings from operations
(1,975)
11,987
10,344
Other income, net
438
92
123
Interest and debt expense
(722)
(475)
(360)
(Loss)/earnings before income taxes
(2,259)
11,604
10,107
Income tax benefit/(expense)
1,623
(1,144)
(1,649)
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Basic (loss)/earnings per share
($1.12)
$18.05
$14.03
Diluted (loss)/earnings per share
($1.12)
$17.85
$13.85
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 56 – 117.
51

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax:
Currency translation adjustments
(27)
(86)
128
Unrealized gain on certain investments, net of tax of $0, ($1) and ($1)
1
2
1
Derivative instruments:
Unrealized (loss)/gain arising during period, net of tax of $13, $40, and ($66)
(48)
(146)
119
Reclassification adjustment for loss included in net earnings, net of tax of ($7), ($8), and ($28)
26
30
52
Total derivative instruments, net of tax
(22)
(116)
171
Defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits:
Net actuarial (loss)/gain arising during the period, net of tax of $405, ($105), and $248
(1,413)
384
(495)
Amortization of actuarial losses included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($133), ($242),
and ($272)
464
878
542
Settlements and curtailments included in net income, net of tax of $0, ($2), and $0
8
Pension and postretirement benefit/(cost) related to our equity method investments, net of tax ($5),
($6), and $5
17
22
(11)
Amortization of prior service credits included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of $25, $39,
and $59
(89)
(143)
(117)
Prior service (credit)/cost arising during the period, net of tax of $0, ($94), and ($14)
(1)
341
28
Total defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits, net of tax
(1,022)
1,490
(53)
Other comprehensive (loss)/income, net of tax
(1,070)
1,290
247
Comprehensive loss related to noncontrolling interests
(41)
(21)
(2)
Comprehensive (loss)/income, net of tax
($1,747)
$11,729
$8,703
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 56 – 117.
52

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position 
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
December 31,
2019
2018
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$9,485
$7,637
Short-term and other investments
545
927
Accounts receivable, net
3,266
3,879
Unbilled receivables, net
9,043
10,025
Current portion of customer financing, net
162
460
Inventories
76,622
62,567
Other current assets
3,106
2,335
Total current assets
102,229
87,830
Customer financing, net
2,136
2,418
Property, plant and equipment, net
12,502
12,645
Goodwill
8,060
7,840
Acquired intangible assets, net
3,338
3,429
Deferred income taxes
683
284
Investments
1,092
1,087
Other assets, net of accumulated amortization of $580 and $503
3,585
1,826
Total assets
$133,625
$117,359
Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
$15,553
$12,916
Accrued liabilities
22,868
14,808
Advances and progress billings
51,551
50,676
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
7,340
3,190
Total current liabilities
97,312
81,590
Deferred income taxes
413
1,736
Accrued retiree health care
4,540
4,584
Accrued pension plan liability, net
16,276
15,323
Other long-term liabilities
3,422
3,059
Long-term debt
19,962
10,657
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock, par value $5.00 – 1,200,000,000 shares authorized; 1,012,261,159 shares issued
5,061
5,061
Additional paid-in capital
6,745
6,768
Treasury stock, at cost
(54,914)
(52,348)
Retained earnings
50,644
55,941
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(16,153)
(15,083)
Total shareholders’ equity
(8,617)
339
Noncontrolling interests
317
71
Total equity
(8,300)
410
Total liabilities and equity
$133,625
$117,359
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 56 – 117.
53

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Cash flows – operating activities:
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
Non-cash items –
Share-based plans expense
212
202
202
Depreciation and amortization
2,271
2,114
2,047
Investment/asset impairment charges, net
443
93
113
Customer financing valuation adjustments
250
(3)
2
Gain on dispositions, net
(691)
(75)
(21)
Other charges and credits, net
334
247
293
Changes in assets and liabilities –
Accounts receivable
603
(795)
(840)
Unbilled receivables
982
(1,826)
(1,600)
Advances and progress billings
737
2,636
4,700
Inventories
(12,391)
568
(1,403)
Other current assets
(682)
98
(19)
Accounts payable
1,600
2
130
Accrued liabilities
7,781
1,117
335
Income taxes receivable, payable and deferred
(2,476)
(180)
656
Other long-term liabilities
(621)
87
94
Pension and other postretirement plans
(777)
(153)
(582)
Customer financing, net
419
120
1,041
Other
196
610
(260)
Net cash (used)/provided by operating activities
(2,446)
15,322
13,346
Cash flows – investing activities:
Property, plant and equipment additions
(1,834)
(1,722)
(1,739)
Property, plant and equipment reductions
334
120
92
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(455)
(3,230)
(324)
Proceeds from dispositions
464
Contributions to investments
(1,658)
(2,607)
(3,569)
Proceeds from investments
1,759
2,898
3,607
Purchase of distribution rights
(127)
(69)
(131)
Other
(13)
(11)
6
Net cash used by investing activities
(1,530)
(4,621)
(2,058)
Cash flows – financing activities:
New borrowings
25,389
8,548
2,077
Debt repayments
(12,171)
(7,183)
(953)
Contributions from noncontrolling interests
7
35
Stock options exercised
58
81
311
Employee taxes on certain share-based payment arrangements
(248)
(257)
(132)
Common shares repurchased
(2,651)
(9,000)
(9,236)
Dividends paid
(4,630)
(3,946)
(3,417)
Other
(15)
Net cash provided/(used) by financing activities
5,739
(11,722)
(11,350)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(5)
(53)
80
Net increase/(decrease) in cash & cash equivalents, including restricted
1,758
(1,074)
18
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at beginning of year
7,813
8,887
8,869
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at end of year
9,571
7,813
8,887
Less restricted cash & cash equivalents, included in Investments
86
176
74

Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$9,485
$7,637
$8,813
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 56 – 117.
54

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Equity
 
Boeing shareholders
 
 
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Treasury 
Stock
Retained 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Loss
Non- 
controlling 
Interest
Total
Balance at January 1, 2017
$5,061
$4,762
($36,097)
$41,754
($13,623)
$60
$1,917
Net earnings/(loss)
8,458
(2)
8,456
Impact of ASU 2018-02
2,997
(2,997)
—
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($69)
247
247
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
238
(35)
203
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(88)
399
311
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(190)
62
(128)
Treasury shares contributed to pension plans
2,082
1,418
3,500
Common shares repurchased
(9,236)
(9,236)
Cash dividends declared ($5.97 per share)
(3,556)
(3,556)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(1)
(1)
Balance at December 31, 2017
$5,061
$6,804
($43,454)
$49,618
($16,373)
$57
$1,713
Net earnings/(loss)
10,460
(21)
10,439
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($379)
1,290
1,290
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
238
(36)
202
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(45)
126
81
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(229)
(20)
(249)
Common shares repurchased
(9,000)
(9,000)
Cash dividends declared ($7.19 per share)
(4,101)
(4,101)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
35
35
Balance at December 31, 2018
$5,061
$6,768
($52,348)
$55,941
($15,083)
$71
$410
Net earnings/(loss)
(636)
(41)
(677)
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of $298
(1,070)
(1,070)
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
245
(33)
212
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(47)
104
57
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(221)
(19)
(240)
Common shares repurchased
(2,651)
(2,651)
Cash dividends declared ($8.22 per share)
(4,628)
(4,628)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
287
287
Balance at December 31, 2019
$5,061
$6,745
($54,914)
$50,644
($16,153)
$317
($8,300)
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 56 – 117.
55

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Summary of Business Segment Data
(Dollars in millions)
 
Years ended December 31, 
2019
2018
2017
Revenues:
Commercial Airplanes
$32,255
$57,499
$54,612
Defense, Space & Security
26,227
26,392
23,938
Global Services
18,468
17,056
14,611
Boeing Capital
244
274
307
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(635)
(94)
537
Total revenues
$76,559
$101,127
$94,005
(Loss)/earnings from operations:
Commercial Airplanes
($6,657)
$7,830
$5,285
Defense, Space & Security
2,608
1,657
2,383
Global Services
2,697
2,536
2,251
Boeing Capital
28
79
114
Segment operating (loss)/profit
(1,324)
12,102
10,033
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(2,066)
(1,442)
(1,127)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
1,415
1,327
1,438
(Loss)/earnings from operations
(1,975)
11,987
10,344
Other income, net
438
92
123
Interest and debt expense
(722)
(475)
(360)
(Loss)/earnings before income taxes
(2,259)
11,604
10,107
Income tax benefit/(expense)
1,623
(1,144)
(1,649)
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
This information is an integral part of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 23 for further segment results.
56

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The Boeing Company (herein referred to as
“Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”). These statements include the accounts of all majority-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities
that are required to be consolidated. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. As described in Note 23, we
operate in four reportable segments: Commercial Airplanes (BCA); Defense, Space & Security (BDS), Global Services (BGS), and Boeing Capital
(BCC). Effective at the beginning of 2019, all revenues and costs associated with military derivative aircraft production are reported in the BDS
segment. Amounts in prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those
estimates.
Operating Cycle
For classification of certain current assets and liabilities, we use the duration of the related contract or program as our operating cycle, which is
generally longer than one year.
Standards Issued and Implemented
In the first quarter of 2019, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) and recognized on our Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position $1,064 of lease liabilities with corresponding right-of-use assets for operating leases. Our accounting for finance
leases and lessor contracts remains substantially unchanged. The standard has no impact to cash provided or used by operating, investing, or
financing activities on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As permitted under the standard, we elected prospective application of the new
guidance and prior periods continue to be presented in accordance with Topic 840. We also elected the package of practical expedients, which
among other things, does not require reassessment of lease classification. See Note 9 and 13 for additional disclosures.
In the first quarter of 2019, we adopted ASU 2017-12, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), using the modified retrospective method. The standard
refines and simplifies hedge accounting requirements for both financial and commodity risks. The impact of the adoption was not material. See Note
20 for additional disclosures.
57

Table of Contents
Revenue and Related Cost Recognition
Commercial aircraft contracts The majority of our BCA segment revenue is derived from commercial aircraft contracts. For each contract, we
determine the transaction price based on the consideration expected to be received. We allocate the transaction price to each commercial aircraft
performance  obligation  based  on  relative  standalone  selling  prices  adjusted  by  an  escalation  formula  as  specified  in  the  customer  agreement.
Revenue is recognized for each commercial aircraft performance obligation at the point in time when the aircraft is completed and accepted by the
customer. We use program accounting to determine the amount reported as cost of sales.
In certain situations, where an aircraft is still in our possession, and title and risk of loss has passed to the customer (known as a bill-and-hold
arrangement), revenue will be recognized when all specific requirements for transfer of control under a bill-and-hold arrangement have been met.
Payments for commercial aircraft sales are received in accordance with the customer agreement, which generally includes a deposit upon order and
additional payments in accordance with a payment schedule, with the balance being due immediately prior to or at aircraft delivery. Advances and
progress  billings  (contract  liabilities)  are  normal  and  customary  for  commercial  aircraft  contracts  and  not  considered  a  significant  financing
component as they are intended to protect us from the other party failing to adequately complete some or all of its obligations under the contract.
Long-term contracts Substantially all contracts at BDS and certain contracts at BGS are long-term contracts with the U.S. government and other
customers that generally extend over several years. Products sales under long-term contracts primarily include fighter jets, rotorcraft, cybersecurity
products,  surveillance  suites,  advanced  weapons,  missile  defense,  military  derivative  aircraft,  satellite  systems,  and  modification  of  commercial
passenger aircraft to cargo freighters. Services sales under long-term contracts primarily include support and maintenance agreements associated
with our commercial and defense products and space travel on Commercial Crew.
For each long-term contract, we determine the transaction price based on the consideration expected to be received. We allocate the transaction
price to each distinct performance obligation to deliver a good or service, or a collection of goods and/or services, based on the relative standalone
selling prices. A long-term contract will typically represent a single distinct performance obligation due to the highly interdependent and interrelated
nature of the underlying goods and/or services and the significant service of integration that we provide. While the scope and price on certain long-
term contracts may be modified over their life, the transaction price is based on current rights and obligations under the contract and does not
include potential modifications until they are agreed upon with the customer. When applicable, a cumulative adjustment or separate recognition for
the additional scope and price may result. Long-term contracts can be negotiated with a fixed price or a price in which we are reimbursed for costs
incurred  plus  an  agreed  upon  profit.  The  Federal  Acquisition  Regulations  provide  guidance  on  the  types  of  cost  that  will  be  reimbursed  in
establishing the price for contracts with the U.S. government. Certain long-term contracts include in the transaction price variable consideration,
such as incentive and award fees, if specified targets are achieved. The amount included in the transaction price represents the expected value,
based on a weighted probability, or the most likely amount.
Long-term contract revenue is recognized over the contract term (over time) as the work progresses, either as products are produced or as services
are rendered. We generally recognize revenue over time as we perform on long-term contracts because of continuous transfer of control to the
customer. For U.S. government contracts, this continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by clauses in the contract that allow the
customer to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay us for costs incurred plus a reasonable profit and take control of any work in
process.  Similarly,  for  non-U.S.  government  contracts,  the  customer  typically  controls  the  work  in  process  as  evidenced  either  by  contractual
termination
58

Table of Contents
clauses or by our rights to payment of the transaction price associated with work performed to date on products or services that do not have an
alternative use to the Company.
The accounting for long-term contracts involves a judgmental process of estimating total sales, costs and profit for each performance obligation.
Cost of sales is recognized as incurred. The amount reported as revenues is determined by adding a proportionate amount of the estimated profit to
the  amount  reported  as  cost  of  sales. Recognizing  revenue  as  costs  are  incurred  provides  an  objective  measure  of  progress  on  the  long-term
contract and thereby best depicts the extent of transfer of control to the customer.
Changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effect on operating income are recognized using a cumulative catch-up adjustment
which recognizes in the current period the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods based on a long-term contract’s percentage-
of-completion. When the current estimates of total sales and costs for a long-term contract indicate a loss, a provision for the entire reach-forward
loss on the long-term contract is recognized.
Net cumulative catch-up adjustments to prior years' revenue and earnings, including certain reach-forward losses, across all long-term contracts
were as follows:
2019
2018
2017
Increase to Revenue
$54
$137
$559
(Decrease)/increase to (Loss)/earnings from Operations
($111)
($190)
$250
(Decrease)/increase to Diluted EPS
($0.06)
($0.29)
$0.34
Significant adjustments during the three years ended December 31, 2019 included reach-forward losses of $148, $736 and $445 on KC-46A Tanker
recorded during 2019, 2018, and 2017, as well as reach-forward losses on Commercial Crew of $489 during 2019.
Due  to  the  significance  of  judgment  in  the  estimation  process,  changes  in  underlying  assumptions/estimates,  supplier  performance,  or
circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods.
Payments under long-term  contracts  may be received before or after revenue is recognized. The U.S. government  customer typically withholds
payment of a small portion of the contract price until contract completion. Therefore, long-term contracts typically generate Unbilled receivables
(contract assets) but may generate Advances and progress billings (contract liabilities). Long-term contract Unbilled receivables and Advances and
progress billings are not considered a significant financing component because they are intended to protect either the customer or the Company in
the event that some or all of the obligations under the contract are not completed.
Commercial  spare  parts  contracts Certain  contracts  at  our  BGS  segment  include  sales  of  commercial  spare  parts.  For  each  contract,  we
determine the transaction price based on the consideration expected to be received. The spare parts have discrete unit prices that represent fair
value. We generally consider each spare part to be a separate performance obligation. Revenue is recognized for each commercial spare part
performance obligation at the point in time of delivery to the customer. We may provide our customers with a right to return a commercial spare part
where a customer may receive a full or partial refund, a credit applied to amounts owed, a different product in exchange, or any combination of
these items. We consider the potential for customer returns in the estimated transaction price. The amount reported as cost of sales is recorded at
average cost. Payments for commercial spare parts sales are typically received shortly after delivery.
Other service revenue contracts Certain contracts at our BGS segment are for sales of services to commercial customers including maintenance,
training, data analytics and information-based services. We recognize revenue for these service performance obligations over time as the services
are rendered.
59

Table of Contents
The  method  of  measuring  progress  (such  as  straight-line  or  billable  amount)  varies  depending  upon  which  method  best  depicts  the  transfer  of
control to the customer based on the type of service performed. Cost of sales is recorded as incurred.
Concession  Sharing  Arrangements We  account  for  sales  concessions  to  our  customers  in  consideration  of  their  purchase  of  products  and
services as a reduction of the transaction price and the revenue that is recognized for the related performance obligations. The sales concessions
incurred may be partially reimbursed by certain suppliers in accordance with concession sharing arrangements. We record these reimbursements,
which are presumed to represent reductions in the price of the vendor’s products or services, as a reduction in Cost of products.
Unbilled Receivables and Advances and Progress Billings Unbilled receivables (contract assets) arise when the Company recognizes revenue
for amounts which cannot yet be billed under terms of the contract with the customer. Advances and progress billings (contract liabilities) arise when
the Company receives payments from customers in advance of recognizing revenue. The amount of Unbilled receivables or Advances and progress
billings is determined for each contract.
Financial  Services  Revenue We  record  financial  services  revenue  associated  with  sales-type/finance  leases,  operating  leases,  and  notes
receivable.
Lease and financing revenue arrangements are included in Sales of services on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For sales-type/finance
leases, we record financing receivables at lease inception. A financing receivable is recorded at the aggregate of future minimum lease payments,
estimated residual value of the leased equipment, and deferred incremental direct costs less unearned income. Income is recognized over the life of
the lease to approximate a level rate of return on the net investment. Income recognition is generally suspended for financing receivables at the date
full recovery of income and principal becomes not probable. Income is recognized when financing receivables become contractually current and
performance is demonstrated by the customer. Residual values, which are reviewed periodically,  represent  the estimated  amount we expect to
receive at lease termination from the disposition of the leased equipment. Actual residual values realized could differ from these estimates. Declines
in estimated residual value that are deemed other-than-temporary are recognized in the period in which the declines occur.
For operating leases, revenue on leased aircraft and equipment is recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Operating lease
assets, included in Customer financing, are recorded at cost and depreciated over the period that we project we will hold the asset to an estimated
residual  value,  using  the  straight-line  method.  We  periodically  review  our  estimates  of  residual  value  and  recognize  forecasted  changes  by
prospectively adjusting depreciation expense.
For notes receivable, notes are recorded net of any unamortized discounts and deferred incremental direct costs. Interest income and amortization
of any discounts are recorded ratably over the related term of the note.
Reinsurance  Revenue Our  wholly-owned  insurance  subsidiary,  Astro  Ltd.,  participates  in  a  reinsurance  pool  for  workers’  compensation.  The
member agreements and practices of the reinsurance pool minimize any participating members’ individual risk. Reinsurance revenues were $151,
$145 and $141 during 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. Reinsurance costs related to premiums and claims paid to the reinsurance pool were
$150, $136 and $144 during 2019, 2018 and 2017,  respectively.  Revenues  and  costs  are  presented  net  in  Cost  of  sales  in  the  Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
Fleet Support
We  provide  assistance  and  support  to  facilitate  efficient  and  safe  aircraft  operation  to  the  operators  of  all  our  commercial  airplane  models.
Collectively known as fleet support, these activities and support services
60

Table of Contents
include flight and maintenance training, field service support, engineering support, and technical data and documents. Fleet support activity begins
prior to aircraft delivery as the customer receives training, manuals, and technical consulting support. This activity continues throughout the aircraft’s
operational life. Services provided after delivery include field service support, consulting on maintenance, repair, and operational issues brought
forth by the customer or regulators, updating manuals and engineering data, and the issuance of service bulletins that impact the entire model’s
fleet. Field service support involves our personnel located at customer facilities providing and coordinating fleet support activities and requests. The
costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred as Cost of services.
Research and Development
Research  and  development  includes  costs  incurred  for  experimentation,  design,  and  testing,  as  well  as  bid  and  proposal  efforts  related  to
government products and services which are expensed as incurred unless the costs are related to certain contractual arrangements with customers.
Costs that are incurred pursuant to such contractual arrangements are recorded over the period that revenue is recognized, consistent with our
contract  accounting  policy.  We  have  certain  research  and  development  arrangements  that  meet  the  requirement  for  best  efforts  research  and
development accounting. Accordingly, the amounts funded by the customer are recognized as an offset to our research and development expense
rather than as contract revenues. Research and development expense included bid and proposal costs of $214, $234 and $288 in 2019, 2018 and
2017, respectively.
Share-Based Compensation
We provide various forms of share-based compensation to our employees. For awards settled in shares, we measure compensation expense based
on the grant-date fair value net of estimated forfeitures.  For awards settled in cash, or that may be settled in cash, we measure compensation
expense based on the fair value at each reporting date net of estimated forfeitures. The expense is recognized over the requisite service period,
which is generally the vesting period of the award.
Income Taxes
Provisions for U.S. federal, state and local, and non-U.S. income taxes are calculated on reported (Loss)/earnings before income taxes based on
current tax law and also include, in the current period, the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining
deferred tax assets and liabilities. Such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and
expense are recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for income tax purposes. Significant judgment is required in
determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions.
The accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured for
financial statement purposes and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax
positions  changes,  the  change  in estimate  is  recorded  in  the  period  in  which  the  determination  is  made.  Tax-related  interest  and  penalties  are
classified as a component of Income tax benefit/(expense).
Postretirement Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. We also provide
postretirement
61

Table of Contents
benefit plans other than pensions, consisting principally of health care coverage to eligible retirees and qualifying dependents. Benefits under the
pension and other postretirement benefit plans are generally based on age at retirement and years of service and, for some pension plans, benefits
are also based on the employee’s annual earnings. The net periodic cost of our pension and other postretirement plans is determined using the
projected unit credit method and several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, the long-term rate of asset return,
and medical trend (rate  of growth for medical costs).  A portion  of the service  cost  component of net periodic pension and other postretirement
income or expense is not recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to production as product costs, and reflected in
inventory at the end of a reporting period. Actuarial gains and losses, which occur when actual experience differs from actuarial assumptions, are
reflected in Shareholders’ equity (net of taxes). If actuarial gains and losses exceed ten percent of the greater of plan assets or plan liabilities we
amortize them over the average expected future lifetime of participants. The funded status of our pension and postretirement plans is reflected on
the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
Postemployment Plans
We record a liability for postemployment benefits, such as severance or job training, when payment is probable, the amount is reasonably estimable,
and the obligation relates to rights that have vested or accumulated.
Environmental Remediation
We  are  subject  to  federal  and  state  requirements  for  protection  of  the  environment,  including  those  for  discharge  of  hazardous  materials  and
remediation  of  contaminated  sites.  We  routinely  assess,  based  on  in-depth  studies,  expert  analyses  and  legal  reviews,  our  contingencies,
obligations, and commitments for remediation of contaminated sites, including assessments of ranges and probabilities of recoveries from other
responsible parties and/or insurance carriers. Our policy is to accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to environmental
remediation sites when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. The amount of the liability is
based  on  our  best  estimate  or  the  low  end  of  a  range  of  reasonably  possible  exposure  for  investigation,  cleanup,  and  monitoring  costs  to  be
incurred. Estimated remediation costs are not discounted to present value as the timing of payments cannot be reasonably estimated. We may be
able to recover a portion of the remediation costs from insurers or other third parties. Such recoveries are recorded when realization of the claim for
recovery is deemed probable.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid instruments, such as commercial paper, time deposits, and other money market instruments,
which have original maturities of three months or less. We aggregate our cash balances by bank where conditions for right of set-off are met, and
reclassify any negative balances, consisting mainly of uncleared checks, to Accounts payable. Negative balances reclassified to Accounts payable
were $101 and $127 at December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Inventories
Inventoried  costs  on  commercial  aircraft  programs  and  long-term  contracts  include  direct  engineering,  production  and  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring  costs,  and  applicable  overhead,  which  includes  fringe  benefits,  production  related  indirect  and  plant  management  salaries  and  plant
services, not in excess of estimated net realizable value. To the extent a material amount of such costs are related to an abnormal event or are fixed
costs not appropriately attributable to our programs or contracts, they are expensed in the current period rather than inventoried. Inventoried costs
include amounts relating to programs and contracts with long-term production cycles, a portion of which is not expected to be realized within one
62

Table of Contents
year. Included in inventory for federal government contracts is an allocation of allowable costs related to manufacturing process reengineering.
Commercial aircraft programs inventory includes deferred production costs and supplier advances. Deferred production costs represent actual costs
incurred for production of early units that exceed the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity. Higher production costs
are experienced at the beginning of a new or derivative airplane program. Units produced early in a program require substantially more effort (labor
and  other  resources)  than  units  produced  later  in  a  program  because  of  volume  efficiencies  and  the  effects  of  learning.  We  expect  that  these
deferred costs will be fully recovered when all units included in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is
below the estimated average cost of all units in the program. Supplier advances represent payments for parts we have contracted to receive from
suppliers in the future. As parts are received, supplier advances are amortized to work in process.
The determination of net realizable value of long-term contract costs is based upon quarterly reviews that estimate costs to be incurred to complete
all contract requirements. When actual contract costs and the estimate to complete exceed total estimated contract revenues, a loss provision is
recorded. The determination of net realizable value of commercial aircraft program costs is based upon quarterly program reviews that estimate
revenue  and  cost  to  be  incurred  to  complete  the  program  accounting  quantity.  When  estimated  costs  to  complete  exceed  estimated  program
revenues to go, a program loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the accounting quantity.
Used aircraft purchased by the Commercial Airplanes segment and general stock materials are stated at cost not in excess of net realizable value.
See ‘Aircraft Valuation’ within this Note for a discussion of our valuation of used aircraft. Spare parts inventory is stated at lower of average unit cost
or net realizable value. We review our commercial spare parts and general stock materials quarterly to identify impaired inventory, including excess
or obsolete inventory, based on historical sales trends, expected production usage, and the size and age of the aircraft fleet using the part. Impaired
inventories are charged to Cost of products in the period the impairment occurs.
Included in inventory for commercial aircraft programs are amounts paid or credited in cash, or other consideration to certain airline customers, that
are referred to as early issue sales consideration. Early issue sales consideration is recognized as a reduction to revenue when the delivery of the
aircraft under contract occurs. If an airline customer does not perform and take delivery of the contracted aircraft, we believe that we would have the
ability to recover amounts paid. However, to the extent early issue sales consideration exceeds advances and is not considered to be otherwise
recoverable, it would be written off in the current period.
Precontract Costs
We may, from time to time, incur costs in excess of the amounts required for existing contracts. If we determine the costs are probable of recovery
from  future  orders,  then  we  capitalize  the  precontract  costs  we  incur,  excluding  start-up  costs  which  are  expensed  as  incurred.  Capitalized
precontract  costs  are  included  in  Inventories  in  the  accompanying  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position.  Should  future  orders  not
materialize or we determine the costs are no longer probable of recovery, the capitalized costs would be written off.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property,  plant  and  equipment  are  recorded  at  cost,  including  applicable  construction-period  interest,  less  accumulated  depreciation  and  are
depreciated principally over the following estimated useful lives: new buildings and land improvements, from 10 to 40 years; and new machinery and
equipment, from 4 to 20 years. The principal methods of depreciation are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 150%
63

Table of Contents
declining  balance;  and  machinery  and  equipment,  sum-of-the-years’  digits.  Capitalized  internal  use  software  is  included  in  Other  assets  and
amortized using the straight line method over 5 years. Capitalized software as a service is included in Other assets and amortized using the straight
line method over the term of the hosting arrangement which is typically no greater than 10 years. We periodically evaluate the appropriateness of
remaining depreciable lives assigned to long-lived assets, including assets that may be subject to a management plan for disposition.
Long-lived  assets  held  for  sale  are  stated  at  the  lower  of  cost  or  fair  value  less  cost  to  sell.  Long-lived  assets  held  for  use  are  subject  to  an
impairment assessment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying
value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between
the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
Leases We determine if an arrangement is, or contains, a lease at the inception date. Operating leases are included in Other assets, with the
related  liabilities  included  in  Accrued  liabilities  and  Other  long-term  liabilities.  Assets  under  finance  leases,  which  primarily  represent  computer
equipment, are included in Property, plant and equipment, net, with the related liabilities included in Short-term debt and current portion of long-term
debt and Long-term debt on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease
payments arising from the lease. Operating lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the estimated
present value of lease payments over the lease term. We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease
payments. Variable components of the lease payments such as fair market value adjustments, utilities, and maintenance costs are expensed as
incurred and not included in determining the present value. Our lease terms include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably
certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components which are accounted for as a single lease component.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We record all known asset retirement obligations for which the liability’s fair value can be reasonably estimated, including certain asbestos removal,
asset decommissioning and contractual lease restoration obligations. Recorded amounts are not material.
We also have known conditional asset retirement  obligations, such as certain asbestos remediation and asset decommissioning activities to be
performed in the future, that are not reasonably estimable due to insufficient information about the timing and method of settlement of the obligation.
Accordingly, these obligations have not been recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. A liability for these obligations will be recorded in
the period when sufficient information regarding timing and method of settlement becomes available to make a reasonable estimate of the liability’s
fair value. In addition, there may be conditional asset retirement obligations that we have not yet discovered (e.g. asbestos may exist in certain
buildings but we have not become aware of it through the normal course of business), and therefore, these obligations also have not been included
in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangibles
Goodwill and other acquired intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually and when an event
occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. Our annual testing date is April 1.
64

Table of Contents
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  two-step  impairment  process.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a
qualitative assessment and determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related
operations,  the  two-step  impairment  process  is  then  performed;  otherwise,  no  further  testing  is  required.  For  operations  where  the  two-step
impairment  process  is  used,  we  first  compare  the  carrying  value  of  net  assets  to  the  fair  value  of  the  related  operations.  If  the  fair  value  is
determined to be less than carrying value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. In this process, a fair value for
goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. The shortfall of the fair value below
carrying value represents the amount of goodwill impairment.
Indefinite-lived  intangibles  consist  of  brand  and  trade  names  acquired  in  business  combinations.  We  test  these  intangibles  for  impairment  by
comparing their carrying value to current projections of discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. Any excess carrying value
over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment.
Our finite-lived acquired intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: developed technology,
from 2 to 14 years; product know-how, from 6 to 30 years; customer base, from 3 to 17 years; distribution rights, from 3 to 27 years; and other, from
1 to 32 years. We evaluate the potential impairment of finite-lived acquired intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of
the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
Investments
Time deposits are held-to-maturity investments that are carried at cost.
Available-for-sale debt securities include commercial paper, U.S. government agency securities, and corporate debt securities. Available-for-sale
debt  securities  are  recorded  at  fair  value,  and  unrealized  gains  and  losses  are  recorded,  net  of  tax,  as  a  component  of  accumulated  other
comprehensive income. Realized gains and losses on available-for-sale debt securities are recognized based on the specific identification method.
Available-for-sale debt securities are assessed for impairment quarterly.
The equity method of accounting is used to account for investments for which we have the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control,
over an investee. Significant influence is generally deemed to exist if we have an ownership interest in the voting stock of an investee of between
20% and 50%. The cumulative earnings approach is used for cash flow classification of distributions received from equity method investments.
Other  Equity  investments  are  recorded  at  fair  value,  with  gains  and  losses  recorded  through  net  earnings.  Equity  investments  without  readily
determinable  fair  value  are  measured  at  cost,  less  impairments,  plus  or  minus  observable  price  changes.  Equity  investments  without  readily
determinable fair value are assessed for impairment quarterly.
We  classify  investment  income  and  loss  on  our  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  based  on  whether  the  investment  is  operating  or  non-
operating in nature. Operating investments align strategically and are integrated with our operations. Earnings from operating investments, including
our share of income or loss from equity method investments, dividend income from other equity investments, and any impairments or gain/loss on
the disposition of these investments, are recorded in Income from operating investments, net. Non-operating investments are those we hold for non-
strategic purposes. Earnings from non-operating investments, including interest and dividends on marketable securities, and any impairments or
gain/loss on the disposition of these investments are recorded in Other income/(loss), net.
65

Table of Contents
Derivatives
All derivative instruments are recognized in the financial statements and measured at fair value regardless of the purpose or intent of holding them.
We use derivative instruments to principally manage a variety of market risks. For derivatives designated as hedges of the exposure to changes in
fair value of the recognized asset or liability or a firm commitment (referred to as fair value hedges), the gain or loss is recognized in earnings in the
period of change together with the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged. The effect of that accounting is to
include  in  earnings  the  extent  to  which  the  hedge  is  not  effective  in  achieving  offsetting  changes  in  fair  value.  For  our  cash  flow  hedges,  the
derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported in comprehensive income and is subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods
during  which  the  hedged  forecasted  transaction  affects  earnings.  We  have  agreements  to  purchase  and  sell  aluminum  to  address  long-term
strategic  sourcing  objectives  and  international  business  requirements.  These  agreements  are  derivatives  for  accounting  purposes  but  are  not
designated for hedge accounting treatment. We also hold certain derivative instruments for economic purposes that are not designated for hedge
accounting treatment.  For  these aluminum  agreements  and for  other  derivative  instruments  not designated for hedge accounting  treatment,  the
changes in their fair value are recorded in earnings immediately.
Aircraft Valuation
Used aircraft under trade-in commitments and aircraft under repurchase commitments In conjunction with signing a definitive agreement for
the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain customers that give them the right to trade in used
aircraft at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. Additionally, we have entered into contingent repurchase commitments with certain
customers wherein we agree to repurchase the Sale Aircraft at a specified price, generally 10 to 15 years after delivery of the Sale Aircraft. Our
repurchase of the Sale Aircraft is contingent upon a future, mutually acceptable agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft. If we execute an
agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft,  and if the customer  exercises its right to sell the Sale Aircraft  to us, a contingent repurchase
commitment would become a trade-in commitment. Our historical experience is that contingent repurchase commitments infrequently become trade-
in commitments.
Exposure related to trade-in commitments may take the form of:
(1) adjustments to revenue for the difference between the contractual trade-in price in the definitive agreement and our best estimate of the
fair value of the trade-in aircraft as of the date of such agreement, which would be recognized upon delivery of the Sale Aircraft, and/or
(2) charges  to  cost  of  products  for  adverse  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  trade-in  aircraft  that  occur  subsequent  to  signing  of  a  definitive
agreement for Sale Aircraft but prior to the purchase of the used trade-in aircraft. Estimates based on current aircraft values would be
included in Accrued liabilities.
The fair value of trade-in aircraft is determined using aircraft-specific data such as model, age and condition, market conditions for specific aircraft
and  similar  models,  and  multiple  valuation  sources.  This  process  uses  our  assessment  of  the  market  for  each  trade-in  aircraft,  which  in  most
instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. There are several possible markets in which we continually pursue opportunities to place
used aircraft. These markets include, but are not limited to, the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term storage; the
leasing  market,  with  the  potential  for  refurbishment  costs  to  meet  the  leasing  customer’s  requirements;  or  the  scrap  market.  Trade-in  aircraft
valuation varies significantly depending on which market we determine is most likely for each aircraft. On a quarterly basis, we update our valuation
analysis based on the actual activities associated with placing each aircraft into a market or using current published third-party aircraft valuations
based on the type and age of the aircraft, adjusted for individual attributes and known conditions.
66

Table of Contents
Used aircraft acquired by the Commercial Airplanes segment are included in Inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value as it is our intent
to sell these assets. To mitigate costs and enhance marketability, aircraft may be placed on operating lease. While on operating lease, the assets
are included in Customer financing.
Customer financing Customer financing includes operating lease equipment, notes receivable, and sales-type/finance leases. Sales-type/finance
leases are treated as receivables, and allowances for losses are established as necessary.
We  assess  the  fair  value  of  the  assets  we  own,  including  equipment  under  operating  leases,  assets  held  for  sale  or  re-lease,  and  collateral
underlying receivables, to determine if their fair values are less than the related assets’ carrying values. Differences between carrying values and fair
values of sales-type/finance leases and notes and other receivables, as determined by collateral value, are considered in determining the allowance
for losses on receivables.
We use a median calculated from published collateral values from multiple third-party aircraft value publications based on the type and age of the
aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. Under certain circumstances, we apply judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft or
equipment,  usually  when  the  features  or  use  of  the  aircraft  vary  significantly  from  the  more  generic  aircraft  attributes  covered  by  outside
publications.
Impairment review for assets under operating leases and held for sale or re-lease We evaluate for impairment assets under operating lease or
assets held for sale or re-lease when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the expected undiscounted cash flow from the asset may be
less than the carrying value. We use various assumptions when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow, including our intentions for how
long we will hold an asset subject to operating lease before it is sold, the expected future lease rates, lease terms, residual value of the asset,
periods in which the asset may be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing costs and the remaining economic life
of the asset. We record assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value less costs to sell.
When we determine that impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment expense recorded is the excess of the carrying value over
the fair value of the asset.
Allowance for losses on customer financing receivables We record the potential impairment of customer financing receivables in a valuation
account, the balance of which is an accounting estimate of probable but unconfirmed losses. The allowance for losses on receivables relates to two
components of receivables: (a) receivables that are evaluated individually for impairment and (b) all other receivables.
We determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due
according to the original contractual terms of the receivable agreement, without regard to any subsequent restructurings. Factors considered in
assessing collectability include, but are not limited to, a customer’s extended delinquency, requests for restructuring and filings for bankruptcy. We
determine a specific impairment allowance based on the difference between the carrying value of the receivable and the estimated fair value of the
related collateral we would expect to realize.
We review the adequacy of the allowance attributable to the remaining receivables (after excluding receivables subject to a specific impairment
allowance) by assessing both the collateral exposure and the applicable cumulative default rate. Collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the
excess of the carrying value of the receivable over the fair value of the related collateral. A receivable with an estimated fair value in excess of the
carrying value is considered to have no collateral exposure. The applicable cumulative default rate is determined using two components: customer
credit ratings and weighted average remaining contract term. Internally assigned credit ratings, our credit quality indicator, are determined for
67

Table of Contents
each customer in the portfolio. Those ratings are updated based upon public information and information obtained directly from our customers.
We have entered into agreements with certain customers that would entitle us to look beyond the specific collateral underlying the receivable for
purposes of determining the collateral exposure as described above. Should the proceeds from the sale of the underlying collateral asset resulting
from a default condition be insufficient to cover the carrying value of our receivable (creating a shortfall condition), these agreements would, for
example, permit us to take the actions necessary to sell or retain certain other assets in which the customer has an equity interest and use the
proceeds to cover the shortfall.
Each quarter we review customer credit ratings, published historical credit default rates for different rating categories, and multiple third-party aircraft
value publications as a basis to validate the reasonableness of the allowance for losses on receivables. There can be no assurance that actual
results will not differ from estimates or that the consideration of these factors in the future will not result in an increase or decrease to the allowance
for losses on receivables.
Warranties
In conjunction with certain product sales, we provide warranties that cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and defects in material
and design. The majority of our warranties are issued by our Commercial Airplanes segment. Generally, aircraft sales are accompanied by a 3 to 4-
year standard warranty for systems, accessories, equipment, parts, and software manufactured by us or manufactured to certain standards under
our authorization. These warranties are included in the programs’ estimate at completion. On occasion we have made commitments beyond the
standard warranty obligation to correct fleet-wide major issues of a particular model, resulting in additional accrued warranty expense. Warranties
issued by our BDS segment principally relate to sales of military aircraft and weapons systems. These sales are generally accompanied by a six
month  to two-year  warranty  period  and  cover  systems,  accessories,  equipment,  parts,  and  software  manufactured  by  us  to  certain  contractual
specifications. Estimated costs related to standard warranties are recorded in the period in which the related product delivery occurs. The warranty
liability recorded at each balance sheet date reflects the estimated number of months of warranty coverage outstanding for products delivered times
the average of historical monthly warranty payments, as well as additional amounts for certain major warranty issues that exceed a normal claims
level. Estimated costs of these additional warranty issues are considered changes to the initial liability estimate.
We  provide  guarantees  to  certain  commercial  airplane  customers  which  include  compensation  provisions  for  failure  to  meet  specified  aircraft
performance targets. We account for these performance guarantees as warranties. The estimated liability for these warranties is based on known
and anticipated operational characteristics and forecasted customer operation of the aircraft relative to contractually specified performance targets,
and anticipated settlements when contractual remedies are not specified. Estimated payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue at delivery of
the related  aircraft.  We have agreements  that  require  certain  suppliers  to compensate  us for  amounts  paid to  customers  for  failure  of  supplied
equipment to meet specified performance targets. Claims against suppliers under these agreements are included in Inventories and recorded as a
reduction  in  Cost  of  products  at  delivery  of  the  related  aircraft.  These  performance  warranties  and  claims  against  suppliers  are  included  in  the
programs’ estimate at completion.
Supplier Penalties
We record an accrual for supplier penalties when an event occurs that makes it probable that a supplier penalty will be incurred and the amount is
reasonably estimable. Until an event occurs, we fully anticipate accepting all products procured under production-related contracts.
68

Table of Contents
Guarantees
We record a liability in Accrued liabilities for the fair value of guarantees that are issued or modified after December 31, 2002. For credit guarantees,
the liability  is equal to  the present  value  of  the  expected  loss.  We  determine  the  expected  loss  by multiplying  the  creditor’s  default  rate  by the
guarantee amount reduced by the expected recovery, if applicable, for each future period the credit guarantee will be outstanding. If at inception of a
guarantee, we determine there is a probable related contingent loss, we will recognize a liability for the greater of (a) the fair value of the guarantee
as described above or (b) the probable contingent loss amount.
Standards Issued and Not Yet Implemented
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). The new standard
is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. The standard replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology under current
GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires the use of a forward-looking expected credit loss model for accounts
receivables, loans, and other financial instruments. The standard requires a modified retrospective approach through a cumulative-effect adjustment
to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the guidance is effective. We plan to adopt the new credit loss standard
effective January 1, 2020. We do not expect the new credit loss standard to have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
Note 2 – Acquisitions and Joint Ventures
Strategic Partnership with Embraer
During  the  first  quarter  of  2019,  we  entered  into  definitive  transaction  documents  with  respect  to  a  strategic  partnership  with  Embraer  S.A.
(Embraer). The partnership contemplates that the parties enter into a joint venture comprising the commercial aircraft and services operations of
Embraer, in which Boeing will acquire an 80 percent ownership stake for $4,200, as well as a joint venture to promote and develop new markets for
the multi-mission, medium airlift C-390 Millennium, in which Boeing will hold a 49 percent ownership stake.
Embraer shareholders approved the transaction, which remains subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions. We are
actively engaged with the European Commission and have obtained unconditional clearance to close in all other required jurisdictions, including the
United States, China, and Japan. In Brazil, the Administrative Council for Economic Defense (CADE)’s General-Superintendence (SG) has provided
unconditional approval; the decision will become final in mid-February unless a review is requested by CADE Commissioners. We continue to be
engaged with the European Commission as it progresses its Phase II investigation of the transaction. Pending timely resolution of the remaining
regulatory approvals, the transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2020. If the transaction is not completed due to failure to obtain antitrust
approvals, we would be required to pay a termination fee of $100.
69

Table of Contents
KLX Inc.
On  October  9,  2018,  we  acquired  all  the  outstanding  shares  of  KLX  Inc.  (KLX).  KLX  is  a  global  provider  of  aviation  parts  and  services  in  the
aerospace  industry.  Its  capabilities  include  distribution  and  supply  chain  services.  The  KLX  acquisition  is  intended  to  accelerate  growth  in  our
services business by allowing Boeing to offer commercial, defense, business and general aviation customers a broader range of offerings. The
results  of  KLX’s  operations  have  been  included  in  our  Global  Services  segment  from  the  acquisition  date.  KLX’s  revenues  and  earnings  from
operations from October 9, 2018 through December 31, 2018 were $356 and $50.
The final allocation of the purchase price was as follows:
Cash and cash equivalents
$225
Accounts receivable
260
Inventories
1,298
Other current assets
43
Property, plant & equipment
36
Goodwill
2,056
Intangible assets
963
Other assets
78
Current liabilities
(350)
Other long-term liabilities
(113)
Long-term debt
(1,210)
Total net assets acquired
$3,286
The goodwill has been allocated to the Global Services and Commercial Airplanes segments based on revenue synergies expected to be realized
from the integration of KLX’s products and services and expected cost synergies primarily resulting from the consolidation of procurement spending
and functional support. Approximately $533 of the acquired goodwill and intangible assets is deductible for tax purposes. The acquired intangible
assets primarily relate to customer and supplier relationships and have a weighted-average useful life of 17.5 years.
70

Table of Contents
Note 3 – Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
Changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
Commercial
Airplanes
Defense, Space
& Security
Global Services
Other
Total
Balance at January 1, 2018
$992
$3,074
$1,493
$5,559
KLX acquisition
249
1,861
2,110
Other acquisitions
180
3
183
Goodwill adjustments
(12)
(12)
Balance at December 31, 2018
$1,241
$3,254
$3,345
$7,840
KLX acquisition adjustments
(51)
(51)
Acquisitions
72
188
$62
322
Dispositions
(49)
(49)
Goodwill adjustments
(10)
8
(2)
Balance at December 31, 2019
$1,313
$3,244
$3,441
$62
$8,060
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had indefinite-lived intangible assets with carrying amounts of $197 and $490 relating to trade names.
During 2019, we recorded an impairment of $293 within Cost of Sales, as a result of our decision to retire the Aviall brand and trade name. As of
December 31, 2019, we had indefinite-lived intangible assets with a carrying amount of $202 related to in process research and development.
The gross carrying amounts and accumulated amortization of our acquired finite-lived intangible assets were as follows at December 31:
2019
2018
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Distribution rights
$2,989
$1,262
$2,879
$1,101
Product know-how
553
354
536
324
Customer base
1,364
599
1,284
523
Developed technology
653
485
595
439
Other
280
200
218
186
Total
$5,839
$2,900
$5,512
$2,573
Amortization expense for acquired finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $331 and $272. Estimated
amortization expense for the five succeeding years is as follows:
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Estimated amortization expense
$320
$298
$287
$259
$248
During 2019 and 2018,  we  acquired $563 and $1,133 of  finite-lived  intangible  assets,  of  which $30 and $0 related  to  non-cash  investing  and
financing transactions.
71

Table of Contents
Note 4 – Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share are computed using the two-class method, which is an earnings allocation method that determines earnings
per  share  for  common  shares  and  participating  securities.  The  undistributed  earnings  are  allocated  between  common  shares  and  participating
securities as if all earnings had been distributed during the period. Participating securities and common shares have equal rights to undistributed
earnings.
Basic  earnings  per  share  is  calculated  by  taking  net  earnings,  less  earnings  available  to  participating  securities,  divided  by  the  basic  weighted
average common shares outstanding.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated by taking net earnings, less earnings available to participating securities, divided by the diluted weighted
average common shares outstanding.
The elements used in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows:
(In millions - except per share amounts) 
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Net (loss)/earnings
($636)
$10,460
$8,458
Less: earnings available to participating securities
7
6
Net (loss)/earnings available to common shareholders
($636)
$10,453
$8,452
Basic
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
566.0
579.9
603.2
Less: participating securities
0.6
0.7
0.7
Basic weighted average common shares outstanding
565.4
579.2
602.5
Diluted
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
566.0
579.9
603.2
Dilutive potential common shares(1)
6.3
7.5
Diluted weighted average shares outstanding
566.0
586.2
610.7
Less: participating securities
0.6
0.7
0.7
Diluted weighted average common shares outstanding
565.4
585.5
610.0
Net (loss)/earnings per share:
Basic
($1.12)
$18.05
$14.03
Diluted
(1.12)
17.85
13.85
(1) 
Diluted (loss)/earnings per share includes any dilutive impact of stock options, restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units
and performance awards.
72

Table of Contents
As a result of incurring a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019, potential common shares of 4.1 million were excluded from diluted loss per
share because the effect would have been antidilutive. In addition, the following table includes the number of shares that may be dilutive potential
common shares in the future. These shares were not included in the computation of diluted (loss)/earnings per share because the effect was either
antidilutive or the performance condition was not met.
(Shares in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Performance awards
2.8
2.5
4.1
Performance-based restricted stock units
0.6
0.3
0.5
Note 5 – Income Taxes
The components of earnings before income taxes were:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
U.S.
($2,792)
$11,166
$9,660
Non-U.S.
533
438
447
Total
($2,259)
$11,604
$10,107
Income tax (benefit)/expense consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Current tax (benefit)/expense
U.S. federal
($308)
$1,873
$1,276
Non-U.S.
169
169
149
U.S. state
(161)
97
23
Total current
(300)
2,139
1,448
Deferred tax (benefit)/expense
U.S. federal
(953)
(996)
204
Non-U.S.
(3)
(4)
3
U.S. state
(367)
5
(6)
Total deferred
(1,323)
(995)
201
Total income tax (benefit)/expense
($1,623)
$1,144
$1,649
Net income tax payments were $837, $1,326 and $896 in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
73

Table of Contents
The following is a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory tax to actual income tax expense:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Amount
Rate
Amount
Rate
Amount
Rate
U.S. federal statutory tax
($474)
21.0 %
$2,437
21.0 %
$3,537
35.0 %
Research and development credits
(382)
16.9
(207)
(1.8)
(162)
(1.6)
Audit settlements(1)
(371)
16.4
(412)
(3.6)
Foreign derived intangible income(2)
(229)
10.1
(549)
(4.7)
Excess tax benefits(3)
(180)
8.0
(181)
(1.6)
(207)
(2.1)
Other provision adjustments
66
(3.0)
91
1.0
26
0.3
Tax deductible dividends
(53)
2.4
(48)
(0.4)
(68)
(0.7)
Tax on non-US activities
43
(1.9)
40
0.3
(95)
(0.9)
State income tax provision, net of effects on U.S.
federal tax
(43)
1.9
84
0.7
17
0.2
Impact of Tax Cuts and Jobs Act(4)
(111)
(1.0)
(1,271)
(12.6)
U.S. manufacturing activity tax benefit
(128)
(1.3)
Income tax (benefit)/expense
($1,623)
71.8 %
$1,144
9.9 %
$1,649
16.3 %
(1) 
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded a tax benefit of $371 related to the settlement of state tax audits spanning 15 tax years. In the third
quarter of 2018, we recorded a tax benefit of $412 related to the settlement of the 2013-2014 federal tax audit.
(2) 
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) was enacted. The TCJA revised the U.S. corporate income tax by, among other
things, lowering the rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, implementing a territorial tax system and imposing a one-time tax on
deemed  repatriated  earnings  of  non-U.S.  subsidiaries.  The  TCJA  also  enacted  provisions  which  effectively  apply  a  lower  U.S.  tax  rate  to
intangible  income  derived  from  serving  non-U.S.  markets.  In  2019  and  2018,  we  recorded  tax  benefits  related  to  foreign  derived  intangible
income of $229 and $549.
(3) 
In 2019, 2018 and 2017, we recorded excess tax benefits related to employee share-based payments of $180, $181 and $207, respectively.
(4) 
In accordance with U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (SAB 118), in the fourth quarter of 2017, we
recorded provisional tax benefits of $1,430 related to the remeasurement of our net U.S. deferred tax liabilities to reflect the reduction in the
corporate tax rate and a provisional tax expense of $159 related to tax on non-U.S. activities resulting from the TCJA. During the fourth quarter
of 2018 and in accordance with SAB 118, the Company completed its accounting for the provisional amounts recognized at December 31, 2017
and recorded an incremental benefit related to refinements to these provisional amounts which was not significant.
74

Table of Contents
Significant components of our deferred tax assets/(liabilities) at December 31 were as follows:
2019
2018
Inventory and long-term contract methods of income recognition
($6,048)
($5,422)
Pension benefits
3,495
3,344
737 MAX customer concessions and other considerations
1,626
Fixed assets, intangibles and goodwill (net of valuation allowance of $16 and $16)
(1,560)
(1,616)
Retiree health care benefits
1,120
1,124
Other employee benefits
849
873
Accrued expenses and reserves
627
411
Net operating loss, credit and capital loss carryovers (net of valuation allowance of $102 and $77)(1)
595
258
Customer and commercial financing
(268)
(309)
Other
(166)
(115)
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities)(2)
$270
($1,452)
(1)  Of the deferred tax asset for net operating loss and credit carryovers, $251 expires on or before December 31, 2039 and $344 may be carried
over indefinitely.
(2)  Included in the net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 are deferred tax assets in the amounts of $4,589 and
$4,275 related to Accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) at December 31 were as follows:
2019
2018
Deferred tax assets
$10,722
$8,835
Deferred tax liabilities
(10,334)
(10,194)
Valuation allowance
(118)
(93)
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities)
$270
($1,452)
The deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the
deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The TCJA one-time repatriation tax and Global Intangible Low Tax Income liabilities effectively taxed the undistributed earnings previously deferred
from U.S. income taxes. We have not provided for foreign withholding tax on the undistributed earnings from our non-U.S. subsidiaries because
such  earnings  are  considered  to  be  indefinitely  reinvested.  If  such  earnings  were  to  be  distributed,  any  foreign  withholding  tax  would  not  be
significant.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the amounts accrued for the payment of income tax-related interest and penalties included in the Consolidated
Statements  of  Financial  Position  were  not  significant.  The  amounts  of  interest  included  in  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  were  not
significant for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
75

Table of Contents
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
2019
2018
2017
Unrecognized tax benefits – January 1
$2,412
$1,736
$1,557
Gross increases – tax positions in prior periods
100
87
3
Gross decreases – tax positions in prior periods
(1,418)
(410)
(44)
Gross increases – current-period tax positions
344
1,208
220
Gross decreases - current period tax positions
(1)
Settlements
39
(206)
Statute Lapse
(3)
Unrecognized tax benefits – December 31
$1,476
$2,412
$1,736
As of December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $1,476, $2,412 and $1,736, respectively, of which
$1,287, $1,405 and $1,568 would affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. As of December 31, 2019, these amounts are primarily associated with
the amount of research tax credits claimed, uncertainties in the TCJA, tax basis adjustments and the U.S. manufacturing activity tax benefit.
Federal income tax audits have been settled for all years prior to 2015. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) began the 2015-2017 federal tax audit in
the first quarter of 2019. We are also subject to examination in major state and international jurisdictions for the 2007-2018 tax years. We believe
appropriate provisions for all outstanding tax issues have been made for all jurisdictions and all open years.
Audit outcomes and the timing of audit settlements are subject to significant uncertainty. It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months
unrecognized tax benefits related to federal matters under audit may decrease by up to $710 based on current estimates.
Note 6 – Accounts Receivable, net
Accounts receivable at December 31 consisted of the following:
2019
2018
U.S. government contracts(1)
$1,121
$1,877
Commercial Airplanes
29
51
Global Services(2)
1,967
1,783
Defense, Space, & Security(2)
220
222
Other
2
3
Less valuation allowance
(73)
(57)
Total
$3,266
$3,879
(1) 
Includes foreign military sales through the U.S. government
(2) 
Excludes U.S. government contracts
Accounts receivable expected to be collected after one year are not material.
76

Table of Contents
Note 7 – Inventories
Inventories at December 31 consisted of the following:
2019
2018
Long-term contracts in progress
$1,187
$2,129
Commercial aircraft programs
66,016
52,753
Commercial spare parts, used aircraft, general stock materials and other
9,419
7,685
Total
$76,622
$62,567
Long-Term Contracts in Progress
Long-term  contracts  in  progress  includes  Delta  launch  program  inventory  that  is  being  sold  at  cost  to United  Launch  Alliance (ULA)  under  an
inventory supply agreement that terminates on March 31, 2021. The inventory balance was $176 and $227 at December 31, 2019 and 2018. See
indemnifications to ULA in Note 15.
Included in inventories are capitalized precontract costs of $711 at December 31, 2019, primarily related to the KC-46A Tanker and Commercial
Crew, and $644 at December 31, 2018 primarily related to KC-46A Tanker. See Note 14.
Commercial Aircraft Programs
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 737 program: $1,313 and
$463 of deferred production costs and $521 and $471 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs. At December 31, 2019, $1,829 of 737
deferred  production  costs,  unamortized  tooling  and  other  non-recurring  costs  are  expected  to  be  recovered  from  units  included  in  the  program
accounting quantity that have firm orders and $5 is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent
expected future orders.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 777X program: $5,628 and
$3,067 of work in process and $2,914 and $2,512 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 787 program: $24,772 and
$27,852 of work in process (including deferred production costs of $18,716 and $22,967), $2,202 and $2,453 of supplier advances, and $2,092 and
$2,638 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs. At December 31, 2019, $14,386 of 787 deferred production costs, unamortized tooling
and other non-recurring costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that have firm orders and $6,422
is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.
Commercial  aircraft  programs  inventory  included  amounts  credited  in  cash  or  other  consideration  (early  issue  sales  consideration)  to  airline
customers totaling $2,863 and $2,844 at December 31, 2019 and 2018.
77

Table of Contents
Note 8 – Contracts with Customers
Unbilled receivables decreased from $10,025 at December 31, 2018 to $9,043 at December 31, 2019, primarily driven by timing of billings at BDS
and BGS.
Advances and progress billings increased from $50,676 at December 31, 2018 to $51,551 at December 31, 2019, primarily driven by advances on
orders received in excess of revenue recognized at BDS, BGS, and BCA.
Revenues recognized for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 from amounts recorded as Advances and progress billings at the beginning
of each year were $16,778 and $24,737.
Certain commercial airplane customers are experiencing liquidity issues and seeking additional capital. Should these customers fail to address their
liquidity  issues,  accounts  receivable,  unbilled  receivables  and  certain  inventory  could  become  impaired.  In  addition  we  would  have  to  remove
contracts related to these customers from backlog and remarket any undelivered aircraft.
The following table summarizes our contract assets under long-term contracts that were unbillable or related to outstanding claims as of December
31:
Unbilled
Claims
2019
2018
2019
2018
Current
$6,931
$7,178
$9
$1
Expected to be collected after one year
2,112
2,847
14
2
Total
$9,043
$10,025
$23
$3
Unbilled receivables related to commercial customer incentives expected to be collected after one year were $211 and $150 at December 31, 2019
and 2018. Unbilled receivables related to claims are items that we believe are earned, but are subject to uncertainty concerning their determination
or ultimate realization.
Note 9 – Customer Financing
Customer financing primarily relates to our BCC segment. Customer financing consisted of the following at December 31:
2019
2018
Financing receivables:
Investment in sales-type/finance leases
$1,029
$1,125
Notes
443
730
Total financing receivables
1,472
1,855
Operating lease equipment, at cost, less accumulated depreciation of $235 and $203
834
782
Operating lease incentive
250
Gross customer financing
2,306
2,887
Less allowance for losses on receivables
(8)
(9)
Total
$2,298
$2,878
78

Table of Contents
The components of investment in sales-type/finance leases at December 31 were as follows:
2019
2018
Minimum lease payments receivable
$799
$908
Estimated residual value of leased assets
393
425
Unearned income
(163)
(208)
Total
$1,029
$1,125
Operating lease equipment primarily includes large commercial jet aircraft.
Financing receivable balances evaluated for impairment at December 31 were as follows:
2019
2018
Individually evaluated for impairment
$400
$409
Collectively evaluated for impairment
1,072
1,446
Total financing receivables
$1,472
$1,855
We determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due
according  to  the  original  contractual  terms.  At December  31,  2019 and 2018,  we  individually  evaluated  for  impairment  customer  financing
receivables of $400 and $409, of which $388 and $398 were determined to be impaired. We recorded no allowance for losses on these impaired
receivables as the collateral values exceeded the carrying values of the receivables.
Income recognition is generally suspended for financing receivables at the date full recovery of income and principal becomes not probable. Income
is recognized when financing receivables become contractually current and performance is demonstrated by the customer. The average recorded
investment in impaired financing receivables for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $392, and the related interest income was insignificant.
The change in the allowance for losses on financing receivables for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, consisted of the following:
2019
2018
2017
Beginning balance - January 1
($9)
($12)
($10)
Customer financing valuation benefit/(cost)
1
3
(2)
Ending balance - December 31
($8)
($9)
($12)
Collectively evaluated for impairment
($8)
($9)
($12)
The adequacy of the allowance for losses is assessed quarterly. Three primary factors influencing the level of our allowance for losses on customer
financing  receivables  are  customer  credit  ratings,  default  rates  and  collateral  values.  We  assign  internal  credit  ratings  for  all  customers  and
determine the creditworthiness of each customer based upon publicly available information and information obtained directly from our customers.
Our rating categories are comparable to those used by the major credit rating agencies.
79

Table of Contents
Our financing receivable balances at December 31 by internal credit rating category are shown below:
Rating categories
2019
2018
BBB
$573
$883
BB
385
430
B
122
135
CCC
392
407
Total carrying value of financing receivables
$1,472
$1,855
At December 31, 2019, our allowance related to receivables with ratings of B, BB and BBB. We applied default rates that averaged 22.1%, 5.3%
and 0.6%, respectively, to the exposure associated with those receivables.
Customer Financing Exposure
Customer financing is collateralized by security in the related asset. The value of the collateral is closely tied to commercial airline performance and
overall  market  conditions  and  may  be  subject  to  reduced  valuation  with  market  decline.  Declines  in  collateral  values  could  result  in  asset
impairments, reduced finance lease income, and an increase in the allowance for losses. Our customer financing collateral is concentrated in 747-8
and out-of-production aircraft. Generally, out-of-production aircraft have experienced greater collateral value declines than in-production aircraft.
The majority of customer financing carrying values are concentrated in the following aircraft models at December 31:
2019
2018
717 Aircraft ($124 and $204 accounted for as operating leases)
$736
$918
747-8 Aircraft ($130 and $132 accounted for as operating leases)
475
477
737 Aircraft ($240 and $263 Accounted for as operating leases)
263
290
777 Aircraft ($236 and $60 accounted for as operating leases)
240
68
MD-80 Aircraft (Accounted for as sales-type finance leases)
186
204
757 Aircraft ($22 and $24 accounted for as operating leases)
182
200
747-400 Aircraft ($31 and $45 Accounted for as operating leases)
90
116
As  part  of  selected  lease  transactions,  Boeing  may  provide  incentives  to  commercial  customers.  At December  31,  2018,  Customer  Financing
included $250 of lease incentives with one customer that experienced liquidity issues. In the first quarter of 2019, we concluded that these lease
incentives were impaired and recorded a charge of $250.
Charges related to customer financing asset impairment for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
2019
2018
2017
Boeing Capital
$53
$1
$13
Other Boeing
217
38
30
Total
$270
$39
$43
80

Table of Contents
Lease income recorded in Revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $62 from sales-
type/finance leases and $139 from operating leases, of which $8 related to variable operating lease payments.
As of December 31, 2019, undiscounted cash flows for notes receivable, sales-type/finance and operating leases over the next five years and
thereafter are as follows:
Notes
receivable
Sales-
type/finance
leases
Operating leases
Year 1
$382
$191
$130
Year 2
7
141
103
Year 3
37
127
89
Year 4
17
118
74
Year 5
98
58
Thereafter
124
41
Total lease receipts
443
799
495
Less imputed interest
(163)
Estimated unguaranteed residual values
393
Total
$443
$1,029
$495
At December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 unguaranteed residual values were $393 and $425. Guaranteed residual values at December 31,
2019 were not significant.
Note 10 – Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment at December 31 consisted of the following:
2019
2018
Land
$527
$546
Buildings and land improvements
14,288
14,109
Machinery and equipment
15,723
15,221
Construction in progress
1,306
1,337
Gross property, plant and equipment
31,844
31,213
Less accumulated depreciation
(19,342)
(18,568)
Total
$12,502
$12,645
Depreciation expense was $1,567, $1,556 and $1,548 for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. Interest capitalized
during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 totaled $83, $81 and $110, respectively.
During 2019 and 2018,  we  acquired $128 and $78 of  property,  plant  and  equipment  through  non-cash  investing  and  financing  transactions.
Accounts payable related to purchases of property, plant and equipment were $256 and $338 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
81

Table of Contents
Note 11 – Investments
Our investments, which are recorded in Short-term and other investments or Investments, consisted of the following at December 31:
2019
 
2018
Equity method investments (1)
$1,031
$1,048
Time deposits
50
255
Available for sale debt instruments
405
491
Equity and other investments
65
44
Restricted cash & cash equivalents (2)
86
176
Total
$1,637
$2,014
(1) 
Dividends received were $164 and $325 during 2019 and 2018. Retained earnings at December 31, 2019 include undistributed earnings from
our equity method investments of $156.
(2) 
Reflects amounts restricted in support of our workers’ compensation programs, employee benefit programs, and insurance premiums.
Equity Method Investments
Our equity method investments consisted of the following as of December 31:
Segment
Ownership
Percentages
Investment Balance
2019
 
2018
United Launch Alliance
BDS
50%
$771
$768
Other
BCA, BDS, BGS and Other
260
280
Total equity method investments
$1,031
$1,048
Note 12 – Other Assets
Sea Launch
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, Other assets included $244 of receivables related to our former investment in the Sea Launch venture which
became payable by certain Sea Launch partners following Sea Launch’s bankruptcy filing in June 2009. The net amounts owed to Boeing by each of
the partners are as follows: S.P. Koroley Rocket and Space Corporation Energia of Russia (RSC Energia) – $111, PO Yuzhnoye Mashinostroitelny
Zavod of Ukraine – $89 and KB Yuzhnoye of Ukraine – $44.
In 2013, we filed an action in the United States District Court for the Central District of California seeking reimbursement from the other Sea Launch
partners. In 2016, the United States District Court for the Central District of California issued a judgment in favor of Boeing. Later that year, we
reached an agreement which we believe will enable us to recover  the outstanding  receivable balance from  RSC Energia over the next several
years. In the fourth quarter of 2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the decision of the U.S. District Court. We continue to
pursue collection efforts against the former Ukrainian partners in connection with the court judgment. We continue to believe the partners have the
financial wherewithal to pay and intend to pursue vigorously all of our rights and remedies. In the event we are unable to secure reimbursement from
RSC Energia and the Ukrainian Sea Launch partners, we could incur additional charges.
82

Table of Contents
Note 13 – Leases
Our operating lease assets primarily represent manufacturing and research and development facilities, warehouses, and offices. Total operating
lease expense was $326 for the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $55 was attributable to variable lease expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash payments against operating lease liabilities totaled $277 and non-cash transactions totaled $371 to
recognize operating assets and liabilities for new leases.
Supplemental Consolidated Statement of Financial Position information related to leases was as follows:
December 31 
2019
Operating leases:
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$1,182
Current portion of lease liabilities
252
Non-current portion of lease liabilities
978
Total operating lease liabilities
$1,230
Weighted average remaining lease term (years)
9
Weighted average discount rate
3.35%
Maturities of operating lease liabilities for the next five years are as follows:
Operating leases
2020
$287
2021
235
2022
194
2023
151
2024
98
Thereafter
609
Total lease payments
1,574
Less imputed interest
(344)
Total
$1,230
As  of December  31,  2019,  we  have  entered  into  an  operating  lease  that  has  not  yet  commenced  of $160,  primarily  related  to  research  and
development and manufacturing facilities. This lease will commence in 2020 with a lease term of 15 years.
83

Table of Contents
Payments due under operating leases net of sublease amounts and non-cancellable future rentals under ASC 840 as of December 31, 2018 were
as follows:
Operating leases
2019
$272
2020
232
2021
194
2022
165
2023
126
Thereafter
849
Total lease payments
$1,838
Note 14 – Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
Accrued Liabilities
Accrued liabilities at December 31 consisted of the following:
2019
2018
Accrued compensation and employee benefit costs
$5,582
$6,841
737 MAX customer concessions and other considerations
7,389
Environmental
570
555
Product warranties
1,267
1,127
Forward loss recognition
1,681
1,488
Dividends payable
1,159
1,160
Income taxes payable
670
485
Other
4,550
3,152
Total
$22,868
$14,808
737 MAX Grounding
On March 13, 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued an order to suspend operations of all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S.
aircraft operators following two fatal 737 MAX accidents. Non-U.S. civil aviation authorities have issued directives to the same effect. Deliveries of
the 737 MAX have been suspended until clearance is granted by the appropriate regulatory authorities. In addition, multiple legal actions have been
filed against us as a result of the accidents. We also are fully cooperating with U.S. government investigations related to the accidents and the 737
MAX program, including investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission. We cannot reasonably
estimate a range of loss, if any, not covered by available insurance that may result given the ongoing status of these law suits, investigations and
inquiries.
We have developed software and pilot training updates for the 737 MAX and continue to work with the FAA and non-U.S. civil aviation authorities to
complete remaining steps toward certification and readiness for return to service including addressing their questions on the software updates and
how pilots will interact with the airplane controls and displays in different flight scenarios. We have assumed that computer and simulator training will
be required and as a result, we have provisioned for certain training costs.
84

Table of Contents
Prior to the grounding, the 737 production rate was 52 per month and we had planned to increase the rate to 57 per month during 2019. Beginning
in the second quarter of 2019, we reduced the production rate to 42 per month. We have continued to produce at a rate of 42 per month through
December 2019, which has resulted in approximately 400 airplanes in inventory as of December 31, 2019. In December 2019, we announced the
temporary suspension of 737 MAX production beginning in January 2020 due to a number of factors, including the 737 MAX grounding continuing
longer than expected, our decision to prioritize delivery of stored aircraft, and uncertainty about the timing and conditions of return to service and
global training approvals. We have assumed that we will resume 737 MAX aircraft production at low rates in 2020 as timing and conditions of return
to service are better understood, and then we expect to gradually increase to previously planned production rates over the next few years. We have
assumed that regulatory approval will enable 737 MAX deliveries to resume during mid-2020. The cumulative impacts of changes to assumptions
regarding timing of return to service and timing of planned production rates and deliveries have increased the estimated costs to produce and deliver
aircraft included in the current accounting quantity by approximately $6,300, which will be recorded in program inventory. This will result in lower 737
program margins in future periods after deliveries resume. In addition, the suspension of 737 MAX production and abnormally low production rates
once production resumes will result in approximately $4,000 of abnormal production costs during 2020 and 2021 that will be expensed as incurred.
We are working with our customers to minimize the impact to their operations from grounded and undelivered aircraft. During the second quarter of
2019,  we  recorded  an  earnings  charge  (reduction  in  revenue)  and  a  corresponding  liability  of $6,110 in  connection  with  estimated  potential
concessions and other considerations  to customers  for disruptions related to the 737 MAX grounding and associated delivery delays. We have
insurance coverage for up to $500 of costs arising due to grounded aircraft and have received $500 from our insurance carriers, which partially
offset the earnings charges. We continue to reassess the liability for estimated potential concessions and other considerations to customers on a
quarterly basis, and in the third and fourth quarters of 2019, we recorded additional charges totaling $2,649. This reassessment includes updating
estimates  to  reflect  revised  return  to  service  and  updated  delivery  and  production  rate  assumptions,  as  well  as  latest  information  based  on
engagements  with  737  MAX  customers.  The  liability  represents  our  current  best  estimate  of  future  concessions  and  other  considerations  to
customers, and is necessarily based on a series of assumptions.
The following table summarizes changes in the 737 MAX customer concessions and other considerations liability during 2019.
2019
Beginning balance – January 1
Initial liability recorded in the second quarter of 2019
$6,110
Reductions for payments made
(1,237)
Reductions for concessions and other in-kind considerations
(133)
Changes in estimates
2,649
Ending balance – December 31
$7,389
We have also recorded additional expenses of $328 as a result of the 737 MAX grounding. These expenses include costs related to storage, pilot
training and software updates.
The  FAA  and  other  non-U.S.  civil  aviation  authorities  will  determine  the  timing  and  conditions  of  return  to  service.  Our  assumptions  reflect  our
current best estimate, but actual timing and conditions of return to service and resumption of deliveries could differ from this estimate, the effect of
which could be material. We are unable at this time to reasonably estimate potential future additional financial impacts or a range of loss, if any, due
to continued uncertainties related to the timing and conditions of return to service, future changes to the production rate, supply chain impacts or the
results of negotiations with particular customers. Any such impacts, including any changes in our estimates, could have a material adverse effect on
our
85

Table of Contents
financial position, results of operations, and/or cash flows. For example, we expect that, in the event that we are unable to resume aircraft deliveries
consistent with our assumptions, the continued absence of revenue, earnings, and cash flows associated with 737 MAX deliveries would continue to
have the most material impact on our operating results. In the event that future production rate increases occur at a slower rate or take longer than
we are currently assuming we expect that the growth in inventory and other cash flow impacts associated with production would decrease. However,
while  any  prolonged  production  suspension  or  delays  in  planned  production  rate  increases  could  mitigate  the  impact  on  our  liquidity  it  could
significantly increase the overall expected costs to produce aircraft included in the accounting quantity, which would reduce 737 program margins
and/or increase abnormal production costs in the future.
737NG Structure (Pickle Fork)
During the third quarter of 2019, we detected cracks in the "pickle forks," a component of the structure connecting the wings to the fuselages, of
three 737-800NGs we were converting into freighters. We notified the FAA, which issued a directive requiring that 737NG airplanes with over 30,000
flight cycles be inspected for this condition by October 10, 2019, and that airplanes with over 22,600 flight cycles be inspected over the next 1,000
flight cycles. To date, all airplanes with over 30,000 flight cycles and approximately half of the airplanes with over 22,600 flights cycles have been
inspected and this condition has been found on a small percentage of aircraft, and those aircraft will be repaired. A small percentage of airplanes
with fewer than 22,600 flight cycles have also been inspected. We have estimated the number of aircraft that will have to be repaired in the future
and provisioned for the estimated costs of completing the repairs. We recognized charges of $135 in 2019 for current and projected future aircraft
repairs. However, we cannot estimate a range of reasonably possible losses, if any, in excess of amounts recognized due to the ongoing nature of
the inspections and repairs and pending the completion of investigations into the cause of the condition.
Environmental
The following table summarizes environmental remediation activity during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
2019
2018
Beginning balance – January 1
$555
$524
Reductions for payments made
(47)
(37)
Changes in estimates
62
68
Ending balance – December 31
$570
$555
The liabilities recorded represent our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible costs expected to be incurred to remediate
sites, including operation and maintenance over periods of up to 30 years. It is reasonably possible that we may incur charges that exceed these
recorded amounts because of regulatory agency orders and directives, changes in laws and/or regulations, higher than expected costs and/or the
discovery of new or additional contamination. As part of our estimating process, we develop a range of reasonably possible alternate scenarios that
includes the high end of a range of reasonably possible cost estimates for all remediation sites for which we have sufficient information based on our
experience  and  existing  laws  and  regulations.  There  are  some  potential  remediation  obligations  where  the  costs  of  remediation  cannot  be
reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the high end of the estimated range of reasonably possible remediation costs exceeded our
recorded liabilities by $1,077 and $796.
86

Table of Contents
Product Warranties
The following table summarizes product warranty activity recorded during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
2019
2018
Beginning balance – January 1
$1,127
$1,211
Additions for current year deliveries
188
232
Reductions for payments made
(249)
(193)
Changes in estimates
201
(123)
Ending balance – December 31
$1,267
$1,127
Commercial Aircraft Commitments
In conjunction with signing definitive agreements for the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain
customers that give them the right to trade in used aircraft  at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. The probability that trade-in
commitments will be exercised is determined by using both quantitative information from valuation sources and qualitative information from other
sources. The probability of exercise is assessed quarterly, or as events trigger a change, and takes into consideration the current economic and
airline industry environments. Trade-in commitments, which can be terminated by mutual consent with the customer, may be exercised only during
the period specified in the agreement, and require advance notice by the customer.
Trade-in commitment agreements at December 31, 2019 have expiration dates from 2020 through 2026. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, total
contractual trade-in commitments were $1,407 and $1,519. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, we estimated that it was probable we would be
obligated to perform on certain of these commitments  with net amounts payable to customers totaling $711 and $522 and the fair value of the
related trade-in aircraft was $678 and $485.
Financing Commitments
Financing commitments related to aircraft on order, including options and those proposed in sales campaigns, and refinancing of delivered aircraft,
totaled $13,377 and $19,462 as  of December  31,  2019  and  2018.  The  estimated  earliest  potential  funding  dates  for  these  commitments  as  of
December 31, 2019 are as follows:
Total
2020
$3,506
2021
2,981
2022
1,343
2023
2,163
2024
1,407
Thereafter
1,977
$13,377
As of December 31, 2019, all of these financing commitments relate to customers we believe have less than investment-grade credit. We have
concluded that no reserve for future potential losses is required for these financing commitments based upon the terms, such as collateralization
and interest rates, under which funding would be provided.
87

Table of Contents
Funding Commitments
We have commitments to make additional capital contributions of $246 to joint ventures over the next eight years.
Standby Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
We  have  entered  into  standby  letters  of  credit  and  surety  bonds  with  financial  institutions  primarily  relating  to  the  guarantee  of  our  future
performance  on  certain  contracts.  Contingent  liabilities  on  outstanding  letters  of  credit  agreements  and  surety  bonds  aggregated  approximately
$3,769 and $3,761 as of December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Company Owned Life Insurance
McDonnell Douglas Corporation insured its executives with Company Owned Life Insurance (COLI), which are life insurance policies with a cash
surrender value. Although we do not use COLI currently, these obligations from the merger with McDonnell Douglas are still a commitment at this
time. We have loans in place to cover costs paid or incurred to carry the underlying life insurance policies. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the
cash  surrender  value  was $448 and $466 and  the  total  loans  were $431 and $447.  As  we  have  the  right  to  offset  the  loans  against  the  cash
surrender value of the policies, we present the net asset in Other assets on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31,
2019 and 2018.
United States Government Defense Environment Overview
The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 raised the Budget Control Act limits on federal discretionary defense and non-defense spending for fiscal years
2020 and 2021 (FY20 and FY21), reducing budget uncertainty and the risk of sequestration. The consolidated appropriations acts for FY20, enacted
in December 2019, provided FY20 appropriations for government departments and agencies, including the United States Department of Defense
(U.S. DoD), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the FAA.
The enacted FY20 appropriations included funding for Boeing’s major programs, such as the F/A-18 Super Hornet, F-15EX, CH-47 Chinook, AH-64
Apache, V-22 Osprey, KC-46A Tanker, P-8 Poseidon and Space Launch System. However, there continues to be uncertainty with respect to future
program-level appropriations for the U.S. DoD and other government agencies, including NASA. Future budget cuts or investment priority changes,
including changes associated with the authorizations and appropriations process, could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing
contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could have a material effect on our results of operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
BDS Fixed-Price Development Contracts
Fixed-price development work is inherently uncertain and subject to significant variability in estimates of the cost and time required to complete the
work.  BDS  fixed-price  contracts  with  significant  development  work  include  Commercial  Crew,  KC-46A  Tanker,  T-7A  Red  Hawk  (formerly  T-X
Trainer), VC-25B Presidential Aircraft, MQ-25, and commercial and military satellites. The operational and technical complexities of these contracts
create financial risk, which could trigger termination provisions, order cancellations or other financially significant exposure. Changes to cost and
revenue estimates could result in lower margins or material charges for reach-forward losses. For example, we have recorded reach-forward losses
of $148 on KC-46A Tanker and $489 on Commercial Crew in 2019. Moreover, our fixed-price development programs remain subject to additional
reach-forward losses if we experience further production, technical or quality issues, schedule delays, or increased costs. 
88

Table of Contents
KC-46A Tanker
In  2011,  we  were  awarded  a  contract  from  the  U.S.  Air  Force  (USAF)  to  design,  develop,  manufacture  and  deliver  four  next  generation  aerial
refueling tankers. This EMD contract is a fixed-price incentive fee contract and involves highly complex designs and systems integration. Since
2016, the USAF has authorized five low rate initial production (LRIP) lots for a total of 67 aircraft. The EMD contract and authorized LRIP lots are
valued at approximately $15 billion.
At December 31, 2019, we had approximately $331 of capitalized precontract costs and $225 of potential termination liabilities to suppliers.
Recoverable Costs on Government Contracts
Our final incurred costs for each year are subject to audit and review for allowability by the U.S. government, which can result in payment demands
related to costs they believe should be disallowed. We work with the U.S. government to assess the merits of claims and where appropriate reserve
for amounts disputed. If we are unable to satisfactorily resolve disputed costs, we could be required to record an earnings charge and/or provide
refunds to the U.S. government.
Note 15 – Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
We enter into arrangements with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business, primarily in the form of guarantees.
The  following  table  provides  quantitative  data  regarding  our  third  party  guarantees.  The  maximum  potential  payments  represent  a  “worst-case
scenario,” and do not necessarily reflect amounts that we expect to pay. Estimated proceeds from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated
values  of  assets  we  could  liquidate  or  receive  from  other  parties  to  offset  our  payments  under  guarantees.  The  carrying  amount  of  liabilities
represents the amount included in Accrued liabilities.
Maximum 
Potential 
Payments
Estimated
Proceeds from
Collateral/
Recourse
Carrying
Amount of
Liabilities
December 31,
2019
2018
2019
2018
2019
2018
Contingent repurchase commitments
$1,570
$1,685
$1,570
$1,685
Indemnifications to ULA:
Contributed Delta inventory
30
52
Inventory supply agreement
34
85
Questioned costs
317
317
$48
Credit guarantees
92
106
36
51
16
$16
Contingent  Repurchase  Commitments The  repurchase  price  specified  in  contingent  repurchase  commitments  is  generally  lower  than  the
expected fair value at the specified repurchase date. Estimated proceeds from collateral/recourse  in the table above represent the lower of the
contracted repurchase price or the expected fair value of each aircraft at the specified repurchase date.
Indemnifications  to  ULA In  2006,  we  agreed  to  indemnify  ULA  through  December  31,  2020  against  potential  non-recoverability  and  non-
allowability of $1,360 of  Boeing Delta launch  program  inventory  included  in contributed  assets  plus $1,860 of inventory subject to an inventory
supply agreement which ends on March 31, 2021. See Note 7. ULA has yet to consume $30 of contributed inventory.
89

Table of Contents
In June 2011, the Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA) notified ULA that it had determined that $271 of deferred support costs are not
recoverable under government contracts. In December 2011, the DCMA notified ULA of the potential non-recoverability of an additional $114 of
deferred production costs. ULA and Boeing believe that all costs are recoverable and in November 2011, ULA filed a certified claim with the USAF
for collection of deferred support and production costs. The USAF issued a final decision denying ULA’s certified claim in May 2012. In 2012, Boeing
and ULA, through its subsidiary United Launch Services, filed a suit in the Court of Federal Claims seeking recovery of the deferred support and
production costs from the U.S. government, which subsequently asserted a counterclaim for credits that it alleges were offset by deferred support
cost invoices. We believe that the U.S. government’s counterclaim is without merit. The discovery phase of the litigation completed in 2017. The
parties have since agreed to engage in alternative dispute resolution, and the court has stayed the litigation pending that process. If, contrary to our
belief, it is determined that some or all of the deferred support or production costs are not recoverable, we could be required to record pre-tax losses
up to $269 and make indemnification payments to ULA for up to $317 of the costs questioned by the DCMA.
Other Indemnifications In conjunction with our sales of Electron Dynamic Devices, Inc. and Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power businesses and our
BCA facilities in Wichita, Kansas and Tulsa and McAlester, Oklahoma, we agreed to indemnify, for an indefinite period, the buyers for costs relating
to pre-closing environmental conditions and certain other items. We are unable to assess the potential number of future claims that may be asserted
under these indemnifications, nor the amounts thereof (if any). As a result, we cannot estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments
under these indemnities and therefore, no liability has been recorded. To the extent that claims have been made under these indemnities and/or are
probable and reasonably estimable, liabilities associated with these indemnities are included in the environmental liability disclosure in Note 14.
Credit Guarantees We have issued credit guarantees where we are obligated to make payments to a guaranteed party in the event that the original
lessee or debtor does not make payments or perform certain specified services. Generally, these guarantees have been extended on behalf of
guaranteed parties with less than investment-grade  credit and are collateralized by certain assets. Current outstanding credit guarantees expire
through 2036.
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Industrial Revenue Bonds (IRB) issued by St. Louis County were used to finance the purchase and/or construction of real and personal property at
our St. Louis site. Tax benefits associated with IRBs include a twelve-year property tax abatement and sales tax exemption from St. Louis County.
We  record  these  properties  on  our  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position.  We  have  also  purchased  the  IRBs  and  therefore  are  the
bondholders as well as the borrower/lessee of the properties purchased with the IRB proceeds. The liabilities and IRB assets are equal and are
reported net in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the assets and liabilities associated with the IRBs were $271.
Note 16 – Debt
In the first quarter of 2019, we issued $1,500 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $400 due March 1, 2024 that bear an annual interest rate of
2.8%, $400 due March 1, 2029 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.2%, $400 due March 1, 2039 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.5%, and
$300 due March  1,  2059 that  bear  an  annual  interest  rate  of 3.825%.  The  notes  are  unsecured  senior  obligations  and  rank  equally  in  right  of
payment with our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. The net proceeds of the issuance totaled $1,451, after deducting
underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
90

Table of Contents
In the second quarter of 2019, we issued $3,500 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $600 due May 1, 2022 that bear an annual interest rate of
2.7%, $650 due May 1, 2026 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.1%, $600 due March 1, 2029 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.2%, $850 due
May  1,  2034 that  bear  an  annual  interest  rate  of 3.6%,  and $800 due May  1,  2049 that  bear  an  annual  interest  rate  of 3.9%.  The  notes  are
unsecured senior obligations and rank equally in right of payment with our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. The net
proceeds of the issuance totaled $3,454, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
In the third quarter of 2019, we issued $5,500 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $750 due August 1, 2021 that bear an annual interest rate of
2.3%, $1,000 due February 1, 2027 that bear an annual interest rate of 2.7%, $750 due February 1, 2030 that bear an annual interest rate of 2.95%,
$750 due February 1, 2035 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.25%, $1,250 due February 1, 2050 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.75%, and
$1,000 due August 1, 2059 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.95%. The notes are unsecured senior obligations and rank equally in right of
payment with our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. The net proceeds of the issuance totaled $5,442, after deducting
underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
Interest incurred, including amounts capitalized, was $867, $624 and $541 for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Interest expense recorded by BCC is reflected as Boeing Capital interest expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Company
interest payments were $973, $616 and $527 for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
We have $9,600 currently available under credit line agreements, of which $3,200 is a 364-day revolving credit facility expiring in October 2020,
$3,200 expires in October 2022, and $3,200 expires in October 2024. The 364-day credit facility has a one-year term out option which allows us to
extend the maturity of any borrowings one year beyond the aforementioned expiration date. We continue to be in full compliance with all covenants
contained in our debt or credit facility agreements.
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2019
2018
Unsecured debt securities
$1,099
$1,151
Non-recourse debt and notes
21
25
Finance lease obligations
71
57
Commercial paper
6,109
1,895
Other notes
40
62
Total
$7,340
$3,190
91

Table of Contents
Debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2019
2018
Unsecured debt securities
1.65% - 4.88% due through 2059
$17,404
$7,538
5.80% - 6.88% due through 2043
1,740
2,388
7.25% - 8.75% due through 2043
1,639
1,638
Commercial paper
6,109
1,895
Non-recourse debt and notes
6.98% notes due through 2021
37
62
Finance lease obligations due through 2044
229
156
Other notes
144
170
Total debt
$27,302
$13,847
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, commercial paper borrowings totaling $6,109 and $1,895, with a weighted-average interest rate of 2.2% and
2.5%, were supported by unused commitments under the revolving credit agreement.
Total debt at December 31 is attributable to:
2019
2018
BCC
$1,960
$2,487
Other Boeing
25,342
11,360
Total debt
$27,302
$13,847
At December 31, 2019, $37 of debt (non-recourse debt) was collateralized by customer financing assets totaling $186.
Scheduled principal payments for debt and minimum finance lease obligations for the next five years are as follows:
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Debt
$7,306
$1,484
$1,214
$780
$1,000
Minimum finance lease obligations
$71
$56
$42
$20
$6
Note 17 – Postretirement Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Additional union
employees transitioned to company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plans effective January 1, 2019.
We fund our major pension plans through trusts. Pension assets are placed in trust solely for the benefit of the plans’ participants, and are structured
to maintain liquidity that is sufficient to pay benefit obligations as well as to keep pace over the long-term with the growth of obligations for future
benefit payments.
We also have other postretirement benefits (OPB) other than pensions which consist principally of health care coverage for eligible retirees and
qualifying dependents, and to a lesser extent, life insurance to certain groups of retirees. Retiree health care is provided principally until age 65 for
approximately two-thirds of those participants who are eligible for health care coverage. Certain employee groups, including
92

Table of Contents
employees covered by most United Auto Workers bargaining agreements, are provided lifetime health care coverage. The funded status of the
plans is measured as the difference between the plan assets at fair value and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). We have recognized the
aggregate of all overfunded plans in Other assets, and the aggregate of all underfunded plans in either Accrued retiree health care or Accrued
pension plan liability, net. The portion of the amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits included in the PBO exceeds the fair value of
plan assets, payable in the next 12 months, is reflected in Accrued liabilities.
The components of net periodic benefit (income)/cost were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
2019
2018
2017
Service cost
$2
$430
$402
$77
$94
$106
Interest cost
2,925
2,781
2,991
196
194
229
Expected return on plan assets
(3,863)
(4,009)
(3,847)
(8)
(8)
(7)
Amortization of prior service credits
(79)
(56)
(39)
(35)
(126)
(137)
Recognized net actuarial loss/(gain)
643
1,130
804
(46)
(10)
10
Settlement/curtailment/other losses
44
1
Net periodic benefit (income)/cost
($372)
$320
$312
$184
$144
$201
Net periodic benefit cost included in (Loss)/earnings
from operations
$313
$313
$510
$88
$84
$107
Net periodic benefit (income)/cost included in Other income,
net
(374)
(143)
(117)
107
101
123
Net periodic benefit (income)/cost included in
(Loss)/earnings before income taxes
($61)
$170
$393
$195
$185
$230
The  following  tables  show  changes  in  the  benefit  obligation,  plan  assets  and  funded  status  of  both  pensions  and  OPB  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2019 and 2018. Benefit obligation balances presented below reflect the PBO for our pension plans, and accumulated postretirement
benefit obligations (APBO) for our OPB plans.
93

Table of Contents
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2019
2018
2019
2018
Change in benefit obligation
Beginning balance
$71,424
$80,393
$5,114
$6,085
Service cost
2
430
77
94
Interest cost
2,925
2,781
196
194
Amendments
(377)
1
(58)
Actuarial (gain)/loss
8,695
(6,352)
127
(732)
Settlement/curtailment/other
(756)
(730)
Gross benefits paid
(4,658)
(4,700)
(474)
(487)
Subsidies
36
24
Exchange rate adjustment
13
(21)
3
(6)
Ending balance
$77,645
$71,424
$5,080
$5,114
Change in plan assets
Beginning balance at fair value
$56,102
$64,011
$132
$143
Actual return on plan assets
10,851
(2,585)
26
(3)
Company contribution
16
16
1
2
Plan participants’ contributions
6
7
Settlement payments
(756)
(764)
Benefits paid
(4,514)
(4,557)
(16)
(17)
Exchange rate adjustment
12
(19)
Ending balance at fair value
$61,711
$56,102
$149
$132
Amounts recognized in statement of financial position at December 31
consist of:
Other assets
$484
$138
Other accrued liabilities
(142)
(137)
($391)
($398)
Accrued retiree health care
(4,540)
(4,584)
Accrued pension plan liability, net
(16,276)
(15,323)
Net amount recognized
($15,934)
($15,322)
($4,931)
($4,982)
Amounts recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31 were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2019
2018
2019
2018
Net actuarial loss/(gain)
$23,124
$22,061
($625)
($783)
Prior service credits
(1,467)
(1,546)
(122)
(158)
Total recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss
$21,657
$20,515
($747)
($941)
94

Table of Contents
The accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for all pension plans was $75,787 and $69,376 at December 31, 2019 and 2018. Key information for our
plans with ABO and PBO in excess of plan assets as of December 31 was as follows:
2019
2018
Accumulated benefit obligation
$70,466
$66,306
Fair value of plan assets
55,907
52,894
2019
2018
Projected benefit obligation
$72,325
$68,354
Fair value of plan assets
55,907
52,894
Assumptions
The following assumptions, which are the weighted average for all plans, are used to calculate the benefit obligation at December 31 of each year
and the net periodic benefit cost for the subsequent year.
December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Discount rate:
Pension
3.30%
4.20%
3.60%
Other postretirement benefits
3.00%
4.00%
3.30%
Expected return on plan assets
6.80%
6.80%
6.80%
Rate of compensation increase
4.30%
5.30%
5.30%
Interest crediting rates for cash balance plans
5.15%
5.15%
5.15%
The discount rate for each plan is determined based on the plans’ expected future benefit payments using a yield curve developed from high quality
bonds that are rated as Aa or better by at least half of the four rating agencies utilized as of the measurement date. The yield curve is fitted to yields
developed from bonds at various maturity points. Bonds with the ten percent highest and the ten percent lowest yields are omitted. The present
value of each plan’s benefits is calculated by applying the discount rates to projected benefit cash flows.
The pension fund’s expected return on plan assets assumption is derived from a review of actual historical returns achieved by the pension trust and
anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. While consideration is given to recent trust performance and historical returns,
the assumption represents a long-term, prospective return. The expected return on plan assets component of the net periodic benefit cost for the
upcoming plan year is determined based on the expected return on plan assets assumption and the market-related value of plan assets (MRVA).
Since our adoption of the accounting standard for pensions in 1987, we have determined the MRVA based on a five-year moving average of plan
assets. As of December 31, 2019, the MRVA was approximately $3,674 less than the fair market value of assets.
Assumed health care cost trend rates were as follows:
December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Health care cost trend rate assumed next year
5.00%
5.50%
6.00%
Ultimate trend rate
4.50%
4.50%
4.50%
Year that trend reached ultimate rate
2021
2021
2021
95

Table of Contents
Plan Assets
Investment Strategy The overall objective of our pension assets is to earn a rate of return over time to satisfy the benefit obligations of the pension
plans and to maintain sufficient liquidity to pay benefits and address other cash requirements of the pension fund. Specific investment objectives for
our  long-term  investment  strategy  include  reducing  the  volatility  of  pension  assets  relative  to  pension  liabilities,  achieving  a  competitive  total
investment return, achieving diversification between and within asset classes and managing other risks. Investment objectives for each asset class
are determined based on specific risks and investment opportunities identified.
We periodically update our long-term, strategic asset allocations. We use various analytics to determine the optimal asset mix and consider plan
liability characteristics, liquidity characteristics, funding requirements, expected rates of return and the distribution of returns. We identify investment
benchmarks to evaluate performance for the asset classes in the strategic asset allocation that are market-based and investable where possible.
Actual allocations to each asset class vary from target allocations due to periodic investment strategy changes, market value fluctuations, the length
of time it takes to fully implement investment allocation positions, and the timing of benefit payments and contributions. Short-term investments and
exchange-traded derivatives are used to rebalance the actual asset allocation to the target asset allocation. The asset allocation is monitored and
rebalanced periodically. The actual and target allocations by asset class for the pension assets at December 31 were as follows:
Actual Allocations
Target Allocations
Asset Class
2019
2018
2019
2018
Fixed income
49%
48%
47%
47%
Global equity
29
28
29
29
Private equity
5
5
5
5
Real estate and real assets
8
9
9
9
Hedge funds
9
10
10
10
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
Fixed  income  securities  are  invested  primarily  in  a  diversified  portfolio  of  long  duration  instruments.  Global  equity  securities  are  invested  in  a
diversified portfolio of U.S. and non-U.S. companies, across various industries and market capitalizations.
Private equity investment vehicles are primarily limited partnerships (LPs) that mainly invest in U.S. and non-U.S. leveraged buyout, venture capital
and special situation strategies. Real estate and real assets include global private investments that may be held through an investment in a limited
partnership (LP) or other fund structures and publicly traded investments (such as Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) in the case of real estate).
Real estate includes, but is not limited to, investments in office, retail, apartment and industrial properties. Real assets include, but are not limited to,
investments in natural resources (such as energy, farmland and timber), commodities and infrastructure.
Hedge fund investments seek to capitalize on inefficiencies identified across and within different asset classes or markets. Hedge fund strategy
types include, but are not limited to directional, event driven, relative value, long-short and multi-strategy.
Investment managers are retained for explicit investment roles specified by contractual investment guidelines. Certain investment managers are
authorized to use derivatives, such as equity or bond futures, swaps, options and currency futures or forwards. Derivatives are used to achieve the
desired  market  exposure  of  a  security  or  an  index,  transfer  value-added  performance  between  asset  classes,  achieve  the  desired  currency
exposure, adjust portfolio duration or rebalance the total portfolio to the target asset allocation.
96

Table of Contents
As  a  percentage  of  total  pension  assets,  derivative  net  notional  amounts  were 4.3% and 4.4% for  fixed  income,  including  to-be-announced
mortgage-backed securities and treasury forwards, and 3.6% and 5.5% for global equity and commodities at December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Risk Management In managing the pension assets, we review and manage risk associated with funded status risk, interest rate risk, market risk,
counterparty risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. Liability matching and asset class diversification are central to our risk management approach
and  are  integral  to  the  overall  investment  strategy.  Further,  asset  classes  are  constructed  to  achieve  diversification  by  investment  strategy,  by
investment manager, by industry or sector and by holding. Investment manager guidelines for publicly traded assets are specified and are monitored
regularly  through  the  custodian.  Credit  parameters  for  counterparties  have  been  established  for  managers  permitted  to  trade  over-the-counter
derivatives.  Valuation  is  governed  through  several  types  of  procedures,  including  reviews  of  manager  valuation  policies,  custodian  valuation
processes, pricing vendor practices, pricing reconciliation, and periodic, security-specific valuation testing.
97

Table of Contents
Fair Value Measurements The following table presents our plan assets using the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2019 and 2018. The fair
value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined based on
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs, and Level 3
includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs.
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$19,341
$19,336
$5
$17,481
$17,479
$2
U.S. government and agencies
5,759
5,759
5,589
5,589
Mortgage backed and asset backed
1,181
720
461
722
410
312
Municipal
1,317
1,317
1,255
1,255
Sovereign
1,076
1,076
967
967
Other
55
$7
48
106
$53
53
Derivatives:
Assets
Liabilities
(143)
(143)
(51)
(51)
Cash equivalents and other short-term
investments
769
769
1,068
1,068
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred stock
4,866
4,866
3,744
3,744
Non-U.S. common and preferred stock
5,529
5,527
2
4,850
4,846
4
Derivatives:
Assets
6
6
3
3
Liabilities
(5)
(5)
(9)
(9)
Real estate and real assets:
Real estate
454
454
422
422
Real assets
810
649
157
4
659
311
344
4
Derivatives:
Assets
5
1
4
4
4
Liabilities
(2)
(2)
(17)
(1)
(16)
Total
$41,018
$11,504
$29,042
$472
$36,793
$9,375
$27,100
$318
Fixed income common/collective/pooled
funds
$959
$938
Fixed income other
512
442
Equity common/collective pooled funds
6,301
5,264
Private equity
3,184
2,934
Real estate and real assets
3,605
3,792
Hedge funds
5,688
5,484
Total investments measured at NAV as a
practical expedient
$20,249
$18,854
Cash
$207
$205
Receivables
383
404
Payables
(146)
(154)  
 
 
Total
$61,711
$56,102
98

Table of Contents
Fixed  income  securities  are  primarily  valued  upon  a  market  approach,  using  matrix  pricing  and  considering  a  security’s  relationship  to  other
securities for which quoted prices in an active market may be available, or an income approach, converting future cash flows to a single present
value amount. Inputs used in developing fair value estimates include reported trades, broker quotes, benchmark yields, and base spreads.
Common/collective/pooled  funds  are  typically  common  or  collective  trusts  valued  at  their  net  asset  values  (NAVs)  that  are  calculated  by  the
investment manager or sponsor of the fund and have daily or monthly liquidity. Derivatives included in the table above are over-the-counter and are
primarily valued using an income approach with inputs that include benchmark yields, swap curves, cash flow analysis, rating agency data and
interdealer broker rates. Exchange-traded derivative positions are reported in accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled
daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Cash equivalents and other short-term investments (which are used to pay benefits) are held in a separate account which consists of a commingled
fund (with daily liquidity) and separately held short-term securities and cash equivalents. All of the investments in this cash vehicle are valued daily
using  a  market  approach  with  inputs  that  include  quoted  market  prices  for  similar  instruments.  In  the  event  a  market  price  is  not  available  for
instruments  with an original maturity  of one year or less,  amortized  cost  is used as a proxy  for fair value. Common  and preferred  stock  equity
securities are primarily valued using a market approach based on the quoted market prices of identical instruments.
Private  equity  and  private  debt  NAV  valuations  are  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments,  which  include  inputs  such  as  cost,
operating results, discounted future cash flows and market based comparable data. For those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis
(primarily LPs) we use NAVs, adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events.
Real estate and real asset NAV valuations are based on valuation of the underlying investments, which include inputs such as cost, discounted
future  cash  flows,  independent  appraisals  and  market  based  comparable  data.  For  those  investments  reported  on  a  one-quarter  lagged  basis
(primarily LPs) NAVs are adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events. Publicly traded REITs and infrastructure stocks are valued
using a market approach based on quoted market prices of identical instruments. Exchange-traded commodities futures positions are reported in
accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Hedge  fund  NAVs  are  generally  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments.  This  is  primarily  done  by  applying  a  market  or  income
valuation methodology depending on the specific type of security or instrument held.
Investments in private equity, private debt, real estate, real assets, and hedge funds are primarily calculated and reported by the General Partner
(GP), fund manager or third party administrator. Additionally, some investments in fixed income and equity are made via commingled vehicles and
are valued in a similar fashion. Pension assets invested in commingled and limited partnership structures rely on the NAV of these investments as
the practical expedient for the valuations.
99

Table of Contents
The following tables present a reconciliation of Level 3 assets held during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Transfers into and out of
Level 3 are reported at the beginning-of-year values.
January 1 
2019 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized
Gains/(Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Into/(Out of)
Level 3
December 31 
2019 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$2
$3
$5
Mortgage backed and asset
backed
312
$11
137
$1
461
Equity securities:
Non-U.S. common and
preferred stock
1
1
2
Real assets
4
4
Total
$318
$11
$141
$2
$472
January 1 
2018 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized
Gains/(Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Into/(Out of)
Level 3
December 31 
2018 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$2
$2
Mortgage backed and asset
backed
310
($3)
$3
$2
312
Real assets
3
1
4
Total
$315
($3)
$3
$3
$318
The changes in unrealized gains/(losses) for Level 3 mortgage backed and asset backed fixed income securities still held at December 31, 2019
and 2018 were a gain of $10 and a loss of $4. The changes in unrealized losses for Level 3 non-U.S. common and preferred stock equity securities
still held at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were $1 and $0.
OPB Plan Assets The majority of OPB plan assets are invested in a balanced index fund which is comprised of approximately 60% equities and
40% debt securities. The index fund is valued using a market approach based on the quoted market price of an identical instrument (Level 1). The
expected rate of return on these assets does not have a material effect on the net periodic benefit cost.
100

Table of Contents
Cash Flows
Contributions Required pension contributions under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), as well as rules governing funding of
our non-US pension plans, are not expected to be significant in 2020. We do not expect to make discretionary contributions to our pension plans in
2020.
Estimated Future Benefit Payments The table below reflects the total pension benefits expected to be paid from the plans or from our assets,
including both our share of the benefit cost and the participants’ share of the cost, which is funded by participant contributions. OPB payments
reflect our portion only.
Year(s)
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025-2029
Pensions
$4,838
$4,808
$4,744
$4,650
$4,608
$21,757
Other postretirement benefits:
Gross benefits paid
479
470
462
450
435
1,867
Subsidies
(18)
(18)
(18)
(18)
(18)
(93)
Net other postretirement benefits
$461
$452
$444
$432
$417
$1,774
Termination Provisions
Certain of the pension plans provide that, in the event there is a change in control of the Company which is not approved by the Board of Directors
and the plans are terminated within five years thereafter, the assets in the plan first will be used to provide the level of retirement benefits required
by ERISA, and then any surplus will be used to fund a trust to continue present and future payments under the postretirement medical and life
insurance benefits in our group insurance benefit programs.
Should we terminate certain pension plans under conditions in which the plan’s assets exceed that plan’s obligations, the U.S. government will be
entitled to a fair allocation of any of the plan’s assets based on plan contributions that were reimbursed under U.S. government contracts.
Defined Contribution Plans
We provide certain defined contribution plans to all eligible employees. The principal plans are the Company-sponsored 401(k) plans. The expense
for these defined contribution plans was $1,533, $1,480 and $1,522 in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Note 18 – Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
Share-Based Compensation
Our 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated, permits awards of incentive and non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights,
restricted stock or units, performance shares, performance restricted stock or units, performance units and other stock and cash-based awards to
our employees, officers, directors, consultants, and independent contractors. The aggregate number of shares of our stock authorized for issuance
under the plan is 87,000,000.
Shares issued as a result of stock option exercises or conversion of stock unit awards will be funded out of treasury shares, except to the extent
there are insufficient treasury shares, in which case new shares will be issued. We believe we currently have adequate treasury shares to satisfy
these issuances during 2020.
101

Table of Contents
Share-based plans expense is primarily included in General and administrative expense since it is incentive compensation issued primarily to our
executives. The share-based plans expense and related income tax benefit were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Restricted stock units and other awards
$217
$213
$212
Income tax benefit
$47
$46
$46
Stock Options
We discontinued granting options in 2014, replacing them with performance-based restricted stock units. Options granted through January 2014 had
an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our stock on the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant. The stock options
vested over a period of three years and were fully vested as of December 31, 2017.
Stock option activity for the year ended December 31, 2019 is as follows:
Shares
Weighted Average
Exercise Price Per Share
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
(Years)
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
Number of shares under option:
Outstanding at beginning of year
3,252,083
$72.47
Exercised
(870,821)
66.16
Expired
(5,679)
69.23
Outstanding at end of year
2,375,583
$74.79
2.44
$596
Exercisable at end of year
2,375,583
$74.79
2.44
$596
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 was $279, $320 and $491, with a related
tax benefit of $61, $70 and $175, respectively. No options vested during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
Restricted Stock Units
In February 2019, 2018 and 2017, we granted to our executives 233,582, 260,730 and 523,835 restricted stock units (RSUs) as part of our long-
term incentive program with grant date fair values of $428.22, $361.13 and $178.72 per unit, respectively. The RSUs granted under this program will
vest and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. If an executive terminates employment because
of retirement, involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) will receive a proration of stock units based on active employment
during the three-year service period. In all other cases, the RSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate. In addition to RSUs
awarded under our long-term incentive program, we grant RSUs to certain executives and employees to encourage retention or to reward various
achievements. These RSUs are labeled other RSUs in the table below. The fair values of all RSUs are estimated using the average of the high and
low stock prices on the date of grant.
102

Table of Contents
RSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2019 was as follows:
Long-Term Incentive
Program
Other
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
1,322,251
984,235
Granted
259,791
247,673
Dividends
22,571
20,576
Forfeited
(73,591)
(121,344)
Distributed
(625,997)
(222,819)
Outstanding at end of year
905,025
908,321
Unrecognized compensation cost
$102
$132
Weighted average remaining contractual life (years)
1.8
2.6
The number of vested but undistributed RSUs at December 31, 2019 was not significant.
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (PBRSUs) are stock units that pay out based on the Company’s total shareholder return as compared to
a group of peer companies over a three-year period. The award payout can range from 0% to 200% of the initial PBRSU grant. PBRSUs granted in
February 2017 and 2016 will not exceed 400% of the initial value (excluding dividend equivalent credits). The PBRSUs granted under this program
will  vest  at  the  payout  amount  and  settle  in common  stock  (on  a  one-for-one  basis)  on  the  third  anniversary  of  the  grant  date.  If  an  executive
terminates employment because of retirement, involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) remains eligible under the award
and, if the award is earned, will receive a proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period. In all other
cases, the PBRSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate.
In February 2019, 2018 and 2017, we granted to our executives 214,651, 241,284 and 492,273 PBRSUs as part of our long-term incentive program.
Compensation expense for the award is recognized over the three-year performance period based upon the grant date fair value. The grant date fair
values were estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation model with the assumptions presented below. The model includes no expected dividend yield
as the units earn dividend equivalents.
Grant Year
Grant Date
Performance Period
Expected Volatility
Risk Free Interest
Rate
Grant Date Fair Value
2019
2/25/2019
3 years
23.88%
2.46%
$466.04
2018
2/26/2018
3 years
22.11%
2.36%
390.27
2017
2/27/2017
3 years
21.37%
1.46%
190.17
103

Table of Contents
PBRSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2019 was as follows:
Long-Term Incentive Program
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
1,268,667
Granted
214,651
Performance based adjustment (1)
115,613
Dividends
65,042
Forfeited
(60,755)
Distributed
(777,092)
Outstanding at end of year
826,126
Unrecognized compensation cost
$91
Weighted average remaining contractual life (years)
1.8
(1) 
Represents net incremental number of units issued at vesting based on TSR for units granted in 2016
Other Compensation Arrangements
Performance Awards
Performance Awards are cash units that pay out based on the achievement of long-term financial goals at the end of a three-year period. Each unit
has an initial value of $100 dollars. The amount payable at the end of the three-year performance period may be anywhere from $0 to $200 dollars
per unit, depending on the Company’s performance against plan for a three-year period. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay
these awards in cash, stock, or a combination of both after the three-year performance period. Compensation expense, based on the estimated
performance payout, is recognized ratably over the performance period.
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, we granted Performance Awards to our executives as part of our long-term incentive program with the payout based
on the achievement of financial goals for each three-year period following the grant date. The minimum payout amount is $0 and the maximum
amount we could be required to pay out for the 2019, 2018 and 2017 Performance Awards is $392, $355 and $325, respectively.
Deferred Compensation
The Company has deferred compensation plans which permit employees to defer a portion of their salary, bonus, certain other incentive awards,
and retirement contributions. Participants can diversify these amounts among 22 investment funds including a Boeing stock unit account.
Total expense related to deferred compensation was $174, $19 and $240 in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. As of December 31, 2019 and
2018, the deferred compensation liability which is being marked to market was $1,779 and $1,572.
104

Table of Contents
Note 19 – Shareholders’ Equity
On December 17, 2018, the Board approved a repurchase plan for up to $20,000 of common stock. Share repurchases under this plan are currently
suspended. The program will expire when we have used all authorized funds or is otherwise terminated.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, there were 1,200,000,000 shares of common stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized. No
preferred stock has been issued.
Changes in Share Balances
The following table shows changes in each class of shares:
Common
Stock
Treasury
Stock
Balance at January 1, 2017
1,012,261,159
395,109,568
Issued
(20,746,426)
Acquired
46,859,184
Balance at December 31, 2017
1,012,261,159
421,222,326
Issued
(3,409,330)
Acquired
26,806,974
Balance at December 31, 2018
1,012,261,159
444,619,970
Issued
(2,797,002)
Acquired
7,529,437
Balance at December 31, 2019
1,012,261,159
449,352,405
105

Table of Contents
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
Changes in Accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCI) by component for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 were as follows:
Currency
Translation
Adjustments
Unrealized
Gains and
Losses on
Certain
Investments
Unrealized
Gains and
Losses on
Derivative
Instruments
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans &
Other Postretirement
Benefits
Total (1)
Balance at January 1, 2017
($143)
($2)
($127)
($13,351)
($13,623)
Other comprehensive (loss)/income before reclassifications
128
1
119
(478)
(230)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
52
425
(2) 
477
Net current period Other comprehensive (loss)/income
128
1
171
(53)
247
Impact of ASU 2018-02
(1)
10
(3,006)
(2,997)
Balance at December 31, 2017
($15)
($2)
$54
($16,410)
($16,373)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications
(86)
2
(146)
747
517
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
30
743
(2) 
773
Net current period Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(86)
2
(116)
1,490
1,290
Balance at December 31, 2018
($101)
$—
($62)
($14,920)
($15,083)
Other comprehensive (loss)/income before reclassifications
(27)
1
(48)
(1,397)
(1,471)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
26
375
(2) 
401
Net current period Other comprehensive (loss)/income
(27)
1
(22)
(1,022)
(1,070)
Balance at December 31, 2019
($128)
$1
($84)
($15,942)
($16,153)
(1) 
Net of tax.
(2) 
Primarily relates to amortization of actuarial losses for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017 totaling $464, $878, and $542 (net
of tax of ($133), ($242), and ($272)), respectively. These are included in the net periodic pension cost. See Note 17.
Note 20 – Derivative Financial Instruments
Disclosures reflect the adoption of ASU 2017-12, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), in the first quarter of 2019. Prior period amounts have not
been restated.
Cash Flow Hedges
Our cash flow hedges include foreign currency forward contracts, commodity swaps and commodity purchase contracts. We use foreign currency
forward  contracts  to  manage  currency  risk  associated  with  certain  transactions,  specifically  forecasted  sales  and  purchases  made  in  foreign
currencies.  Our  foreign  currency  contracts  hedge  forecasted  transactions  through 2025.  We  use  commodity  derivatives,  such  as  fixed-price
purchase commitments and swaps to hedge against potentially unfavorable price changes for items used in production. Our commodity contracts
hedge forecasted transactions through 2023.
Fair Value Hedges
Interest rate swaps under which we agree to pay variable rates of interest are designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate debt. The net change in
fair value of the derivatives and the hedged items is reported in Boeing Capital interest expense. As of December 31, 2019, there are no fair value
hedges reported on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
106

Table of Contents
Derivative Instruments Not Receiving Hedge Accounting Treatment
We  have  entered  into  agreements  to  purchase  and  sell  aluminum  to  address  long-term  strategic  sourcing  objectives  and  non-U.S.  business
requirements. These agreements are derivative instruments for accounting purposes. The quantities of aluminum in these agreements offset and
are priced at prevailing market prices. We also hold certain foreign currency forward contracts which do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
Notional Amounts and Fair Values
The notional amounts and fair values of derivative instruments in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31 were as
follows:
Notional
  amounts(1)
Other assets
Accrued
liabilities
2019
2018
2019
2018
2019
2018
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts
$2,590
$3,407
$29
$32
($60)
($132)
Interest rate contracts
125
Commodity contracts
645
57
4
9
(72)
(2)
Derivatives not receiving hedge accounting treatment:
Foreign exchange contracts
285
414
1
11
(6)
(2)
Commodity contracts
1,644
478
Total derivatives
$5,164
$4,481
34
52
(138)
(136)
Netting arrangements
(20)
(24)
20
24
Net recorded balance
$14
$28
($118)
($112)
(1) 
Notional amounts represent the gross contract/notional amount of the derivatives outstanding.
Gains/(losses) associated with our hedging transactions and forward points recognized in Other comprehensive income are presented in the
following table: 
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
Recognized in Other comprehensive income, net of taxes:
Foreign exchange contracts
$15
($156)
Commodity contracts
(63)
10
107

Table of Contents
Gains/(losses) associated with our hedging transactions and forward points reclassified from AOCI to earnings are presented in the following table:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
Foreign exchange contracts
Revenues
Costs and expenses
($26)
($30)
General and administrative
(9)
(12)
Commodity contracts
Revenues
Costs and expenses
$1
$2
General and administrative expense
1
2
Gains/(losses)  related  to  undesignated  derivatives  on  foreign  exchange  cash  flow  hedging  transactions  recognized  in Other  income,  net were
insignificant  for  the years  ended  December  31,  2019  and  2018.  Forward  points  related  to  foreign  exchange  cash  flow  hedging  transactions
recognized in Other income, net was a gain of $1 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Based  on  our  portfolio  of  cash  flow  hedges,  we  expect  to  reclassify  losses  of $8 (pre-tax)  out  of  Accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  into
earnings during the next 12 months.
We have derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features. For foreign exchange contracts with original maturities of at least five
years,  our  derivative  counterparties  could  require  settlement  if  we  default  on  our  five-year  credit  facility.  For  certain  commodity  contracts,  our
counterparties could require collateral posted in an amount determined by our credit ratings. The fair value of foreign exchange and commodity
contracts that have credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position at December 31, 2019 was $19. At December 31, 2019,
there was no collateral posted related to our derivatives.
108

Table of Contents
Note 21 – Fair Value Measurements
The fair value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined
based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs, and
Level 3 includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs. The following table presents our assets and liabilities that are measured
at fair value on a recurring basis and are categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Assets
Money market funds
$2,562
$2,562
$1,737
$1,737
Available-for-sale debt investments:
Commercial paper
108
$108
78
$78
Corporate notes
242
242
420
420
U.S. government agencies
55
55
Other equity investments
33
33
12
12
Derivatives
14
14
28
$28
Total assets
$3,014
$2,650
$364
$2,275
$1,749
$526
Liabilities
Derivatives
($118)
($118)
($112)
($112)
Total liabilities
($118)
($118)
($112)
($112)
Money market funds, available-for-sale debt investments and equity securities are valued using a market approach based on the quoted market
prices or broker/dealer quotes of identical or comparable instruments.
Derivatives include foreign currency, commodity and interest rate contracts. Our foreign currency forward contracts are valued using an income
approach based on the present value of the forward rate less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. Commodity derivatives are valued
using an income approach based on the present value of the commodity index prices less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. The
fair value of our interest rate swaps is derived from a discounted cash flow analysis based on the terms of the contract and the interest rate curve.
Certain  assets  have  been  measured  at  fair  value  on  a  nonrecurring  basis  using  significant  unobservable  inputs  (Level  3).  The  following  table
presents the nonrecurring losses recognized for the years ended December 31 due to long-lived asset impairment, and the fair value and asset
classification of the related assets as of the impairment date:
2019
2018
Fair Value
Total Losses
Fair Value
Total Losses
Investments
$27
($109)
($50)
Customer financing assets
111
(20)
$101
(39)
Other assets and Acquired intangible assets
4
(310)
Property, plant and equipment
41
(4)
44
(4)
Total
$183
($443)
$145
($93)
109

Table of Contents
Investments,  Acquired  intangible  assets  and  Property,  plant  and  equipment  were  primarily  valued  using  an  income  approach  based  on  the
discounted cash flows associated with the underlying assets. The fair value of the impaired customer financing assets includes operating lease
equipment and investments in sales type-leases/finance leases, and is derived by calculating a median collateral value from a consistent group of
third party aircraft value publications. The values provided by the third party aircraft publications are derived from their knowledge of market trades
and other market factors. Management reviews the publications quarterly to assess the continued appropriateness and consistency with market
trends. Under certain circumstances, we adjust values based on the attributes and condition of the specific aircraft or equipment, usually when the
features or use of the aircraft vary significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by third party publications, or on the expected net
sales price for the aircraft.
For Level 3 assets that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the year ended December 31, 2019, the following table presents
the fair value of those assets as of the measurement date, valuation techniques and related unobservable inputs of those assets.
Fair
Value
Valuation
Technique(s)
Unobservable Input
Range
Median or Average
Customer financing assets
$111
Market approach
Aircraft value publications
$98 - $158(1)
Median $123
Aircraft condition
adjustments
($13) - $1(2)
Net ($12)
(1) 
The range represents the sum of the highest and lowest values for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, according to the third party
aircraft valuation publications that we use in our valuation process.
(2) 
The negative amount represents the sum, for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, of all downward adjustments based on consideration
of individual aircraft attributes and condition. The positive amount represents the sum of all such upward adjustments.
Fair Value Disclosures
The  fair  values  and  related  carrying  values  of  financial  instruments  that  are  not  required  to  be  remeasured  at  fair  value  on  the  Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position at December 31 were as follows:
December 31, 2019
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair
Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Notes receivable, net
$443
$444
$444
Liabilities
Debt, excluding finance lease obligations and
commercial paper
(20,964)
(23,119)
(23,081)
($38)
December 31, 2018
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Notes receivable, net
$730
$735
$735
Liabilities
Debt, excluding finance lease obligations and
commercial paper
(11,796)
(12,746)
(12,682)
($64)
110

Table of Contents
The fair values of notes receivable are estimated with discounted cash flow analysis using interest rates currently offered on loans with similar terms
to borrowers of similar credit quality. The fair value of our debt that is traded in the secondary market is classified as Level 2 and is based on current
market yields. For our debt that is not traded in the secondary market, the fair value is classified as Level 2 and is based on our indicative borrowing
cost derived from dealer quotes or discounted cash flows. The fair values of our debt classified as Level 3 are based on discounted cash flow
models using the implied yield from similar securities. With regard to other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, it is not practicable to
estimate the fair value of our indemnifications and financing commitments because the amount and timing of those arrangements are uncertain.
Items not included in the above disclosures include cash, restricted cash, time deposits and other deposits, commercial paper, money market funds,
Accounts receivable, Unbilled receivables, Other current assets, Accounts payable and long-term payables. The carrying values of those items, as
reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position, approximate their fair value at December 31, 2019 and 2018. The fair value of assets
and liabilities whose carrying value approximates fair value is determined using Level 2 inputs, with the exception of cash (Level 1).
Note 22 – Legal Proceedings
Various legal proceedings, claims and investigations related to products, contracts, employment and other matters are pending against us.
In addition, we are subject to various U.S. government inquiries and investigations from which civil, criminal or administrative proceedings could
result or have resulted in the past. Such proceedings involve or could involve claims by the government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble
damages, restitution and/or forfeitures. Under government regulations, a company, or one or more of its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also
be suspended or debarred from government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of investigations. We believe, based upon
current information, that the outcome of any such legal proceeding, claim, or government dispute and investigation will not have a material effect on
our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Where it is reasonably possible that we will incur losses in excess of recorded amounts in
connection with any of the matters set forth below, we will disclose either the amount or range of reasonably possible losses in excess of such
amounts or, where no such amount or range can be reasonably estimated, the reasons why no such estimate can be made.
Multiple legal actions have been filed against us as a result of the October 29, 2018 accident of Lion Air Flight 610 and the March 10, 2019 accident
of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. Further, we are subject to ongoing governmental and regulatory investigations and inquiries relating to the accidents
and the 737 MAX, including investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission. We cannot reasonably
estimate a range of loss, if any, not covered by available insurance that may result given the ongoing status of these lawsuits, investigations, and
inquiries.
Note 23 – Segment and Revenue Information
Effective at the beginning of 2019, all revenues and costs associated with military derivative aircraft production are reported in the BDS segment.
Revenues  and  costs  associated  with  military  derivative  aircraft  production  were  previously  reported  in  the  BCA  and  BDS  segments.  Business
segment data for 2018 and 2017 reflects the realignment for military derivative aircraft, as well as the realignment of certain programs from BDS to
BGS.
Our primary profitability measurements to review a segment’s operating results are Earnings from operations and operating margins. We operate in
four reportable segments: BCA, BDS, BGS, and BCC. All other activities fall within Unallocated items, eliminations and other. See page 56 for the
Summary of Business Segment Data, which is an integral part of this note.
111

Table of Contents
BCA develops,  produces  and  markets  commercial  jet  aircraft  principally  to  the  commercial  airline  industry  worldwide.  Revenue  on  commercial
aircraft contracts is recognized at the point in time when an aircraft is completed and accepted by the customer.
BDS engages in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: manned and unmanned
military  aircraft  and  weapons  systems,  surveillance  and  engagement,  strategic  defense  and  intelligence  systems,  satellite  systems  and  space
exploration. BDS revenue is generally recognized over the contract term (over time) as costs are incurred.
BGS provides  parts,  maintenance,  modifications,  logistics  support,  training,  data  analytics  and  information-based  services  to  commercial  and
government customers worldwide. BGS segment revenue and costs include certain services provided to other segments. Revenue on commercial
spare parts contracts is recognized at the point in time when a spare part is delivered to the customer. Revenue on other contracts is generally
recognized over the contract term (over time) as costs are incurred.
BCC facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
While our principal operations are in the United States, Canada and Australia, some key suppliers and subcontractors are located in Europe and
Japan. Revenues, including foreign military sales, are reported by customer location and consist of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Asia, other than China
$10,662
$12,141
$9,195
Europe
10,366
12,976
11,240
Middle East
9,272
9,745
11,433
China
5,684
13,764
11,932
Canada
2,019
2,583
2,212
Oceania
2,006
2,298
1,931
Africa
1,113
1,486
815
Latin America, Caribbean and other
1,015
1,458
1,541
Total non-U.S. revenues
42,137
56,451
50,299
United States
42,681
44,676
43,706
Estimated potential concessions and other considerations to 737 MAX customers, net(1)
(8,259)
Total revenues
$76,559
$101,127
$94,005
(1) 
Net of insurance recoveries
Revenues  from  the  U.S.  government  (including  foreign  military  sales  through  the  U.S.  government),  primarily  recorded  at  BDS  and  BGS,
represented 39%, 31%, and 31% of consolidated revenues for 2019, 2018, and 2017, respectively. Approximately 4% of operating assets were
located outside the United States as of December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The following tables present BCA, BDS and BGS revenues from contracts with customers disaggregated in a number of ways, such as geographic
location, contract type and the method of revenue recognition. We believe these best depict how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of our
revenues and cash flows are affected by economic factors.
112

Table of Contents
BCA revenues by customer location consist of the following:
Years ended December 31, 
2019
2018
2017
Revenue from contracts with customers:
Asia, other than China
$7,395
$8,274
$6,482
Europe
5,829
9,719
8,478
Middle East
5,761
5,876
8,927
China
5,051
13,068
10,982
Other
3,450
5,185
4,365
Total non-U.S. revenues
27,486
42,122
39,234
United States
12,676
15,347
15,182
Estimated potential concessions and other considerations to 737 MAX customers,
net(1)
(8,259)
Total revenues from contracts with customers
31,903
57,469
54,416
Intersegment revenues, eliminated on consolidation
352
30
196
Total segment revenues
$32,255
$57,499
$54,612
Revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts
100%
100%
100%
Revenue recognized at a point in time
100%
100%
100%
(1) 
Net of insurance recoveries
BDS revenues on contracts with customers, based on the customer's location, consist of the following:
Years ended December 31, 
2019
2018
2017
Revenue from contracts with customers:
U.S. customers
$19,573
$19,576
$18,984
Non-U.S. customers(1)
6,654
6,816
4,954
Total segment revenue from contracts with customers
$26,227
$26,392
$23,938
Revenue recognized over time
98%
98%
97%
Revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts
70%
70%
69%
Revenue from the U.S. government(1)
89%
88%
89%
(1) 
Includes revenues earned from foreign military sales through the U.S. government.
113

Table of Contents
BGS revenues consist of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Revenue from contracts with customers:
Commercial
$10,167
$9,227
$7,622
Government
8,107
7,658
6,940
Total revenues from contracts with customers
18,274
16,885
14,562
Intersegment revenues eliminated on consolidation
194
171
49
Total segment revenues
$18,468
$17,056
$14,611
Revenue recognized at a point in time
55%
54%
50%
Revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts
90%
90%
89%
Revenue from the U.S. government(1)
34%
36%
39%
(1) 
Includes revenues earned from foreign military sales through the U.S. government.
Earnings in Equity Method Investments
We recorded Earnings from operations associated with our equity method investments of $90, $167 and $233, primarily in our BDS segment, for the
years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Backlog
Our total backlog represents the estimated transaction prices on performance obligations to our customers for which work remains to be performed.
Backlog is converted into revenue in future periods as work is performed, primarily based on the cost incurred or at delivery and acceptance of
products, depending on the applicable accounting method.
Our backlog at December 31, 2019 was $463,403. We expect approximately 17% to be converted to revenue through 2020 and approximately 63%
through 2023, with the remainder thereafter.
114

Table of Contents
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and other
Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  include  common  internal  services  that  support  Boeing’s  global  business  operations,  intercompany
guarantees provided to BCC and eliminations of certain sales between segments. Such sales include airplanes accounted for as operating leases
and considered transferred  to the BCC segment.  We generally allocate costs to business segments based on the U.S.  federal cost accounting
standards. Components of Unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the following table.
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Share-based plans
($65)
($76)
($77)
Deferred compensation
(174)
(19)
(240)
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
(89)
(92)
(96)
Research and development expense, net
(384)
(132)
42
Customer financing impairment
(250)
Litigation
(109)
(148)
Eliminations and other unallocated items
(995)
(975)
(756)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
($2,066)
($1,442)
($1,127)
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
$1,071
$1,005
$1,127
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
344
322
311
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
$1,415
$1,327
$1,438
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Expense
Pension costs, comprising GAAP service and prior service costs, are allocated to BCA and the commercial operations at BGS. Pension costs are
allocated to BDS and BGS businesses supporting government customers using U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), which employ
different actuarial assumptions and accounting conventions than GAAP. These costs are allocable to government contracts. Other postretirement
benefit  costs  are allocated  to business  segments  based on CAS,  which is generally  based on  benefits  paid.  FAS/CAS  service  cost  adjustment
represents the difference between the FAS pension and postretirement service costs calculated under GAAP and costs allocated to the business
segments.  Non-operating  pension and postretirement  expenses represent  the components  of net  periodic benefit  costs  other  than service  cost.
These expenses are included in Other income, net.
115

Table of Contents
Effective in 2019, certain centrally managed assets that were previously recorded in the BCA, BDS and BGS segments have been realigned to
Unallocated items, eliminations and other. Business segment data in the following tables for 2019, 2018 and 2017 reflects the realignment of these
assets.
Assets
Segment assets are summarized in the table below.
December 31,
2019
2018
Commercial Airplanes
$73,995
$61,116
Defense, Space & Security
15,977
18,023
Global Services
18,605
17,856
Boeing Capital
2,269
2,809
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
22,779
17,555
Total
$133,625
$117,359
Assets included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other primarily consist of Cash and cash equivalents, Short-term  and other investments,
deferred  tax  assets,  capitalized  interest,  and  assets  managed  centrally  on  behalf  of  the  four  principle  business  segments  and  intercompany
eliminations.
Capital Expenditures
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Commercial Airplanes
$433
$604
$636
Defense, Space & Security
202
208
210
Global Services
218
231
180
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
981
679
713
Total
$1,834
$1,722
$1,739
Capital  expenditures  for  Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  relate  primarily  to  assets  managed  centrally  on  behalf  of  the  four  principal
business segments.
Depreciation and Amortization
Years ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Commercial Airplanes
$580
$565
$521
Defense, Space & Security 
274
290
252
Global Services
424
348
322
Boeing Capital Corporation
64
58
70
Centrally Managed Assets (1)
929
853
882
Total
$2,271
$2,114
$2,047
(1) Amounts shown in the table represent depreciation and amortization expense recorded by the individual business segments. Depreciation and amortization for centrally
managed assets are included in segment operating earnings based on usage and occupancy. In 2019, $717 was included in the primary business segments, of which $407,
$257, and $53 was included in BCA, BDS and BGS, respectively. In 2018, $692 was included in the primary business segments, of which $417, $213, and $62 was included
in BCA, BDS and BGS, respectively. In 2017, $730 was included in the primary business segments, of which $427, $243, and $60 was included in BCA, BDS and BGS,
respectively.
116

Table of Contents
Note 24 – Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
2019
2018
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
Total revenues
$17,911
$19,980
$15,751
$22,917
$28,341
$25,146
$24,258
$23,382
Total costs and expenses
(18,708)
(16,930)
(17,810)
(18,645)
(22,090)
(21,040)
(19,536)
(18,824)
(Loss)/earnings from operations
(2,204)
1,259
(3,380)
2,350
4,175
2,227
2,710
2,875
Net (loss)/earnings
(1,010)
1,167
(2,942)
2,149
3,424
2,363
2,196
2,477
Basic (loss)/earnings per share
(1.79)
2.07
(5.21)
3.79
6.00
4.11
3.77
4.19
Diluted (loss)/earnings per share
(1.79)
2.05
(5.21)
3.75
5.93
4.07
3.73
4.15
Gross profit is calculated as Total revenues minus Total costs and expenses. Total costs and expenses includes Cost of products, Cost of services
and Boeing Capital interest expense.
During  the  first  quarter  of  2019,  we concluded  that  lease  incentives  granted  to  a  customer  that  experienced  liquidity  issues  were  impaired  and
recorded a charge of $250. During the first quarter of 2018, we recorded a reach-forward loss on KC-46A Tanker of $81.
During  the  second  quarter  of  2019,  we  recorded  a  reduction  to  revenue  of $5,610,  related  to  estimated  potential  concessions  and  other
considerations  to  customers  for  disruptions  and  associated  delivery  delays  related  to  the  737  MAX  grounding,  net  of  insurance  recoveries.
Additionally, we recorded a charge of $109 related to ongoing litigation associated with recoverable costs on U.S. government contracts. During the
second quarter of 2018, we recorded a charge of $148 related to the outcome of the Spirit litigation and a reach-forward loss on KC-46A Tanker of
$426.
During the third quarter of 2018, we recorded a tax benefit of $412 related to the settlement of the 2013-2014 federal tax audit. Additionally, we
recorded reach-forward losses on KC-46A Tanker of $179, on T-7A Red Hawk of $400, and on MQ-25 of $291.
During  the  fourth  quarter  of  2019,  we  recorded  an  additional  reduction  to  revenue  of $2,619 for  estimated  potential  concessions  and  other
considerations to customers and associated delivery delays related to the 737 MAX grounding. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded a
divestiture gain of $395 and a tax benefit of $371 related to the settlement of state tax audits spanning 15 tax years. Additionally, we recorded an
impairment of $293 as a result of our decision to retire the Aviall brand and trade name, and reach-forward losses on Commercial Crew of $410 and
on KC-46A Tanker of $108. During the fourth quarter of 2018, we recorded a reach-forward loss on KC-46A Tanker of $50.
We increased our quarterly dividend from $1.71 to $2.055 in December 2018.
117

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of The Boeing Company
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the "Company") as of
December 31, 2019 and 2018, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows, for each of the
three years in the period ended December 31, 2019, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the
financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2019, in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
Company's internal control over financial reporting as of
December  31,  2019,  based  on  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  -  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated January 31, 2020, expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company's internal
control over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements  are  the responsibility  of the  Company's  management.  Our  responsibility  is to  express  an opinion on the  Company's
financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with
respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included
performing  procedures  to  assess  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  financial  statements,  whether  due  to  error  or  fraud,  and  performing
procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well
as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current-period audit of the financial statements that were communicated
or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and
(2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our
opinion  on  the  financial  statements,  taken  as  a  whole,  and  we  are  not,  by  communicating  the  critical  audit  matters  below,  providing  separate
opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
118

Table of Contents
Cost Estimates for Fixed-Price Development Contracts - Refer to Notes 1 and 14 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
As  more  fully  described  in  Notes  1  and  14  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements,  the  Company  recognizes  revenue  over  time  for  long-term
contracts as goods are produced or services are rendered. The Company uses costs incurred as the method for determining progress, and revenue
is recognized based on costs incurred to date plus an estimate of margin at completion. The process of estimating margin at completion involves
estimating the costs to complete production of goods or rendering of services and comparing those costs to the estimated final revenue amount.
Fixed-price development contracts are inherently uncertain in that revenue is fixed while the estimates of costs required to complete these contracts
are subject to significant variability. Due to the technical performance requirements in many of these contracts, changes to cost estimates could
occur, resulting in lower margins or material reach-forward losses.
Given the complexity of certain of the Company’s fixed-price development contracts, including the KC-46A Tanker, Commercial Crew, United States
Air Force VC-25B Presidential Aircraft, MQ-25 Stingray, and T-7A Red Hawk contracts, the limited amount of historical data available in certain
instances and significant judgments necessary to estimate future costs at completion, auditing these estimates involved extensive audit effort and a
high degree of auditor judgment and required audit professionals with industry and quantitative analytics experience.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our auditing procedures related to the cost estimates for fixed-price development contracts included the following, among others:
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s methods and assumptions in developing its estimates.
•
We performed inquiries of the Company’s project managers and others directly involved with the contracts and observed the work site to
evaluate project status and project challenges which may affect total estimated costs to complete.
•
We tested the accuracy and completeness of the data used in developing the estimates. We developed independent expectations of likely
outcomes using, in part, the program’s data and compared our expectations to management’s estimates.
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls including those over the data used in developing the estimates, the mathematical extrapolation of
such data, and management’s judgment regarding the range of possible outcomes relating to the specific estimates.
•
We  performed  retrospective  reviews,  comparing  actual  performance  to  estimated  performance,  when  evaluating  the  thoroughness  and
precision of management’s estimation process.
Program Accounting Estimates for New Programs - Refer to Notes 1 and 7 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The introduction of new aircraft programs involves increased risk associated with meeting development, certification and production schedules. The
Company uses program accounting in order to compute cost of sales and margin for each commercial airplane sold. The use of program accounting
requires  estimating  and  demonstrating  customer  demand  for  the  number  of  units  included  in  the  program  (program  accounting  quantity)  and
estimating the sales and costs over the expected life of each program. In particular, estimating the initial program accounting quantity and revenue
for unsold units within the program accounting quantity involves measurement uncertainty resulting in a range of possible outcomes. Changes to
revenue or
119

Table of Contents
program  accounting  quantity  estimates  could  occur,  resulting  in  lower  margins  or  material  reach-forward  losses.  Auditing  the  estimated  market
demand and revenue for unsold units for the 777X program involved extensive audit effort and required professionals with industry and quantitative
analytics experience given the high degree of complexity and subjectivity related to management’s estimates.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our auditing procedures related to estimated market demand and revenue for unsold units for the 777X included the following, among others:
•
We inquired of the Company’s management, including individuals responsible for sales and pricing, to evaluate the status of current sales
campaigns, short and long-term market demand, and overall program status.
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s methods and assumptions used in developing its estimates related to
the initial program accounting quantity and revenue for unsold units.
•
We  evaluated  management’s  ability  to  estimate  program  revenue  by  comparison  to  historical  estimates  and  actual  results  on  similar
programs.
•
We  developed  independent  expectations  of  likely  outcomes  using,  in  part,  the  program’s  data  and  compared  our  expectations  to
management’s estimates.
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls including those over the data used in developing the estimates, the mathematical extrapolation of
such data, and management’s judgment regarding the range of possible outcomes relating to the specific estimates.
Liabilities related to the 737 MAX Grounding - Refer to Notes 14 and 22 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
On March 13, 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued an order to suspend operations of all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S.
aircraft operators following two fatal accidents of 737 MAX aircraft. Non-U.S. civil aviation authorities have issued directives to the same effect (the
“737  MAX  Grounding”).  In  addition,  multiple  legal  actions  have  been  filed  against  the  Company  following  the  fatal  accidents  and  various
governmental and regulatory investigations and inquiries continue relating to the accidents and the 737 MAX aircraft.
During 2019, the Company recorded a liability in connection with estimated payments, concessions and other in-kind consideration it intends to
provide to customers for disruptions related to the 737 MAX Grounding and associated delivery delays. This liability totaled $7.4 billion at December
31, 2019 and is reflected in the financial statements in Accrued liabilities. This represents the Company’s best estimate of future concessions and
other consideration to its customers, and is necessarily based on individual negotiations with customers and a series of assumptions, including the
timing and conditions of the 737 MAX’s return to service in various jurisdictions and the timing of future production rate increases. Because the
timing and conditions of the 737 MAX return to service in various jurisdictions will be determined by civil aviation authorities and is outside of the
Company’s control, the assumptions underlying the liability require a high degree of auditor judgment.
Significant judgment is involved in management’s ability to assess and reasonably estimate potential additional financial statement effects or a range
of loss, if any, resulting from the outcome of 737 MAX-related litigation and the results of the various governmental and regulatory investigations and
inquiries related to the 737 MAX.
120

Table of Contents
The subjectivity of the liability associated with providing consideration to customers resulting from the 737 MAX Grounding and the complexity of
assessing the outcome of the ongoing litigation and investigations related to the 737 MAX required a high degree of auditor judgment and increased
audit effort.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our auditing procedures associated with liabilities related to the 737 MAX grounding included the following, among others:
•
We inquired of management to understand developments with the 737 MAX Grounding, including the status of regulatory approval for return
to service in various jurisdictions and the status of consideration discussions with individual customers.
•
We obtained written representations from management concerning its intent to provide consideration to customers and the extent of that
consideration.
•
We  tested  the  effectiveness  of  controls  related  to  nonrecurring  items  and  loss  contingencies  associated  with  litigation,  claims  and
assessments.
•
We evaluated the significant assumptions used by management to estimate the liability for customer consideration, including the timing and
conditions of 737 MAX return to service, and, where possible, we corroborated the assumptions with management outside of the accounting
and finance organizations.
•
We reviewed the terms of customer contracts and correspondence with customers concerning potential consideration as a result of the 737
MAX Grounding.
•
We inquired of internal and external legal counsel to understand developments related to contractual obligations to customers, litigation and
other claims relating to the 737 MAX Grounding and progression in potential settlement discussions.
•
We read minutes of meetings of the Board of Directors and its committees for evidence of unrecorded loss contingencies.
•
We evaluated the Company’s disclosures for consistency with our knowledge of matters related to the 737 MAX Grounding.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
January 31, 2020
We have served as the Company's auditor since at least 1934; however, an earlier year could not be reliably determined.
121

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of The Boeing Company
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2019, based on
criteria  established  in Internal  Control  -  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission
(COSO). In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on
criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the  consolidated
financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019 of the Company, and our report dated January 31, 2020 expressed an unqualified opinion
on those financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of
internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is
to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB
and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of
the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding
of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit
provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A  company’s  internal  control  over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
the  transactions  and  dispositions  of  the  assets  of  the  company;  (2)  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  transactions  are  recorded  as  necessary  to  permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being
made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
January 31, 2020
122

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
(a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures.
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2019 and have
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we
file or submit under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms and is accumulated and communicated to our management, including the Chief Executive
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
(b) Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  as  such  term  is  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f). Our management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based
on  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission.  Based  on  this  evaluation  under  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework,  our  management  concluded  that  our
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2019.
Our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, has been audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in Item 8 of this report and is incorporated by reference herein.
(c) Changes in Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting.
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2019 that have materially affected or
are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
123

Table of Contents
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Our executive officers and their ages as of January 31, 2020, are as follows:
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Bertrand-Marc Allen
46
Senior Vice President and President, Embraer Partnership and Group Operations since April 2019.
Mr.  Allen  previously  served  as  Senior  Vice  President  and  President,  Boeing  International  from
February 2015 to April 2019; President of Boeing Capital Corporation from March 2014 to February
2015;  Corporate  Vice  President,  Boeing  International  and  Chairman  and  President  of  Boeing
(China) Co., Ltd. from March 2011 to March 2014; and Vice President, Global Law Affairs from May
2007 to March 2011.
Michael A. Arthur
69
Senior Vice President and President, Boeing International since April 2019. Mr. Arthur previously
served as President of Boeing Europe from March 2016 to April 2019 and as Managing Director of
Boeing United Kingdom and Ireland from September 2014 to April 2019.
David L. Calhoun
62
President and Chief Executive Officer since January 2020 and a member of the Board of Directors
since June 2009. Previously, Mr. Calhoun served as Senior Managing Director & Head of Private
Equity Portfolio Operations at The Blackstone Group from January 2014 to January 2020. Prior to
that, Mr. Calhoun served as Chairman of the Board of Nielsen Holdings plc from January 2014 to
January 2016, as Chief Executive Officer of Nielsen Holdings plc from May 2010 to January 2014,
and as Chairman of the Executive Board and Chief Executive Officer of The Nielsen Company B.V.
from August 2006 to January 2014. Prior to joining Nielsen, he served as Vice Chairman of General
Electric Company and President and Chief Executive Officer of GE Infrastructure. During his 26-
year tenure at GE, he ran multiple business units including GE Transportation, GE Aircraft Engines,
GE Employers Reinsurance Corporation, GE Lighting and GE Transportation Systems. Mr. Calhoun
also serves on the board of Caterpillar Inc.
Heidi B. Capozzi
50
Senior Vice President, Human Resources since March 2016. Ms. Capozzi previously served as Vice
President  of  Leadership  Development,  Talent  Management  and  Organization  Effectiveness  from
April  2013  to  March  2016;  Director  of  Human  Resources  for  the  Airplane  Programs  division  of
Commercial  Airplanes  from  April  2011  to  April  2013;  and  Director  of  Human  Resources  for  the
Surveillance and Engagement division of Boeing Military Aircraft from May 2009 to April 2011.
Leanne G. Caret
53
Executive Vice President, President and Chief Executive Officer, Boeing Defense, Space & Security
since March 2016. Ms. Caret joined Boeing in 1988, and her previous positions include President of
Global  Services  &  Support  from  February  2015  to  March  2016;  Chief  Financial  Officer  and  Vice
President,  Finance,  for  BDS  from  March  2014  to  February  2015;  Vice  President  and  General
Manager,  Vertical  Lift  from  November  2012  to  February  2014;  and  Vice  President  and  Program
Manager, Chinook from November 2009 to October 2012.
124

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Theodore Colbert III
46
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Global  Services  since
October 2019. Mr. Colbert previously served as Chief Information Officer and Senior Vice President,
Information Technology & Data Analytics from April 2016 to October 2019; Chief Information Officer
and Vice President of Information Technology from November 2013 to April 2016; Vice President of
Information Technology Infrastructure from December 2011 to November 2013; and Vice President
of IT Business Systems from September 2010 to December 2011.
Stanley A. Deal
55
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Commercial  Airplanes
since October 2019. Mr. Deal joined Boeing in 1986, and his previous positions include Executive
Vice President, President and Chief Executive Officer, Boeing Global Services from November 2016
to  October  2019;  Senior  Vice  President  of  Commercial  Aviation  Services  from  March  2014  to
November  2016;  Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  Supply  Chain  Management  and
Operations  for  Commercial  Airplanes  from  September  2011  to  February  2014;  Vice  President  of
Supplier Management from February 2010 to August 2011; and Vice President of Asia Pacific Sales
from December 2006 to January 2010.
Brett C. Gerry
48
Senior  Vice  President  and  General  Counsel  since  May  2019.  Mr.  Gerry  previously  served  as
President of Boeing Japan from February 2016 to May 2019; Vice President and General Counsel,
Boeing Commercial Airplanes from March 2009 to March 2016; and Chief Counsel, Network and
Space Systems from September 2008 to March 2009.
Niel L. Golightly
61
Senior Vice President, Communications since January 2020. Prior to joining Boeing, Mr. Golightly
served  as Chief  Communications  Officer  and a member  of  the  Global  Executive  Council for  Fiat
Chrysler Automobiles from December 2018 until December 2019. Prior to that, he held a number of
positions at Royal Dutch Shell plc, including Vice President, Energy Transition Strategy, Shell Oil
Company from December 2016 to December 2018, Vice President, External Relations, Americas
from November 2011 to December 2016 and Vice President, Global Downstream Communications
and  Sustainability  from  July  2006  to  November  2011.  From  1994  to  2006,  Mr.  Golightly  held  a
number of positions at Ford Motor Company, including Director of Sustainable Business Strategies.
He began his career in the U.S. Navy as a fighter pilot and later as a Pentagon speechwriter for the
Secretary of the Navy and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Gregory L. Hyslop
61
Chief Engineer and Senior Vice President, Engineering, Test and Technology since August 2019.
Mr. Hyslop’s previous positions include Chief Technology Officer and Senior Vice President, Boeing
Engineering,  Test  &  Technology  from  July  2016  to  August  2019;  Senior  Vice  President  Boeing
Engineering,  Test  &  Technology,  from  March  2016  to  August  2016;  Vice  President  and  General
Manager of Boeing Research & Technology from February 2013 to March 2016 and Vice President
and General Manager of Boeing Strategic Missile & Defense Systems from March 2009 to February
2013.
125

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Timothy J. Keating
58
Executive Vice President, Government Operations since February 2018. Mr. Keating joined Boeing
in June 2008 as Senior Vice President, Government Operations. From October 2002 to May 2008
he served as Senior Vice President, Global Government Relations at Honeywell International Inc.
Prior  thereto,  Mr.  Keating  was  Chairman  of  the  Board  and  Managing  Partner  of  Timmons  and
Company (a Washington, D.C. lobbying firm).
Jenette E. Ramos
54
Senior  Vice  President,  Manufacturing,  Supply  Chain  &  Operations  since  April  2018.  Ms.  Ramos
joined Boeing in 1988, and her previous positions include Senior Vice President, Supply Chain and
Operations from June 2017 to April 2018; Vice President and General Manager, BCA Fabrication
from April 2014 to May 2017; Vice President, Supply Chain Management from January 2012 to April
2014; Vice President, Operations Supply Chain Rate, Supplier Management Capability for Boeing
Commercial Airplanes from June 2011 to January 2012; director of Business Operations for Boeing
Fabrication from June 2009 to May 2011; and General Manager of Boeing Portland from February
2005 to May 2009.
Diana L. Sands
54
Senior  Vice  President,  Office  of  Internal  Governance  and  Administration  since  March  2016.  Ms.
Sands previously served as Senior Vice President, Office of Internal Governance from April 2014 to
March 2016; Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller from February 2012 to April 2014
and  Vice  President  of  Investor  Relations,  Financial  Planning  &  Analysis  from  February  2010  to
February  2012.  Prior  to  that,  she  held  positions  in  Investor  Relations,  Financial  Planning  and  in
Corporate Treasury.
Gregory D. Smith
53
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy since
February  2015.  Mr.  Smith  also  served  as  Interim  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  from
December 2019 to January 2020. He previously served as Executive Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer from February 2012 to February 2015; Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller
from February 2010 to February 2012; and Vice President of Financial Planning & Analysis from
June 2008 to February 2010. From August 2004 until June 2008, he served as Vice President of
Global  Investor  Relations  at  Raytheon  Company.  Prior  to  that,  he  held  a  number  of  positions  at
Boeing including CFO, Shared Services Group; Controller, Shared Services Group; Senior Director,
Internal Audit; and leadership roles in supply chain, factory operations and program management.
Mr. Smith serves on the board of Intel Corporation.
Information relating to our directors and nominees will be included under the caption “Election of Directors” in our proxy statement involving the
election of directors, which will be filed with the SEC no later than 120 days after December 31, 2019 and is incorporated by reference herein.
Information required by Items 405, 407(d)(4) and 407(d)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Stock Ownership Information” and
“Board Committees” in the 2020 Proxy Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Codes of Ethics. We have adopted (1) The Boeing Company Code of Ethical Business Conduct for the Board of Directors; (2) The Boeing Company
Code of Conduct for Finance Employees which is applicable to our Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Controller and all
finance employees; and (3) The Boeing Code of Conduct that applies to all employees, including our CEO (collectively, the
126

Table of Contents
Codes  of  Conduct).  The  Codes  of  Conduct  are  posted  on  our  website,  www.boeing.com/company/general-info/corporate-governance.page,  and
printed copies may be obtained, without charge, by contacting the Office of Internal Governance, The Boeing Company, 100 N. Riverside Plaza,
Chicago, IL 60606. We intend to disclose promptly on our website any amendments to, or waivers of, the Codes of Conduct covering our CEO, CFO
and/or Controller.
No family relationships exist among any of the executive officers, directors or director nominees.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  Item  402  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  captions  “Compensation  Discussion  and  Analysis,”
“Compensation  of  Executive  Officers,”  and  “Compensation  of  Directors”  in  the 2020 Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is  incorporated  by
reference herein. The information required by Item 407(e)(4) and 407(e)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Compensation
Committee  Interlocks  and  Insider  Participation”  and  “Compensation  Committee  Report”  in  the 2020 Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is
incorporated by reference herein.
127

Table of Contents
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The  information  required  by  Item  403  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Stock  Ownership  Information”  in  the 2020 Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
We currently maintain two equity compensation plans that provide for the issuance of common stock to officers and other employees, directors and
consultants. Each of these compensation plans was approved by our shareholders. The following table sets forth information regarding outstanding
options and shares available for future issuance under these plans as of December 31, 2019:
Plan Category
Number of shares
to be issued upon
exercise of outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
Weighted-average
exercise price of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
shares reflected
in column (a))
(a)
(b)
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by shareholders
Stock options
2,375,583
$74.79
Deferred compensation
1,598,089
Other stock units(1)
3,465,598
Equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders
None
None
None
Total(2)
7,439,270
$74.79
14,332,839
(1)  
Includes 1,652,252     shares issuable in respect of PBRSUs subject to the satisfaction of performance criteria and assumes payout at maximum
levels.
(2) 
Excludes the potential performance awards which the Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay in cash, stock or a combination of
both after the three-year performance periods which end in 2019, 2020 and 2021.
For further information, see Note 18 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The  information  required  by  Item  404  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Related  Person  Transactions”  in  the 2020 Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
The information required by Item 407(a) of Regulation S-K will be included under the caption “Director Independence” in the 2020 Proxy Statement,
and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information required by this Item will be included under the caption “Independent Auditor Fees” in the 2020 Proxy Statement, and that
information is incorporated by reference herein.
128

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a) List of documents filed as part of this report:
1.
Financial Statements
Our consolidated financial statements are as set forth under Item 8 of this report on Form 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules
All  schedules  are  omitted  because  they  are  not  applicable,  not  required,  or  the  information  is  included  in  the  consolidated  financial
statements.
3.
Exhibits
3.1
Amended and Restated  Certificate  of Incorporation  of The Boeing Company dated  May 5,  2006 (Exhibit  3.1 to the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated May 1, 2006).
3.2
By-Laws of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective October 25, 2019 (Exhibit 3.2 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated October 25, 2019).
4.1
Description of The Boeing Company Securities Registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act.
10.1
364-Day Credit Agreement, dated as of October 30, 2019, among The Boeing Company, for itself and on behalf of its Subsidiaries,
as a Borrower, the Lenders party hereto, Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent
and  Citibank,  N.A.  and  JPMorgan  Chase  Bank  N.A.,  as  Joint  Lead  Arrangers  and  Joint  Book  Managers  (Exhibit  10.1  to  the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 30, 2019).
10.2
Five-Year  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  October  30,  2019,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  for  itself  and  on  behalf  of  its
Subsidiaries, as a Borrower, the Lenders party hereto, Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
syndication agent and Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Joint Lead Arrangers and Joint Book Managers (Exhibit
10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 30, 2019).
10.3
Three-Year  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  October  30,  2019,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  for  itself  and  on  behalf  of  its
Subsidiaries, as a Borrower, the Lenders party hereto, Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
syndication agent and Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Joint Lead Arrangers and Joint Book Managers (Exhibit
10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 30, 2019).
10.4
Joint Venture Master Agreement, dated as of May 2, 2005, by and among Lockheed Martin Corporation, The Boeing Company and
United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. (Exhibit (10)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2005).
10.5
Delta Inventory Supply Agreement, dated as of December 1, 2006, by and between United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. and The Boeing
Company (Exhibit (10)(vi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2006).
10.6
Summary of Nonemployee Director Compensation.*
10.7
Deferred Compensation Plan for Directors of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2008 (Exhibit
10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).*
10.8
Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2019 (Exhibit
10.3 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2018).*
129

Table of Contents
10.9
Incentive  Compensation  Plan  for  Employees  of  The  Boeing  Company  and  Subsidiaries,  as  amended  and  restated  effective
October 31, 2016 (Exhibit (10)(xi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.10
The Boeing Company Elected Officer Annual Incentive Plan, as amended and restated effective October 31, 2016 (Exhibit (10)
(xii) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.11
The Boeing Company 1997 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended effective May 1, 2000 and further amended effective January 1,
2008 (Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).*
10.12
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated as of January 1, 2016
(Exhibit (10)(xvi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015).*
10.13
The Boeing Company Executive Layoff Benefits Plan, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2017 (Exhibit (10)(xviii) to the
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.14
The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated effective October 31, 2016 (Exhibit (10)(xix)(a) to the
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.15
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Grant Notice of Terms (Exhibit (10)(xvii)(b) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2010).*
10.16
Form of Notice of Terms of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2018).*
10.17
Form of Performance Award Notice (Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018).*
10.18
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018).*
10.19
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March
31, 2018).*
10.20
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
June 25, 2017).*
10.21
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated February 23, 2015. (Exhibit (10)(xviii)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2015).*
21
List of Company Subsidiaries.
23
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
31.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
99.1
Commercial Program Method of Accounting (Exhibit (99)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 1997).
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
130

Table of Contents
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File - the cover page XBRL tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document contained in Exhibit
101
* Management contract or compensatory plan
In accordance with Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the
Company are not filed herewith. Pursuant to this regulation, we hereby agree to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the SEC upon request.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
None
131

Table of Contents
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on January 31, 2020.
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Registrant)
By:  
/s/ Robert E. Verbeck
 
Robert E. Verbeck – Senior Vice President, Finance and Corporate
Controller
132

Table of Contents
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated on January 31, 2020.
/s/ David L. Calhoun
/s/ Lawrence W. Kellner
David L. Calhoun – President and Chief Executive Officer
Lawrence W. Kellner – Chairman of the Board
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
/s/ Caroline B. Kennedy
Gregory D. Smith – Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice
President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy
Caroline B. Kennedy – Director
(Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Robert E. Verbeck
/s/ Edward M. Liddy
Robert E. Verbeck – Senior Vice President, Finance and Corporate
Controller
Edward M. Liddy – Director
(Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ Robert A. Bradway
/s/ John M. Richardson
Robert A. Bradway – Director
John M. Richardson – Director
/s/ Arthur D. Collins, Jr.
/s/ Susan C. Schwab
Arthur D. Collins, Jr. – Director
Susan C. Schwab – Director
/s/ Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr.
/s/ Ronald A. Williams
Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr. – Director
Ronald A. Williams – Director
/s/ Lynn J. Good
/s/ Mike S. Zafirovski
Lynn J. Good – Director
Mike S. Zafirovski – Director
/s/ Nikki R. Haley
Nikki R. Haley – Director
133

Exhibit 4.1
DESCRIPTION OF THE REGISTRANT’S SECURITIES
REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12 OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
As of December 31, 2019, the Boeing Company (“Boeing” or “our”) had one class of securities, our common stock, par value $5.00 per
share (“Common Stock”), registered under Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
The following description of our capital stock is a summary and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the provisions of
our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Charter”) and our by-laws, as amended and restated (the “By-Laws”), copies of which
are incorporated by reference as Exhibits 3.1 and 3.2 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 of which this
Exhibit 4.1 is a part.
 
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
The total number of shares of capital stock authorized by the Charter is 1,220,000,000, consisting of 1,200,000,000 shares of Common
Stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock. Holders of Common Stock are entitled to receive such dividends as may be declared by Boeing’s
board of directors out of legally available funds, and are entitled to share pro rata in any distributions to shareholders, subject to the preferences of
any  preferred  stock  which  may  be  issued  and  to  restrictions  contained  in  agreements  to  which  we  are  a  party.  No  preemptive,  conversion  or
redemption rights or sinking funds provisions are applicable to the Common Stock. All outstanding shares of Common Stock are fully paid and
non-assessable. All holders of the Common Stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters to be voted on by Boeing shareholders, including
the election of directors. Shareholders do not have cumulative voting rights in election of directors. The affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of
the shares present or represented by proxy and entitled to vote at a shareholders’ meeting is required for shareholder action, except for (1) the
election of directors, in which case a nominee shall be elected to the board of directors if the votes cast for such nominee’s election exceed the
votes cast against such nominee’s election (except in the case of a contested election in which case the candidates receiving the greatest number of
votes are elected as directors) and (2) amendments to the provisions in the By-Laws related to compensation and removal of officers, which require
the approval of a majority of the outstanding shares entitled to vote for the election of directors.
The Charter authorizes the board of directors, without any further approval, to (1) divide the preferred stock into series, (2) designate each
such  series,  (3)  fix  and  determine  dividend  rights,  (4)  determine  the  price,  terms  and  conditions  on  which  shares  of  preferred  stock  may  be
redeemed, (5) determine the amount payable to holders of preferred stock in the event of voluntary or involuntary liquidation, (6) determine any
sinking fund provisions, and (7) establish any voting, preemption or conversion privileges.

EXHIBIT 10.6
Summary of Nonemployee Director Compensation
On  January  10,  2020,  the  Board  of  Directors  of  The  Boeing  Company  (the  “Company”)  approved  an  annual  retainer  fee  for  the  non-executive
chairman  of  $250,000  effective  immediately.  The  remaining  components  of  nonemployee  director  compensation  remain  unchanged  from  the
amounts previously disclosed.
COMPENSATION OF NONEMPLOYEE DIRECTORS
Annual Cash Retainer
$135,000
Annual Retainer in Deferred Stock Units
$200,000
Non-Executive Chairman Annual Retainer
$250,000
Aerospace Safety Committee Chair Annual Retainer
$50,000
Audit Committee Chair Annual Retainer
$25,000
Compensation Committee Chair Annual Retainer
$20,000
Governance, Organization and Nominating Committee Chair Annual Retainer
$20,000
Finance Committee Chair Annual Retainer
$20,000
Special Programs Committee Chair Annual Retainer
$15,000

EXHIBIT 21
The Boeing Company Subsidiaries
Name
Place of Incorporation
Astro Limited
Bermuda
Aviall, Inc.
Delaware
BCC Equipment Leasing Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Aircraft Holding Company
Delaware
Boeing Australia Holdings Proprietary Limited
Australia
Boeing Capital Corporation
Delaware
Boeing CAS Holding GmbH
Germany
Boeing Commercial Aviation Services Europe Limited
United Kingdom
Boeing Defence Australia Ltd
Australia
Boeing Deutschland GmbH
Germany
Boeing Digital Solutions, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Distribution Services, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Distribution, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Europe B.V.
Netherlands
Boeing Global Holdings Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Intellectual Property Licensing Company
Delaware
Boeing International Logistics Spares, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Netherlands B.V.
Netherlands
Insitu, Inc.
Washington
Jeppesen Deutschland GmbH
Germany
In accordance with Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K, the company has omitted from this Exhibit the names of its subsidiaries which, considered in
the aggregate or as a single subsidiary, do not constitute a significant subsidiary as defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.

EXHIBIT 23
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement Nos. 33-25332, 33-31434, 33-43854, 33-58798, 33-52773, 333-16363, 333-
26867,  333-32461,  333-32491,  333-32499,  333-32567,  333-41920,  333-54234,  333-73252,  333-107677,  333-140837,  333-156403,  333-160752,
333-163637, 333-195777, and 333-228097 on Form S-8 and Registration Statement No. 333-219630 on Form S-3 of our reports dated January 31,
2020,  relating  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements  of  The  Boeing  Company  and  subsidiaries  (the  “Company”)  and  the  effectiveness  of  the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
January 31, 2020

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, David L. Calhoun, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: January 31, 2020
/s/ David L. Calhoun
David L. Calhoun
President and Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Gregory D. Smith, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: January 31, 2020
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
Gregory D. Smith
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2019, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, David L. Calhoun, President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ David L. Calhoun
David L. Calhoun
President and Chief Executive Officer
January 31, 2020

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2019, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Gregory D. Smith, Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice
President,  Enterprise  Performance  and  Strategy of  the  Company,  certify,  pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  §  1350,  as  adopted  pursuant  to  §  906  of  the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
Gregory D. Smith
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy
January 31, 2020
