Table of Contents
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549  
FORM 10-K
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended September 2, 2018
or
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Commission file number 0-20355
Costco Wholesale Corporation
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Washington
 
91-1223280
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
999 Lake Drive, Issaquah, WA 98027
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (425) 313-8100
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
 
Name of each exchange on
which registered
Common Stock, $.01 Par Value
 
The NASDAQ Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None  
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. YES ☒   NO  ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. YES  ☐    NO ☒ 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during
the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. YES ☒   NO  ☐
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  has  submitted  electronically  every  Interactive  Data  File  required  to  be  submitted  pursuant  to  Rule  405  of
Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). YES
☒   NO ☐
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not
be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any
amendment to this Form 10-K.  ☒
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  a  non-accelerated  filer,  a  smaller  reporting  company,  or  an
emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer”, “smaller reporting company”, and "emerging growth company" in
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer ☒
  
Accelerated filer ☐
Non-accelerated filer ☐
  
Smaller reporting company ☐
Emerging growth company ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). YES  ☐    NO  ☒
The aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of February 18, 2018 was $83,850,253,577 .
The number of shares outstanding of the registrant’s common stock as of October 18, 2018 was 438,208,376 .
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the Company’s Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on January 24, 2019, are incorporated by reference into Part III
of this Form 10-K.

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 2, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
Page
PART I
Item 1.
Business
3
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
8
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
15
Item 2.
Properties
16
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
17
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
17
PART II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
17
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
20
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
21
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
31
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
33
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
62
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
62
Item 9B.
Other Information
64
PART III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
64
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
64
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
64
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
64
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
64
PART IV
Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
65
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
67
Signatures
68
2

3
INFORMATION RELATING TO FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Report constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. They include statements that address
activities, events, conditions or developments that we expect or anticipate may occur in the future and may relate to such matters as sales growth,
changes  in comparable  sales,  cannibalization  of  existing  locations  by  new  openings,  price  or  fee  changes,  earnings  performance,  earnings  per
share,  stock-based  compensation  expense,  warehouse  openings  and  closures,  capital  spending,  the  effect  of  adopting  certain  accounting
standards, future financial reporting, financing, margins, return on invested capital, strategic direction, expense controls, membership renewal rates,
shopping  frequency,  litigation,  and  the  demand  for  our  products  and  services.  Forward-looking  statements  may  also  be  identified  by  the  words
“anticipate,”  “believe,”  “continue,”  “could,”  “estimate,”  “expect,”  “intend,”  “may,”  “might,”  “likely,”  “plan,”  “potential,”  “predict,”  “project,”  “seek,”
“should,”  “target,”  “will,”  “would,”  or  similar  expressions  and  the  negatives  of  those  terms.  Such  forward-looking  statements  involve  risks  and
uncertainties that may cause actual events, results, or performance to differ materially from those indicated by such statements, including, without
limitation,  the  factors  set  forth  in  the  section  titled  “Item  1A-Risk  Factors”,  and  other  factors  noted  in  the  section  titled  “Item  7-Management's
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and in the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8
of this Report. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not undertake to update these statements, except
as required by law.
PART I
Item 1—Business
Costco Wholesale Corporation and its subsidiaries (Costco or the Company) began operations in 1983, in Seattle, Washington. We are principally
engaged in the operation of membership warehouses in the United States (U.S.) and Puerto Rico, Canada, United Kingdom (U.K.), Mexico, Japan,
Korea, Australia, Spain, France, Iceland, and through a majority-owned subsidiary in Taiwan. Costco operated 762 , 741, and 715 warehouses
worldwide at September 2, 2018 , September 3, 2017 , and August 28, 2016 , respectively. Our common stock trades on the NASDAQ Global
Select Market, under the symbol “COST.”
We report on a 52/53-week fiscal year, consisting of thirteen four-week periods and ending on the Sunday nearest the end of August. The first three
quarters consist of three periods each, and the fourth quarter consists of four periods (five weeks in the thirteenth period in a 53-week year). The
material seasonal impact in our operations is increased net sales and earnings during the winter holiday season. References to 2018 and 2016
relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended September 2, 2018 , and August 28, 2016 , respectively. References to 2017 relate to the 53-week fiscal
year ended September 3, 2017 .
General
We operate membership warehouses based on the concept that offering our members low prices on a limited selection of nationally branded and
private-label products in a wide range of categories will produce high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. When combined with the operating
efficiencies achieved by volume purchasing, efficient distribution and reduced handling of merchandise in no-frills, self-service warehouse facilities,
these volumes and turnover enable us to operate profitably at significantly lower gross margins (net sales less merchandise costs) than most other
retailers. We generally sell inventory before we are required to pay for it, even while taking advantage of early payment discounts.
We  buy  most  of  our  merchandise  directly  from  manufacturers  and  route  it  to  cross-docking  consolidation  points  (depots)  or  directly  to  our
warehouses. Our depots receive large shipments from manufacturers and quickly ship these goods to warehouses. This process creates freight
volume and handling efficiencies, lowering costs associated with traditional multiple-step distribution channels.
Our average warehouse space is approximately 145,000 square feet, with newer units being slightly larger. Floor plans are designed for economy
and efficiency in the use of selling space, the handling of merchandise, and the control of inventory. Because shoppers are attracted principally by
the quality of merchandise and
3

Table of Contents
low  prices,  our  warehouses  are  not  elaborate.  By  strictly  controlling  the  entrances  and  exits  and  using  a  membership  format,  we  believe  our
inventory losses (shrinkage) are well below those of typical retail operations.
Our warehouses on average operate on a seven-day, 70-hour week. Gasoline operations generally have extended hours. Because the hours of
operation are shorter than other retailers, and due to other efficiencies inherent in a warehouse-type operation, labor costs are lower relative to the
volume of sales. Merchandise is generally stored on racks above the sales floor and displayed on pallets containing large quantities, reducing labor
required. In general, with variations by country, our warehouses accept certain credit, including the Costco co-branded card, and debit cards, cash,
and checks.
Our strategy is to provide our members with a broad range of high-quality merchandise at prices we believe are consistently lower than elsewhere.
We seek to limit items to fast-selling models, sizes, and colors. We carry an average of approximately 3,700 active stock keeping units (SKUs) per
warehouse in our core warehouse business, significantly less than other broadline retailers. Many consumable products are offered for sale in case,
carton, or multiple-pack quantities only.
In keeping with our policy of member satisfaction, we generally accept returns of merchandise. On certain electronic items, we typically have a 90-
day return policy and provide, free of charge, technical support services, as well as an extended warranty. Additional third-party warranty coverage
is sold on certain electronic items.
We offer merchandise in the following categories:
•
Food  and  Sundries (including  dry  foods,  packaged  foods,  groceries,  snack  foods,  candy,  alcoholic  and  nonalcoholic  beverages,  and
cleaning supplies)
•
Hardlines (including major appliances, electronics, health and beauty aids, hardware, and garden and patio)
•
Fresh Foods (including meat, produce, deli, and bakery)
•
Softlines (including apparel and small appliances)
•
Ancillary (including gasoline and pharmacy businesses)
Ancillary businesses within or next to our warehouses provide expanded products and services, encouraging members to shop more frequently.
These businesses include gas stations, pharmacies, optical dispensing centers, food courts, and hearing-aid centers. The number of warehouses
with gas stations vary significantly by country, and we do not operate our gasoline business in Korea or France. We operated 567 gas stations at the
end of 2018 .
Our e-commerce  operations allow us to connect with our members online and provide additional products and services, many not found in our
warehouses.  We  operate  e-commerce  websites  in  the  U.S.,  Canada,  Mexico,  U.K.,  Korea,  and  Taiwan.  Net  sales  for  e-commerce  represented
approximately 4% of total net sales in 2018 . Additionally, we offer business delivery, travel and various other services online in certain countries.
We  have  direct  buying  relationships  with  many  producers  of  national  brand-name  merchandise.  We  do  not  obtain  a  significant  portion  of
merchandise from any one supplier. We generally have not experienced difficulty in obtaining sufficient quantities of merchandise and believe that if
current sources of supply became unavailable, we would be able to obtain alternative sources without substantial disruption of our business. We
also purchase and manufacture private-label merchandise, as long as quality and member demand are comparable and the value to our members is
significant.
Certain financial information for our segments and geographic areas is included in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in
Item 8 of this Report.
4

Table of Contents
Membership
Our  members  may  utilize  their  memberships  at  our  warehouses  worldwide.  Gold  Star  memberships  are  available  to  individuals;  Business
memberships  are  limited  to  businesses,  including  individuals  with  a  business  license,  retail  sales  license  or  comparable  evidence.  Business
members have the ability to add additional cardholders (affiliates), to which the same annual fee applies. Affiliates are not available for Gold Star
members. Our annual fee for these memberships is $60 in our U.S. and Canadian operations and varies in other countries. All paid memberships
include a free household card.
Our member renewal rate was 90% in the U.S. and Canada and 88% on a worldwide basis at the end of 2018 . The majority of members renew
within six months following their renewal date. Therefore, our renewal rate is a trailing calculation that captures renewals during the period seven to
eighteen months prior to the reporting date.
Our membership was made up of the following (in thousands):
2018
2017
2016
Gold Star
40,700
38,600
36,800
Business, including affiliates
10,900
10,800
10,800
Total paid members
51,600
49,400
47,600
Household cards
42,700
40,900
39,100
Total cardholders
94,300
90,300
86,700
Paid cardholders (except Business affiliates) are eligible to upgrade to an Executive membership in the U.S. and Canada for an additional annual
fee of $60. Executive memberships are also available in Mexico and the U.K., for which the additional annual fee varies. Executive members earn a
2% reward on qualified purchases (up to a maximum reward of $1,000 per year in U.S. and Canada and varies in Mexico and the U.K.), and can be
redeemed only at Costco warehouses. This program also offers (except in Mexico), access to additional savings and benefits on various business
and consumer services, such as auto and home insurance, the Costco auto purchase program, and check printing services. These services are
generally provided by third parties and vary by state and country. Executive members, who represented 37% of paid members at the end of 2018 ,
generally shop more frequently and spend more than other members.
Labor
Our employee count was as follows:
2018
2017
2016
Full-time employees
143,000
133,000
126,000
Part-time employees
102,000
98,000
92,000
Total employees
245,000
231,000
218,000
Approximately 15,900 employees are union employees. We consider our employee relations to be very good.
Competition
Our industry is highly competitive, based on factors such as price, merchandise quality and selection, location, convenience, distribution strategy,
and  customer  service.  We  compete  on  a  worldwide  basis  with  global,  national,  and  regional  wholesalers  and  retailers,  including  supermarkets,
supercenters,  internet  retailers,  gasoline  stations,  hard  discounters,  department  and  specialty  stores,  and  operators  selling  a  single  category  or
narrow range of merchandise. Walmart, Target, Kroger, and Amazon.com are among our significant general
5

Table of Contents
merchandise retail competitors. We also compete with warehouse club operations (primarily Walmart’s Sam’s Club and BJ’s Wholesale Club), and
nearly every major U.S. and Mexico metropolitan area has multiple club operations.
Intellectual Property
We believe that, to varying degrees, our trademarks, trade names, copyrights, proprietary processes, trade secrets, patents, trade dress, domain
names and similar intellectual property add significant value to our business and are important to our success. We have invested significantly in the
development  and  protection  of  our  well-recognized  brands,  including  the  Costco  Wholesale ® trademarks  and  our  private-label  brand,  Kirkland
Signature ® . We believe that Kirkland Signature products are high quality, offered to our members at prices that are generally lower than national
brands,  and  that  they  help  lower  costs,  differentiate  our  merchandise  offerings,  and  generally  earn  higher  margins.  We  expect  to  continue  to
increase the sales penetration of our private label items.
We rely on trademark and copyright laws, trade-secret protection, and confidentiality, license and other agreements with our suppliers, employees
and others to protect our intellectual property. The availability and duration of trademark registrations vary by country; however, trademarks are
generally valid and may be renewed indefinitely as long as they are in use and registrations are properly maintained.
Available Information
Our U.S. website is www.costco.com. We make available through the Investor Relations section of that site, free of charge, our Annual Reports on
Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, Proxy Statements and Forms 3, 4 and 5, and any amendments to those
reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after filing such materials with or furnishing such documents to the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). The information found on our website is not part of this or any other report filed with or furnished to the SEC. The public may read and copy
any  materials  we  file  with  the  SEC  at  the  SEC’s  Public  Reference  Room  at  100  F  Street,  NE,  Washington,  DC  20549.  The  public  may  obtain
information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC also maintains a site that contains
reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers, such as the Company, that file electronically with the SEC at
www.sec.gov.
We have adopted a code of ethics for senior financial officers pursuant to Section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Copies of the code are available
free  of  charge  by  writing  to  Secretary,  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation,  999  Lake  Drive,  Issaquah,  WA  98027.  If  the  Company  makes  any
amendments to this code (other than technical, administrative, or non-substantive amendments) or grants any waivers, including implicit waivers,
from this code to the CEO, chief financial officer or principal accounting officer and controller, we will disclose (on our website or in a Form 8-K
report filed with the SEC) the nature of the amendment or waiver, its effective date, and to whom it applies.
6

Table of Contents
Executive Officers of the Registrant
The executive officers of Costco, their position, and ages are listed below. All executive officers have over 25 years of service with the Company.
Name
Position
Executive
Officer
Since
Age
W. Craig Jelinek
President and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Jelinek has been President and
Chief  Executive  Officer  since  January  2012  and  a  director  since  February
2010. He was President and Chief Operating Officer from February 2010 to
December  2011.  Prior  to  that  he  was  Executive  Vice  President,  Chief
Operating Officer, Merchandising since 2004.
1995
66
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Galanti has been a
director since January 1995.
1993
62
Jim C. Klauer
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Northern  Division.  Mr.
Klauer  was  Senior  Vice  President,  Non  Foods  and  E-commerce
merchandise, from 2013 to January 2018.
2018
56
Franz E. Lazarus
Executive  Vice  President,  Administration.  Mr.  Lazarus  was  Senior  Vice
President, Administration-Global Operations, from 2006 to September 2012.
2012
71
Russ D. Miller
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Southern  Division  and
Mexico. Mr. Miller was Senior Vice President, Western Canada Region, from
2001 to January 2018.
2018
61
Paul G. Moulton
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Information  Officer.  Mr.  Moulton  was
Executive Vice President, Real Estate Development, from 2001 until March
2010.
2001
67
James P. Murphy
Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, International. Mr. Murphy
was Senior Vice President, International, from 2004 to October 2010.
2011
65
Joseph P. Portera
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Eastern  and  Canadian
Divisions. Mr. Portera has held these positions since 1994 and has been the
Chief Diversity Officer since 2010.
1994
66
Timothy L. Rose
Executive  Vice  President,  Ancillary  Businesses,  Manufacturing,  and
Business  Centers.  Mr.  Rose  was  Senior  Vice  President,  Merchandising,
Food and Sundries and Private Label, from 1995 to December 2012.
2013
66
Ron M. Vachris
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Merchandising.  Mr.
Vachris was Senior Vice President, Real Estate Development, from August
2015 to June 2016, and Senior Vice President, General Manager, Northwest
Region, from 2010 to July 2015.
2016
53
7

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors
The  risks  described  below  could  materially  and  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.  We  could  also  be
affected by additional risks that apply to all companies operating in the U.S. and globally, as well as other risks that are not presently known to us or
that we currently consider to be immaterial. These Risk Factors should be carefully reviewed in conjunction with Management ' s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Item   7 and our consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item   8 of this
Report.
Business and Operating Risks
We are highly dependent on the financial performance of our U.S. and Canadian operations.
Our financial and operational performance is highly dependent on our U.S. and Canadian operations, which comprised 87% and 83% of net sales
and operating income in 2018 , respectively. Within the U.S., we are highly dependent on our California operations, which comprised 30% of U.S.
net sales in 2018 . Our California market, in general, has a larger percentage of higher volume warehouses as compared to our other domestic
markets.  Any  substantial  slowing  or  sustained  decline  in  these  operations  could  materially  adversely  affect  our  business  and  financial  results.
Declines  in  financial  performance  of  our  U.S.  operations,  particularly  in  California,  and  our  Canadian  operations  could  arise  from,  among  other
things: slow growth or declines in comparable warehouse sales (comparable sales); negative trends in operating expenses, including increased
labor, healthcare and energy costs; failing to meet targets for warehouse openings; cannibalizing existing locations with new warehouses; shifts in
sales  mix  toward  lower  gross  margin  products;  changes  or  uncertainties  in  economic  conditions  in  our  markets,  including  higher  levels  of
unemployment and depressed home values; and failing to consistently provide high quality and innovative new products.
We may be unsuccessful implementing our growth  strategy, including expanding our business in existing markets and new markets,
which could have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Our growth is dependent, in part, on our ability to acquire property and build or lease new warehouses and depots. We compete with other retailers
and businesses for suitable locations. Local land use and other regulations restricting the construction and operation of our warehouses and depots,
as well as local community actions opposed to the location of our warehouses or depots at specific sites and the adoption of local laws restricting
our operations and environmental regulations, may impact our ability to find suitable locations and increase the cost of sites and of constructing,
leasing and operating warehouses and depots. We also may have difficulty negotiating leases or purchase agreements on acceptable terms. In
addition,  certain  jurisdictions  have enacted  or  proposed  laws and regulations  that  would prevent  or  restrict  the  operation  or expansion  plans of
certain large retailers and warehouse clubs, including us. Failure to effectively manage these and other similar factors may affect our ability to timely
build or lease and operate new warehouses and depots, which could have a material adverse effect on our future growth and profitability.
We seek to expand in existing markets to attain a greater overall market share. A new warehouse may draw members away from our existing
warehouses and adversely affect their comparable sales performance, member traffic, and profitability.
We intend to continue to open warehouses in new markets. Associated risks include difficulties in attracting members due to a lack of familiarity with
us, attracting members of other wholesale club operators, our lack of familiarity with local member preferences, and seasonal differences in the
market. Entry into new markets may bring us into competition with new competitors or with existing competitors with a large, established market
presence.  We cannot ensure that new warehouses and new websites will be profitable and, as a result,  future profitability  could be delayed or
otherwise materially adversely affected.
8

Table of Contents
Our failure to maintain membership growth, loyalty and brand recognition could adversely affect our results of operations.
Membership  loyalty  and  growth  are  essential  to  our  business.  The  extent  to  which  we  achieve  growth  in  our  membership  base,  increase  the
penetration of our Executive members, and sustain high renewal rates materially influences our profitability. Damage to our brands or reputation
may negatively impact comparable sales, diminish member trust, and reduce member renewal rates and, accordingly, net sales and membership
fee revenue, negatively impacting our results of operations.
We sell many products  under our  Kirkland Signature  brand.  Maintaining  consistent  product  quality,  competitive  pricing,  and availability  of these
products  is  essential  to  developing  and  maintaining  member  loyalty.  These  products  also  generally  carry  higher  margins  than  national  brand
products  carried in our warehouses and represent  a growing portion of our overall sales.  If  the Kirkland Signature brand experiences  a loss of
member acceptance or confidence, our sales and gross margin results could be adversely affected.
Disruptions in our merchandise distribution or processing, packaging, manufacturing, and other facilities could adversely affect sales
and member satisfaction.
We  depend  on  the  orderly  operation  of  the  merchandise  receiving  and  distribution  process,  primarily  through  our  depots.  We  also  rely  upon
processing,  packaging,  manufacturing  and  other  facilities  to  support  our  business,  which  includes  the  production  of  certain  private-label  items.
Although we believe that our operations are efficient, disruptions due to fires, tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes or other catastrophic events, labor
issues or other shipping problems may result in delays in the production and delivery of merchandise to our warehouses, which could adversely
affect sales and the satisfaction of our members.
We may not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends, which could negatively affect our relationship with our members,
the demand for our products and services, and our market share.
It is difficult to consistently and successfully predict the products and services that our members will desire. Our success depends, in part, on our
ability to identify and respond to trends in demographics and consumer preferences. Failure to identify timely or effectively respond to changing
consumer  tastes,  preferences  (including  those  relating  to  sustainability  of  product  sources  and  animal  welfare)  and  spending  patterns  could
negatively affect our relationship with our members, the demand for our products and services, and our market share. If we are not successful at
predicting our sales trends and adjusting our purchases accordingly, we may have excess inventory, which could result in additional markdowns and
reduce our operating performance. This could have an adverse effect on net sales, gross margin and operating income.
We  rely  extensively  on  information  technology  to  process  transactions,  compile  results,  and  manage  our  businesses.  Failure  or
disruption  of  our  primary  and  back-up  systems  could  adversely  affect  our  businesses.  A  failure  to  adequately  update  our  existing
systems and implement new systems could harm our businesses and adversely affect our results of operations.
Given the very high volume of transactions we process each year it is important that we maintain uninterrupted operation of our business-critical
computer  systems.  Our  systems,  including  our  back-up  systems,  are  subject  to  damage  or  interruption  from  power  outages,  computer  and
telecommunications failures, computer viruses, internal or external security breaches, catastrophic events such as fires, earthquakes, tornadoes and
hurricanes, and errors by our employees. If our systems are damaged or cease to function properly, we may have to make significant investments to
fix or replace them, and we may suffer interruptions in our operations in the interim. Any material interruption in these systems could have a material
adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
We are currently making, and will continue to make, investments to improve or advance critical information systems and processing capabilities.
Failure  to  monitor  and  choose  the  right  investments  and  implement  them  at  the  right  pace  would  be  harmful.  The  risk  of  system  disruption  is
increased  when  significant  system  changes  are  undertaken,  although  we  believe  that  our  change  management  process  will  mitigate  this  risk.
Excessive technological change could impact the effectiveness of adoption, and could make it more difficult
9

Table of Contents
for us to realize benefits. Targeting the wrong opportunities, failing to make the best investments, or making an investment commitment significantly
above or below our needs could result in the loss of our competitive position and adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations.
The potential problems and interruptions associated with implementing technology initiatives could disrupt or reduce the efficiency of our operations.
These initiatives might not provide the anticipated benefits or may provide them on a delayed schedule or at a higher cost.
We  identified  a  material  weakness  in  our  internal  control  related  to  ineffective  information  technology  general  controls  which,  if  not
remediated appropriately or timely, could result in loss of investor confidence and adversely impact our stock price.
Internal  controls  related  to  the  operation  of  technology  systems  are  critical  to  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  As
disclosed  in  Part  II,  Item  9A,  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  fiscal  2018,  management  identified  a  material  weakness  in  internal  control  related  to
ineffective information technology general controls (ITGCs) in the areas of user access and program change-management over certain information
technology (IT) systems that support the Company’s financial reporting processes. As a result, management concluded that our internal control over
financial reporting was not effective as of September 2, 2018. We are implementing remedial measures and, while there can be no assurance that
our efforts will be successful, we plan to remediate the material weakness prior to the end of fiscal 2019. These measures will result in additional
technology and other expenses. If we are unable to remediate the material weakness, or are otherwise unable to maintain effective internal control
over  financial  reporting  or  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  our  ability  to  record,  process  and  report  financial  information  accurately,  and  to
prepare financial statements within required time periods, could be adversely affected, which could subject us to litigation or investigations requiring
management resources and payment of legal and other expenses, negatively affect investor confidence in our financial statements and adversely
impact our stock price.
If we do not maintain the privacy and security of personal and business information, we could damage our reputation with members and
employees, incur substantial additional costs, and become subject to litigation.
We  receive,  retain,  and  transmit  personal  information  about  our  members  and  employees  and  entrust  that  information  to  third-party  business
associates,  including  cloud  service-providers  that  perform  activities  for  us.  Our  warehouse  and  online  businesses  depend  upon  the  secure
transmission of encrypted confidential information over public networks, including information permitting cashless payments. A compromise of our
security  systems  or  defects  within  our  hardware  or  software,  or  those  of  our  business  associates,  that  results  in  our  members'  or  employees'
information being obtained by unauthorized persons, could adversely affect our reputation with our members and others, as well as our operations,
results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and could result in litigation, government actions, or the imposition of penalties. In addition, a
breach could require that we expend significant additional resources related to the security of information systems and could disrupt our operations.
The use of data by our business and our business associates is regulated at the national and state or local level in all of our operating countries.  
Privacy and information-security laws and regulations change, and compliance with them may result in cost increases due to, among other things,
systems  changes  and  the  development  of  new  processes.  If  we  or  those  with  whom  we  share  information  fail  to  comply  with  these  laws  and
regulations, our reputation could be damaged, possibly resulting in lost future business, and we could be subjected to additional legal risk as a result
of non-compliance, including fines of up to 4% of our global revenue in the case of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). We do not
maintain cyber-insurance for these risks.
We have security measures and controls to protect personal and business information and continue to make investments to secure access to our
information technology network. These measures may be undermined, however, due to the actions of outside parties, employee error, internal or
external malfeasance, or otherwise, and, as a result an unauthorized party may obtain access to our data systems and misappropriate business and
personal information. Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable or degrade
10

Table of Contents
service,  or  sabotage  systems  change  frequently  and  may  not  immediately  produce  signs  of  intrusion,  we  may  be  unable  to  anticipate  these
techniques, timely discover or counter them, or implement adequate preventative measures. Any such breach or unauthorized access could result in
significant legal and financial exposure, damage to our reputation, and potentially have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
We are subject to payment-related risks.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash and checks, a select variety of credit and debit cards, and our proprietary cash card.
As we offer new payment options to our members, we may be subject to additional rules, regulations, compliance requirements, and higher fraud
losses. For certain payment methods, we pay interchange and other related card acceptance fees, along with additional transaction processing fees.
We rely on third parties to provide payment transaction processing services, including the processing of credit and debit cards, and our proprietary
cash card, and it could disrupt our business if these companies become unwilling or unable to provide these services to us. We are also subject to
payment card association and network operating rules, including data security rules, certification requirements and rules governing electronic funds
transfers,  which  could  change  over  time.  For  example,  we  are  subject  to  Payment  Card  Industry  Data  Security  Standards  (“PCI  DSS”),  which
contain  compliance  guidelines  and  standards  with  regard  to  our  security  surrounding  the  physical  and  electronic  storage,  processing  and
transmission of individual cardholder data. In addition, if our internal systems are breached or compromised, we may be liable for card re-issuance
costs, subject to fines and higher transaction fees and lose our ability to accept credit and/or debit card payments from our members,  and our
business and operating results could be adversely affected.
We might sell products that cause illness or injury to our members, harm to our reputation, and expose us to litigation.
If our merchandise, such as food and prepared food products for human consumption, drugs, children ' s products, pet products and durable goods,
do not meet or are perceived not to meet applicable safety standards or our members ' expectations regarding safety, we could experience lost
sales, increased costs, litigation or reputational harm. The sale of these items involves the risk of health-related illness or injury to our members.
Such illnesses or injuries could result from tampering by unauthorized third parties, product contamination or spoilage, including the presence of
foreign  objects,  substances,  chemicals,  other  agents,  or  residues  introduced  during  the  growing,  manufacturing,  storage,  handling  and
transportation phases, or faulty design. Our vendors are generally contractually required to comply with product safety laws, and we are dependent
on them to ensure that the products we buy comply with all safety standards. While we are subject to governmental inspection and regulations and
work to comply in all material respects with applicable laws and regulations, we cannot be sure that consumption or use of our products will not
cause illness or injury in the future or that we will not be subject to claims, lawsuits, or government investigations relating to such matters resulting in
costly  product  recalls  and  other  liabilities  that  could  adversely  affect  our  business  and  results  of  operations.  Even  if  a  product  liability  claim  is
unsuccessful or is not fully pursued, negative publicity could adversely affect our reputation with existing and potential members and our corporate
and brand image, and these effects could be long term.
If we do not successfully develop and maintain a relevant omnichannel experience for our members, our results of operations could be
adversely impacted.
Omnichannel retailing is rapidly evolving, and we must keep pace with changing member expectations and new developments by our competitors.
Our members are increasingly using mobile phones, tablets, computers, and other devices to shop and to interact with us through social media. We
are making technology investments in our websites and mobile applications. If we are unable to make, improve, or develop relevant member-facing
technology in a timely manner, our ability to compete and our results of operations could be adversely affected.
11

Table of Contents
Inability to attract, train and retain highly qualified employees could adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
Our  success  depends  on  the  continued  contributions  of  members  of  our  senior  management  and  other  key  operations,  merchandising  and
administrative personnel. Failure to identify and implement a succession plan for key senior management could negatively impact the business.
We must attract, train and retain a large and growing number of qualified employees, while controlling related labor costs and maintaining our core
values. Our ability to control labor and benefit costs is subject to numerous internal and external factors, including regulatory changes, prevailing
wage rates, and healthcare and other insurance costs. We compete with other retail and non-retail businesses for these employees and invest
significant resources in training and motivating them. There is no assurance that we will be able to attract or retain highly qualified employees in the
future, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We may incur property, casualty or other losses not covered by our insurance.
The Company is predominantly self-insured for employee health care benefits, workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’
and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and inventory loss. Insurance coverage is maintained in certain instances to limit the exposure arising from
catastrophic events. The types and amounts of insurance may vary from time to time based on our decisions with respect to risk retention and
regulatory  requirements.  Significant  claims  or  events,  regulatory  changes,  a  substantial  rise  in  costs  of  health  care  or  costs  to  maintain  our
insurance, or the failure to maintain adequate insurance coverage could have an adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
We are primarily self-insured as it relates to property damage. Although we maintain specific coverages for catastrophic losses, we still bear the risk
of losses incurred as a result of any physical damage to, or the destruction of, any warehouses, depots, manufacturing or home office facilities, loss
or spoilage of inventory, and business interruption caused by any such events to the extent they are below catastrophic levels of coverage, as well
as any losses to the extent they exceed our aggregate limits of applicable coverages. Such losses could materially impact our cash flow and results
of operations.
Market and Other External Risks
We  face  strong  competition  from  other  retailers  and  warehouse  club  operators,  which  could  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial
condition and results of operations.
The retail business is highly competitive. We compete for members, employees, sites, products and services and in other important respects with a
wide range of local, regional and national wholesalers and retailers, both in the United States and in foreign countries, including other warehouse-
club operators, supermarkets, supercenters, internet retailers, gasoline stations, hard discounters, department and specialty stores and operators
selling a single category or narrow range of merchandise. Such retailers and warehouse club operators compete in a variety of ways, including
merchandise pricing, selection and availability, services, location, convenience, store hours, and the attractiveness and ease of use of websites and
mobile applications. The evolution of retailing in online and mobile channels has improved the ability of customers to comparison shop with digital
devices, which has enhanced competition. Some competitors may have greater financial resources and technology capabilities, better access to
merchandise, and greater market penetration than we do. Our inability to respond effectively to competitive pressures, changes in the retail markets
and member expectations could result in lost market share and negatively affect our financial results.
General  economic  factors,  domestically  and  internationally,  may  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition,  and  results  of
operations.
Higher  energy  and  gasoline  costs,  inflation,  levels  of  unemployment,  healthcare  costs,  consumer  debt  levels,  foreign-currency  exchange  rates,
unsettled financial markets, weaknesses in housing and real estate markets, reduced consumer confidence, changes and uncertainties related to
government fiscal and tax
12

Table of Contents
policies including changes in tax rates, duties, tariffs, or other restrictions, sovereign debt crises, and other economic factors could adversely affect
demand for our products and services, require a change in product mix, or impact the cost of or ability to purchase inventory. Prices of certain
commodity  products,  including gasoline and other  food products,  are  historically  volatile  and are subject  to fluctuations  arising  from  changes in
domestic and international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations, taxes and periodic delays in
delivery. Rapid and significant changes in commodity prices and our ability and desire to pass them through to our members may affect our sales
and  profit  margins.  These  factors  could  also  increase  our  merchandise  costs  and  selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses,  and  otherwise
adversely affect our operations and financial results. General economic conditions can also be affected by significant events like the outbreak of war
or acts of terrorism.
Vendors may be unable to timely supply us with quality merchandise at competitive prices or may fail to adhere to our high standards,
resulting in adverse effects on our business, merchandise inventories, sales, and profit margins.
We depend heavily on our ability to purchase quality merchandise in sufficient quantities at competitive prices. As the quantities we require continue
to grow, we have no assurances of continued supply, appropriate pricing or access to new products, and any vendor has the ability to change the
terms upon which they sell to us or discontinue selling to us. Member demands may lead to out-of-stock positions of our merchandise leading to loss
of sales and profits.
We buy from numerous domestic and foreign manufacturers and importers. Our inability to acquire suitable merchandise on acceptable terms or the
loss  of  key  vendors  could  negatively  affect  us.  We  may  not  be  able  to  develop  relationships  with  new  vendors,  and  products  from  alternative
sources, if any, may be of a lesser quality or more expensive than those from existing vendors. Because of our efforts to adhere to high quality
standards  for  which  available  supply  may  be  limited,  particularly  for  certain  food  items,  the  large  volume  we  demand  may  not  be  consistently
available.
Our suppliers (and those they depend upon for materials and services) are subject to risks, including labor disputes, union organizing activities,
financial liquidity, inclement weather, natural disasters, supply constraints, and general economic and political conditions that could limit their ability
to timely provide us with acceptable merchandise. For these or other reasons, one or more of our suppliers might not adhere to our quality control,
legal, regulatory, labor, environmental or animal welfare standards. These deficiencies may delay or preclude delivery of merchandise to us and
might not be identified before we sell such merchandise to our members. This failure could lead to recalls and litigation and otherwise damage our
reputation and our brands, increase our costs, and otherwise adversely impact our business.
Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may adversely affect our results of operations.
During 2018 , our international operations, including Canada, generated 28% and 38% of our net sales and operating income, respectively. Our
international operations have accounted for an increasing portion of our warehouses, and we plan to continue international growth. To prepare our
consolidated financial statements, we translate the financial statements of our international operations from local currencies into U.S. dollars using
current  exchange  rates.  Future  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  that  are  unfavorable  to  us  may  adversely  affect  the  financial  performance  of  our
Canadian  and  Other  International  operations  and  have  a  corresponding  adverse  period-over-period  effect  on  our  results  of  operations.  As  we
continue to expand internationally, our exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may increase.
A portion of the products we purchase for sale in our warehouses around the world is paid for in a currency other than the local currency of the
country in which the goods are sold. Currency fluctuations may increase our cost of goods and may not be passed on to members. Consequently,
fluctuations in currency exchange rates may adversely affect our results of operations.
13

Table of Contents
Natural disasters or other catastrophes could negatively affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Natural  disasters,  such  as  hurricanes,  typhoons  or  earthquakes,  particularly  in  California  or  Washington  state,  where  our  centralized  operating
systems and administrative personnel are located, could negatively affect our operations and financial performance. Such events could result in
physical  damage  to  one  or  more  of  our  properties,  the  temporary  closure  of  one  or  more  warehouses,  depots,  manufacturing  or  home  office
facilities, the temporary lack of an adequate work force in a market, the temporary or long-term disruption in the supply of products from some local
or overseas suppliers, the temporary disruption in the transport of goods to or from overseas, delays in the delivery of goods to our warehouses or
depots within the countries in which we operate, and the temporary reduction in the availability of products in our warehouses. Public health issues,
whether occurring in the U.S. or abroad, could disrupt our operations, disrupt the operations of suppliers or members, or have an adverse impact on
consumer spending and confidence levels. These events could also reduce demand for our products or make it difficult or impossible to procure
products. We may be required to suspend operations in some or all of our locations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition and results of operations.
Factors associated with climate change could adversely affect our business.
We use natural gas, diesel fuel, gasoline, and electricity in our distribution and warehouse operations. U.S. and foreign government regulations
limiting  carbon  dioxide  and  other  greenhouse  gas  emissions  may  result  in  increased  compliance  and  merchandise  costs,  and  legislation  or
regulation  affecting  energy  inputs  that  could  materially  affect  our  profitability.  Climate  change  and  extreme  weather  conditions,  such  as  intense
hurricanes, thunderstorms, tornadoes, and snow or ice storms, as well as rising sea levels could affect our ability to procure needed commodities at
costs and in quantities we currently experience. We also sell a substantial amount of gasoline, the demand for which could be impacted by concerns
about climate change and which could face increased regulation.
Failure to meet financial market expectations could adversely affect the market price and volatility of our stock.
We believe that the price of our stock currently reflects high market expectations for our future operating results. Any failure to meet or delay in
meeting these expectations, including our warehouse and e-commerce comparable sales growth rates, membership renewal rates, new member
sign-ups, gross margin, earnings, earnings per share, new warehouse openings, or dividend or stock repurchase policies could cause the market
price of our stock to decline.
Legal and Regulatory Risks
Our international operations subject us to risks associated with the legislative, judicial, accounting, regulatory, political and economic
factors  specific  to  the  countries  or  regions  in  which  we  operate,  which  could  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition  and
results of operations.
During 2018 , we operated 235 warehouses outside of the U.S., and we plan to continue expanding our international operations. Future operating
results internationally could be negatively affected by a variety of factors, many similar to those we face in the U.S., certain of which are beyond our
control. These factors include political and economic conditions, regulatory constraints, currency regulations, policy changes such as the U.K.'s vote
to withdraw from the European Union, commonly known as "Brexit", and other matters in any of the countries or regions in which we operate, now or
in the future. Other factors that may impact international operations include foreign trade (including tariffs), monetary and fiscal policies and the laws
and  regulations  of  the  U.S.  and  foreign  governments,  agencies  and  similar  organizations,  and  risks  associated  with  having  major  facilities  in
locations which have been historically less stable than the U.S. Risks inherent in international operations also include, among others, the costs and
difficulties of managing international operations, adverse tax consequences, and difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights.
14

Table of Contents
Changes in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by management related to complex accounting
matters could significantly affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Accounting principles and related pronouncements, implementation guidelines, and interpretations we apply to a wide range of matters that are
relevant to our business, including self-insurance liabilities and income taxes, are highly complex and involve subjective assumptions, estimates and
judgments  by  our  management.  Changes  in  rules  or  interpretation  or  changes  in  underlying  assumptions,  estimates  or  judgments  by  our
management could significantly change our reported or expected financial performance and have a material impact on our consolidated financial
statements.
We could be subject to additional income tax liabilities.
We compute our income tax provision based on enacted tax rates in the countries in which we operate. As tax rates vary among countries, a change
in  earnings  attributable  to  the  various  jurisdictions  in  which  we  operate  could  result  in  an  unfavorable  change  in  our  overall  tax  provision.
Additionally,  changes  in  the  enacted  tax  rates,  adverse  outcomes  in  tax  audits,  including  transfer  pricing  disputes,  or  any  change  in  the
pronouncements relating to accounting for income taxes could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Significant changes in, or failure to comply with, federal, state, regional, local and international laws and regulations relating to the use,
storage, discharge and disposal of hazardous materials, hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and other environmental matters could
adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We are subject to a wide variety of federal, state, regional, local and international laws and regulations relating to the use, storage, discharge and
disposal of hazardous materials, hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and other environmental matters. Failure to comply with these laws could
result  in  harm  to  our  members,  employees  or  others,  significant  costs  to  satisfy  environmental  compliance,  remediation  or  compensatory
requirements, or the imposition of severe penalties or restrictions on operations by governmental agencies or courts that could adversely affect our
business, financial condition and results of operations.
We are involved in a number of legal proceedings and audits and some of these outcomes could adversely affect our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
Our  business  requires  compliance  with  many  laws  and  regulations.  Failure  to  achieve  compliance  could  subject  us  to  lawsuits  and  other
proceedings,  and  lead  to  damage  awards,  fines,  penalties,  and  remediation  costs.  We  are,  or  may  become  involved,  in  a  number  of  legal
proceedings  and  audits  including  grand  jury  investigations,  government  and  agency  investigations,  and  consumer,  employment,  tort,  unclaimed
property  laws,  and  other  litigation.  We  cannot  predict  with  certainty  the  outcomes  of  these  proceedings  and  other  contingencies,  including
environmental remediation and other proceedings commenced by governmental authorities. The outcome of some of these proceedings, audits,
unclaimed  property  laws,  and  other  contingencies  could  require  us  to  take,  or  refrain  from  taking,  actions  which  could  negatively  affect  our
operations  or  could  require  us  to  pay  substantial  amounts  of  money,  adversely  affecting  our  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.
Additionally,  defending  against  these  lawsuits  and  proceedings  may  involve  significant  expense  and  diversion  of  management '  s  attention  and
resources.
Item 1B—Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
15

Table of Contents
Item 2—Properties
Warehouse Properties
At September 2, 2018 , we operated 762 membership warehouses:
Own Land
and Building
Lease Land
and/or
Building (1)
Total
United States and Puerto Rico
426
101
527
Canada
86
14
100
Mexico
38
1
39
United Kingdom
22
6
28
Japan
12
14
26
Korea (2)  
11
4
15
Taiwan
—
13
13
Australia
7
3
10
Spain
2
—
2
Iceland
—
1
1
France
1
—
1
Total
605
157
762
_______________
(1)
106 of the 157 leases are land-only leases, where Costco owns the building.
(2)
In fiscal 2018, Costco purchased the remaining equity interest and three formerly leased locations from its former joint-venture partner in Korea.
The following schedule shows warehouse openings, net of closings and relocations, and expected openings through December 31, 2018 :
United States
Canada
Other
International
Total
Total Warehouses
in Operation
2014 and prior
468
88
107
663
663
2015
12
1
10
23
686
2016
21
2
6
29
715
2017
13
6
7
26
741
2018
13
3
5
21
762
2019 (expected through 12/31/2018)
6
—
1
7
769
Total
533
100
136
769
At the end of fiscal 2018 , our warehouses contained approximately 110.7 million square feet of operating floor space: 77.5 million in the U.S.; 13.9
million in Canada; and 19.3 million in Other International. We operate 24 depots, with approximately 11.0 million square feet, for the consolidation
and distribution of most merchandise shipments to the warehouses. Additionally, we operate various processing, packaging, manufacturing  and
other facilities to support our business, which includes the production of certain private-label items. Our executive offices are located in Issaquah,
Washington, and we maintain 18 regional offices in the U.S., Canada and Other International locations.
16

Table of Contents
Item 3—Legal Proceedings
See discussion of Legal Proceedings in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Item 4—Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
PART II
Item 5—Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Market Information and Dividend Policy
Our common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “COST.” On October 18, 2018 , we had 8,829 stockholders of
record. The following table shows the quarterly high and low closing prices of our common stock as reported by NASDAQ for each quarter during
the last two fiscal years and the quarterly cash dividend declared per share.
 
Price Range
Cash
Dividends
Declared
 
High
Low
2018:
Fourth Quarter
$
233.13
$
195.48
$
0.570
Third Quarter
197.16
180.84
0.570
Second Quarter
198.91
172.61
0.500
First Quarter
173.42
154.61
0.500
2017:
Fourth Quarter
$
182.20
$
150.44
$
0.500
Third Quarter
182.45
164.55
7.500
(1)  
Second Quarter
172.00
150.11
0.450
First Quarter
163.98
142.24
0.450
_______________
(1)
Includes a special cash dividend of $7.00 per share.
Payment of future dividends is subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. Factors considered in determining dividends include our profitability
and expected capital needs. Subject to these qualifications, we presently expect to continue to pay dividends on a quarterly basis.
17

Table of Contents
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following table sets forth information on our common stock repurchase program activity for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2018 (dollars in millions,
except per share data):
Period
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
Average Price Paid
per Share
Total Number of
Shares Purchased as
Part of Publicly
Announced Program
(1)
Maximum Dollar Value of
Shares that May Yet be
Purchased under the
Program
May 14—June 10, 2018
96,000
$
198.61
96,000
$
2,497
June 11—July 8, 2018
134,000
208.49
134,000
2,469
July 9—August 5, 2018
111,000
216.06
111,000
2,445
August 6—September 2, 2018
78,000
225.20
78,000
2,427
     Total fourth quarter
419,000
$
211.35
419,000
_______________
(1)
The repurchase program is conducted under a $4,000 authorization approved by our Board of Directors in April 2015, which expires in April 2019.
18

Table of Contents
Performance Graph
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return (stock price appreciation plus dividends) on our common stock for the last five
years with the cumulative total return of the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 500 Retail Index, and a peer group previously selected by the Company.
The  S&P  500  Retail  Index  is  intended  to  replace  the  previously  selected  peer  group  to  allow  for  a  more  broad  representation  of  industry
performance.  The  transition  to  a  larger  retail  index  provides  a  better  representation  of  total  retail  market  performance.  For  the  year  ended
September 2, 2018 , the cumulative total return of the previous peer group is provided pursuant to SEC rules requiring presentation in the year of
change, and consists of: Amazon.com Inc.; The Home Depot Inc.; Lowe's Companies; Best Buy Co., Inc.; Staples Inc.; Target Corporation; Kroger
Company; and Walmart Stores, Inc. This group will not be presented in future periods.
The information provided is from September 1, 2013 , through September 2, 2018 . The graph assumes the investment of $100 in Costco common
stock,  the  S&P  500  Index,  the  S&P  500  Retail  Index,  and  the  previously  selected  peer  group  on  September  1,  2013,  and  reinvestment  of  all
dividends.
19

Item 6—Selected Financial Data
The  following  table  sets  forth  information  concerning  our  consolidated  financial  condition,  operating  results,  and  key  operating  metrics.  This
information should be read in conjunction with Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, included in
Item 7 of this Report, and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, included in Item 8 of this Report.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
(dollars in millions, except per share data)
Sept. 2, 2018
Sept. 3, 2017
Aug. 28, 2016
Aug. 30, 2015
Aug. 31, 2014
As of and for the year ended
(52 weeks)
(53 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net sales
$
138,434
$
126,172
$
116,073
$
113,666
$
110,212
Membership fees
3,142
2,853
2,646
2,533
2,428
Gross margin (1)  as a percentage of net sales
11.04%
11.33%
11.35 %
11.09 %
10.66%
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a
percentage of net sales
10.02%
10.26%
10.40 %
10.07 %
9.89%
Operating income
$
4,480
$
4,111
$
3,672
$
3,624
$
3,220
Net income attributable to Costco
3,134
2,679
2,350
2,377
2,058
Net income per diluted common share attributable to
Costco
7.09
6.08
5.33
5.37
4.65
Cash dividends declared per common share
2.14
8.90
1.70
6.51
1.33
Changes in comparable sales (2)
United States
9%
4%
1 %
3 %
5%
Canada
9%
5%
(3)%
(5)%
2%
Other International
11%
2%
(3)%
(3)%
3%
Total Company
9%
4%
0 %
1 %
4%
Changes in Total Company comparable sales excluding the
impact of foreign currency and gasoline prices
7%
4%
4 %
7 %
6%
BALANCE SHEET DATA
Net property and equipment
$
19,681
$
18,161
$
17,043
$
15,401
$
14,830
Total assets
40,830
36,347
33,163
33,017
32,662
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
6,487
6,573
4,061
4,852
5,084
Costco stockholders’ equity
12,799
10,778
12,079
10,617
12,303
WAREHOUSE INFORMATION
Warehouses in Operation
Beginning of year
741
715
686
663
634
Opened
25
28
33
26
30
Closed due to relocation
(4)
(2)
(4)
(3)
(1)
End of year
762
741
715
686
663
MEMBERSHIP INFORMATION
Total paid members (000's)
51,600
49,400
47,600
44,600
42,000
_______________
(1)
Net sales less merchandise costs.
(2)
Includes net sales from warehouses and websites operating for more than one year. For fiscal 2017, the prior year includes the comparable 53 weeks.
20

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data)
Overview
We believe that the most important driver of our profitability is sales growth, particularly comparable warehouse sales (comparable sales) growth.
We define comparable sales as sales from warehouses open for more than one year, including remodels, relocations and expansions, as well as
online sales related to e-commerce websites operating for more than one year. Comparable sales growth is achieved through increasing shopping
frequency from new and existing members and the amount they spend on each visit (average ticket). Sales comparisons can also be particularly
influenced by certain factors that are beyond our control: fluctuations in currency exchange rates (with respect to the consolidation of the results of
our international operations); and changes in the cost of gasoline and associated competitive conditions. The higher our comparable sales exclusive
of these items, the more we can leverage certain of our selling, general and administrative expenses, reducing them as a percentage of sales and
enhancing profitability. Generating comparable sales growth is foremost a question of making available to our members the right merchandise at the
right prices, a skill that we believe we have repeatedly demonstrated over the long term. Another substantial factor in sales growth is the health of
the economies in which we do business, including the effects of inflation or deflation, especially the United States. Sales growth and gross margins
are also impacted by our competition, which is vigorous and widespread, across a wide range of global, national and regional wholesalers and
retailers,  including  those  with  e-commerce  operations.  While  we  cannot  control  or  reliably  predict  general  economic  health  or  changes  in
competition, we believe that we have been successful historically in adapting our business to these changes, such as through adjustments to our
pricing and to our merchandise mix, including increasing the penetration of our private label items, and through our online offerings.
Our philosophy is to provide our members with quality goods and services at competitive prices. We do not focus in the short term on maximizing
prices charged, but instead seek to maintain what we believe is a perception among our members of our “pricing authority” on quality goods –
consistently  providing  the  most  competitive  values.  Our  investments  in  merchandise  pricing  can,  from  time  to  time,  include  reducing  prices  on
merchandise  to  drive  sales  or  meet  competition  and  holding  prices  steady  despite  cost  increases  instead  of  passing  the  increases  on  to  our
members, all negatively impacting near-term gross margin as a percentage of net sales (gross margin percentage). We believe that our gasoline
business  draws  members  but  it  generally  has  a  significantly  lower  gross  margin  percentage  relative  to  our  non-gasoline  business.  A  higher
penetration of gasoline sales will generally lower our gross margin percentage. Rapidly changing gasoline prices may significantly impact our near-
term net sales growth. Generally, rising gasoline prices benefit net sales growth which, given the higher sales base, negatively impacts our gross
margin percentage but decreases our selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses as a percentage of net sales. A decline in gasoline
prices has the inverse effect.
We also achieve sales growth by opening new warehouses. As our warehouse base grows, available and desirable potential sites become more
difficult to secure, and square footage growth becomes a comparatively less substantial component of growth. The negative aspects of such growth,
however,  including  lower  initial  operating  profitability  relative  to  existing  warehouses  and  cannibalization  of  sales  at  existing  warehouses  when
openings occur in existing markets, are continuing to decline in significance as they relate to the results of our total operations. Our rate of square
footage growth is generally higher in foreign markets, due to the smaller base in those markets, and we expect that to continue. Our e-commerce
business growth, domestically and internationally, has also increased our sales.
Our  membership  format  is  an  integral  part  of  our  business  and  has  a  significant  effect  on  our  profitability.  This  format  is  designed  to  reinforce
member loyalty and provide continuing fee revenue. The extent to which we achieve growth in our membership base, increase the penetration of our
Executive  members,  and  sustain  high  renewal  rates,  materially  influences  our  profitability.  Our  paid  membership  growth  rate  may  be  adversely
impacted when warehouse openings occur in existing markets.
21

Our financial performance depends heavily on our ability to control costs. While we believe that we have achieved successes in this area, some
significant  costs  are  partially  outside  our  control,  most  particularly  health  care  and  utility  expenses.  With  respect  to  expenses  relating  to  the
compensation of our employees, our philosophy is not to seek to minimize their wages and benefits. Rather, we believe that achieving our longer-
term objectives of reducing employee turnover and enhancing employee satisfaction requires maintaining compensation levels that are better than
the industry average for much of our workforce. This may cause us, for example, to absorb costs that other employers might seek to pass through to
their workforces. Because our business is operated on very low margins, modest changes in various items in the income statement, particularly
merchandise costs and selling, general and administrative expenses, can have substantial impacts on net income.
Our operating model is generally the same across our U.S., Canada, and Other International operating segments (see Note 11 to the consolidated
financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report). Certain countries in the Other International segment have relatively higher rates of square
footage growth, lower wages and benefits costs as a percentage of country sales, and/or less or no direct membership warehouse competition.
In discussions of our consolidated operating results, we refer to the impact of changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which are
references to the differences between the foreign-exchange rates we use to convert the financial results of our international operations from local
currencies into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. This impact of foreign-exchange rate changes is calculated based on the difference
between the current period's currency exchange rates and that of the comparable prior period. The impact of changes in gasoline prices on net
sales is calculated based on the difference between the current period's average price per gallon sold and that of the comparable prior period.
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday closest to August 31. Fiscal year 2018 and 2016 were 52-week fiscal years ending on September 2, 2018 and
August 28, 2016 , respectively, and 2017 was a 53-week fiscal year ending on September 3, 2017 . Certain percentages presented are calculated
using actual results prior to rounding. Unless otherwise noted, references to net income relate to net income attributable to Costco.
Highlights for fiscal year 2018 included:
•
We opened 25 new warehouses, including 4 relocations, in 2018 : 13 net new locations in the U.S., three in Canada, and five in our Other
International segment, compared to 28 new warehouses, including 2 relocations in 2017 ;
•
Net sales increased 10% to 138,434 driven by a 9% increase in comparable sales and sales at new warehouses opened in 2017 and 2018 ,
partially offset by one additional week of sales in 2017 ;
•
Membership  fee  revenue  increased 10% to $3,142 ,  primarily  due  to  the  annual  fee  increase  in  the  U.S.  and  Canada  in  June  2017,  and
membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses;
•
Gross margin percentage decreased 29 basis points due to the impact of gasoline price inflation on net sales and a shift in sales penetration to
certain lower margin warehouse ancillary businesses from our core merchandise categories;
•
Selling, general & administrative (SG&A) expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 24 basis points, due to the impact of gasoline price
inflation and leveraging increased sales;
•
The effective tax rate in 2018 was 28.4% and was favorably impacted by the 2017 Tax Act and net tax benefits of $57. The effective tax rate in
2017 was 32.8% and was favorably impacted by net tax benefits of $104;
•
Net income increased 17% to $3,134 , or $7.09 per diluted share compared to $2,679 , or $6.08 per diluted share in 2017 ; and
•
In April 2018, the Board of Directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend from $0.50 to $0.57 per share.
22

Table of Contents
Results of operations
Net Sales
2018
2017
2016
Net Sales
$
138,434
$
126,172
 $
116,073
Changes in net sales:
U.S.
9%
8%
3 %
Canada
10%
10%
(2)%
Other International
14%
8%
4 %
Total Company
10%
9%
2 %
Changes in comparable sales:
U.S.
9%
4%
1 %
Canada
9%
5%
(3)%
Other International
11%
2%
(3)%
Total Company
9%
4%
0 %
Increases in comparable sales excluding the impact of changes in foreign
currency and gasoline prices:
U.S.
7%
4%
3 %
Canada
4%
4%
8 %
Other International
7%
4%
4 %
Total Company
7%
4%
4 %
2018 vs. 2017
Net Sales
Net sales increased $12,262 or 10% during 2018 , primarily due to a 9% increase in comparable sales and sales at new warehouses opened in
2017 and 2018 , partially offset by the impact of one additional week of sales in 2017.
Changes in gasoline prices positively impacted net sales by approximately $2,267, or 180 basis points, due to a 19% increase in the average sales
price per gallon. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar positively impacted net sales by approximately $1,156, or 92 basis points,
compared to 2017 . The positive impact was driven by both our Canadian and Other International operations.
Comparable Sales
Comparable sales increased 9% during 2018 and were positively impacted by increases in both shopping frequency and the average ticket. The
average ticket and comparable sales results were positively impacted by an increase in gasoline prices and exchange rates in foreign currencies
relative to the U.S. dollar. Changes in comparable sales includes the negative impact of cannibalization (established warehouses losing sales to our
newly opened locations).
23

Table of Contents
2017 vs. 2016
Net Sales
Net sales increased $10,099 or 9% during 2017, primarily due to a 4% increase in comparable sales, new warehouses opened in 2016 and 2017,
and the benefit of one additional week of sales in 2017. Changes in gasoline prices positively impacted net sales by approximately $785, or 68 basis
points, due to an 8% increase in the average sales price per gallon. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted net
sales by approximately $295, or 25 basis points, compared to 2016. The negative impact was driven by Other International operations, partially
offset by positive impacts attributable to our Canadian operations.
Comparable Sales
Comparable  sales  increased  4%  during  2017  and  were  positively  impacted  by  an  increase  in  shopping  frequency  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  an
increased average ticket. The average ticket and comparable sales results were positively impacted by an increase in gasoline prices, offset by
decreases in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Changes in comparable sales includes the negative impact of cannibalization.
Membership Fees
2018
2017
2016
Membership fees
$
3,142
$
2,853
$
2,646
Membership fees increase
10%
8%
4%
Membership fees as a percentage of net sales
2.27%
2.26%
2.28%
2018 vs. 2017
The increase in membership fees was primarily due to the annual fee increase and membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses. These
increases were partially offset by the impact of one additional week of membership fees in 2017. At the end of 2018 , our member renewal rates
were 90% in the U.S. and Canada and 88% worldwide.
As reported in fiscal 2017, we increased our annual membership fees in the U.S. and Canada and in certain of our Other International operations.
We account for membership fee revenue on a deferred basis, recognized ratably over the one-year membership period. These fee increases had a
positive impact of approximately $178 in fiscal 2018 and will positively impact fiscal 2019, primarily the first two quarters, by approximately $70.
2017 vs. 2016
The increase in membership fees was primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses, an extra week of membership fee
revenue, the annual fee increase, and an increased number of upgrades to our higher-fee Executive Membership program. Fee increases had a
positive impact on membership fee revenues during 2017 of approximately $23.
24

Table of Contents
Gross Margin
2018
2017
2016
Net sales
$
138,434
$
126,172
$
116,073
Less merchandise costs
123,152
111,882
102,901
Gross margin
$
15,282
$
14,290
$
13,172
Gross margin percentage
11.04%
11.33%
11.35%
2018 vs. 2017
The gross margin of our core merchandise categories (food and sundries, hardlines, softlines and fresh foods), when expressed as a percentage of
core  merchandise  sales  (rather  than  total  net  sales),  increased  one  basis  point  primarily  due  to  increases  in  food  and  sundries  and  hardlines
partially offset by decreases in fresh foods and softlines. This measure eliminates the impact of changes in sales penetration and gross margins
from our warehouse ancillary and other businesses.
Total gross margin percentage decreased 29 basis points compared to 2017. Excluding the impact of gasoline price inflation on net sales, gross
margin  as  a percentage  of  adjusted  net sales  was 11.22%,  a  decrease  of  11 basis  points.  This  decrease  was primarily  due to  a shift  in sales
penetration  to  certain  lower  margin  warehouse  ancillary  and  other  businesses,  which  contributed  to  a  13  basis  point  decrease  in  our  core
merchandise categories, except hardlines which was flat. Gross margin percentage was also negatively impacted by 10 basis points due to a non-
recurring legal settlement benefiting 2017 and costs related to our centralized return centers in the U.S. These decreases were partially offset by a
13  basis  point  increase  in  our  warehouse  ancillary  and  other  businesses,  predominantly  our  gasoline  business.  Changes  in  foreign  currencies
relative to the U.S. dollar positively impacted gross margin by approximately $124 in 2018.
The  segment  gross  margin  percentage,  when  expressed  as  a  percentage  of  the  segment's  own  sales  and  excluding  the  impact  of  changes  in
gasoline  prices  on  net  sales  (segment  gross  margin  percentage),  decreased  in  our  U.S.  operations,  predominantly  in  our  core  merchandise
categories, and as a result of the non-recurring legal settlement in 2017, and the costs related to our centralized return centers mentioned above.
The  segment  gross  margin  percentage  in  our  Canadian  operations  increased,  due  to  warehouse  ancillary  and  other  businesses,  primarily  our
gasoline business. The segment gross margin percentage in our Other International operations decreased, predominantly in food and sundries and
softlines, partially offset by an increase in our gasoline business.
2017 vs. 2016
The gross margin of our core merchandise categories, when expressed as a percentage of core merchandise sales, increased eight basis points
due to increases in these categories other than fresh foods.
Total gross margin percentage decreased two basis points compared to 2016. Excluding the impact of gasoline price inflation on net sales, gross
margin as a percentage of adjusted net sales was 11.40%, an increase of five basis points. This increase was primarily due to amounts earned
under the co-branded credit card arrangement in the U.S. of 15 basis points and a benefit of three basis points from non-recurring legal settlements
and other matters. The improvement in terms in our current co-brand agreement as compared to the prior co-brand arrangement led to substantial
year  over  year  benefits  in fiscal  2017. These  increases  were  partially  offset  by a six  basis point  decrease  in our core  merchandise  categories,
primarily due to food and sundries as a result of a decrease in sales penetration. The gross margin percentage was also negatively impacted by five
basis points due to a LIFO benefit in 2016 and one basis point in warehouse ancillary and other businesses. Changes in foreign currencies relative
to the U.S. dollar had an immaterial impact on gross margin in 2017.
Gross margin on a segment basis, when expressed as a percentage of the segment's own sales and excluding the impact of changes in gasoline
prices on net sales, increased in our U.S. operations, due to amounts
25

Table of Contents
earned under the co-branded credit card arrangement and non-recurring legal settlements and other matters as discussed above. These increases
were partially offset by a decrease in core merchandise categories, predominantly food and sundries as a result of a decrease in sales penetration,
and a LIFO benefit in 2016. The segment gross margin percentage in our Canadian operations increased, primarily due to increases in warehouse
ancillary and other businesses, primarily our pharmacy business, partially offset by a decrease in our core merchandise categories, largely fresh
foods.  The  segment  gross  margin  percentage  increased  in  our  Other  International  operations  due  to  increases  across  all  core  merchandise
categories, except fresh foods.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
2018
2017
2016
SG&A expenses
$
13,876
$
12,950
$
12,068
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales
10.02%
10.26%
10.40%
2018 vs. 2017
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 24 basis points compared to 2017. Excluding the impact of gasoline price inflation on net
sales,  SG&A  expenses  as  a  percentage  of  adjusted  net  sales  was  10.19%,  a  decrease  of  seven  basis  points.  Operating  costs  related  to
warehouses, ancillary, and other businesses, which includes e-commerce and travel, were lower by six basis points, predominantly in our U.S. and
Other International operations, due to leveraging increased sales. Charges related to certain non-recurring legal and other matters in 2017 positively
impacted SG&A expense by two basis points. Stock compensation expense was also lower by one basis point. Central operating costs were higher
by two basis points. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar increased our SG&A expenses by approximately $98 in 2018.
Effective in June 2018, a portion of the savings generated from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “2017 Tax Act”) were used to increase wages for the
majority of our U.S. hourly employees. The impact in fiscal 2018 was two basis points and the estimated annualized pre-tax cost of these increases
is approximately $120.
2017 vs. 2016
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 14 basis points compared to 2016. Excluding the impact of gasoline price inflation on net
sales,  SG&A  expenses  as  a  percentage  of  adjusted  net  sales  was  10.33%,  a  decrease  of  seven  basis  points.  Operating  costs  related  to
warehouses, ancillary, and other businesses, were lower by nine basis points, primarily due to lower costs associated with the co-branded credit
card arrangement in the U.S. of 18 basis points. The improvement in terms in our current co-brand agreement as compared to the prior co-brand
arrangement led to substantial year over year benefits in fiscal 2017. This was partially offset by higher payroll and employee benefit expenses of 11
basis points, primarily in our U.S. operations. Central operating costs were higher by one basis point, primarily due to increased costs associated
with our information systems modernization, including increased depreciation for projects placed in service, incurred by our U.S. operations. Stock
compensation expense was also higher by one basis point.
26

Table of Contents
Preopening
2018
2017
2016
Preopening expenses
$
68
$
82
$
78
Warehouse openings, including relocations
United States
17
15
25
Canada
3
6
2
Other International
5
7
6
Total warehouse openings, including relocations
25
28
33
Preopening expenses include costs for startup operations related to new warehouses and relocations, developments in new international markets,
new manufacturing and distribution facilities, and expansions at existing warehouses. Preopening expenses vary due to the number of warehouse
openings, the timing of the opening relative to our year-end, whether the warehouse is owned or leased, and whether the opening is in an existing,
new, or international market. In 2017, we entered into two new international markets, Iceland and France.
Interest Expense
2018
2017
2016
Interest expense
$
159
$
134
$
133
Interest expense primarily relates to Senior Notes issued by the Company. In May 2017, we issued $3,800 in aggregate principal amount of Senior
Notes. In March and June 2017, we repaid $2,200 in total outstanding principal of the 5.5% and 1.125% Senior Notes, respectively.
Interest Income and Other, Net
2018
2017
2016
Interest income
$
75
$
50
$
41
Foreign-currency transaction gains (losses), net
23
(5)
28
Other, net
23
17
11
Interest income and other, net
$
121
$
62
$
80
2018 vs. 2017
The  increase  in  interest  income  in  2018  as  compared  to  2017  was  primarily  due  to  higher  interest  rates  earned  on  higher  average  cash  and
investment balances. Foreign-currency transaction gains (losses), net include the revaluation or settlement of monetary assets and liabilities and
mark-to-market adjustments for forward foreign-exchange contracts by our Canadian and Other International operations. In 2018, the increase was
primarily due to a strengthening U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies on forward foreign-exchange contracts. See Derivatives and Foreign
Currency sections in Item 8, Note 1 of this Report.
2017 vs. 2016
Foreign-currency transaction gains (losses), net include the revaluation or settlement of monetary assets and liabilities and mark-to-market
adjustments for forward foreign-exchange contracts by our Canadian and Other International operations.
27

Table of Contents
Provision for Income Taxes
2018
2017
2016
Provision for income taxes
$
1,263
$
1,325
$
1,243
Effective tax rate
28.4%
32.8%
34.3%
Our effective tax rate for 2018 was favorably impacted by the 2017 Tax Act, which included a reduction in the U.S. federal corporate rate from 35%
to 21%. Due to the timing of our fiscal year relative to the effective date of the rate change, our U.S. corporate rate for 2018 resulted in a blended
rate of 25.6%. Other impacts from the 2017 Tax Act consisted of tax expense of $142 for the estimated tax on deemed repatriation of unremitted
earnings and $43 for  the  reduction  in  foreign  tax  credits  and  other  immaterial  items,  largely  offset  by  a  tax  benefit  of   $166 for the provisional
remeasurement of certain deferred tax liabilities. In 2018, we also recognized net tax benefits of $76, which was largely driven by the adoption of an
accounting standard related to stock-based compensation and other immaterial net benefits.
In 2017, our provision was favorably impacted by net tax benefits of $104, primarily due to a tax benefit recorded in connection with the May 2017
special dividend paid to employees through our 401(k) retirement plan of $82. This dividend was deductible for U.S. income tax purposes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes our significant sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents:
2018
2017
2016
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
5,774
$
6,726
$
3,292
Net cash used in investing activities
(2,947)
(2,366)
(2,345)
Net cash used in financing activities
(1,281)
(3,218)
(2,419)
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from warehouse operations, cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. Cash
and  cash  equivalents  and  short-term  investments  were $7,259 and $5,779 at  the  end  of 2018 and 2017 ,  respectively.  Of  these  balances,
approximately $ 1,348 and $ 1,255 represented unsettled credit and debit card receivables, respectively. These receivables generally settle within
four days. Cash and cash equivalents were negatively impacted by a change in exchange rates of $ 37 in 2018 and positively impacted by $ 25 and
$ 50 in 2017 and 2016 , respectively.
Management  believes  that  our  cash  position  and  operating  cash  flows  will  be  sufficient  to  meet  our  liquidity  and  capital  requirements  for  the
foreseeable future. While we believe that our U.S. current and projected asset position is sufficient to meet our U.S. liquidity requirements, beginning
in the second quarter of fiscal 2018, we no longer consider current fiscal year and future earnings of our non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries to be
permanently reinvested. We recorded the estimated incremental foreign withholding (net of available foreign tax credits) and state income taxes
payable on current fiscal year earnings assuming a hypothetical repatriation to the U.S. We continue to consider undistributed earnings of certain
non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries prior to fiscal 2018 to be indefinitely reinvested and have not provided for withholding or state taxes.
In fiscal 2018, we recorded a one-time charge of $142 for the estimated tax on deemed repatriation of unremitted earnings under the 2017 Tax Act.
The 2017 Tax Act provides for the payment of the federal tax over an eight-year period. Because of the availability of foreign tax credits, the amount
payable is $97, of which $89 is classified as long-term and included in other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $ 5,774 in 2018 , compared to $ 6,726 in 2017 . Our cash flow provided by operations is primarily
derived from net sales and membership fees. Cash flow used in operations
28

Table of Contents
generally consists of payments to our merchandise vendors, warehouse operating costs including payroll and employee benefits, utilities, and credit
and debit card processing fees. Cash used in operations also includes payments for income taxes. The decrease in net cash provided by operating
activities for 2018 when compared to 2017 was primarily due to accelerated vendor payments of approximately $1,700 made in the last week of
fiscal 2016, which positively impacted cash flows in 2017.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $2,947 in 2018 , compared to $2,366 in 2017 , and primarily related to capital expenditures. Net cash
flows from investing activities also includes maturities and purchases of short-term investments.
Capital Expenditures
We opened 21 net new warehous es and relocated 4 warehouses in 2018 and plan to open approximately 20 net new warehouses and relocate up
to 4 warehouses in 2019 . Our primary requirement for capital is acquiring land, buildings, and equipment for new and remodeled warehouses.
Capital is also required for information systems, manufacturing and distribution facilities, initial warehouse operations and working capital. In 2018 ,
we  spent $2,969 on  capital  expenditures,  and  it  is  our  current  intention  to  spend  approximately  $2,800  to  $3,100  during  fiscal 2019 . These
expenditures are expected to be financed with cash from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. There can be
no assurance that current expectations will be realized and plans are subject to change upon further review of our capital expenditure needs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities  totaled $1,281 in 2018 , compared to $3,218 in 2017 . The primary uses of cash in 2018 were related to
dividend  payments  and  repurchases  of  common  stock.  Net  cash  used  in  financing  activities  in 2017 primarily  related  to  dividend  payments,
predominantly the special dividend paid in May 2017, and the repayments of debt totaling $2,200 representing the aggregate principal balances of
the 5.5% and 1.125% Senior Notes.
In May 2017, we issued $3,800 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes. The proceeds received were net of a discount and used to pay the
special dividend and a portion of the redemption of the 1.125% Senior Notes.
Stock Repurchase Programs
During 2018 and 2017 , we repurchased 1,756,000 and 2,998,000 shares of common stock, at average prices of $183.13 and $157.87 , totaling
approximately $322 and $473 , respectively. The remaining amount available to be purchased under our approved plan was $2,427 at the end of
2018 . These amounts may differ from the stock repurchase balances in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows due to changes in
unsettled stock repurchases at the end of each fiscal year. Purchases are made from time-to-time, as conditions warrant, in the open market or in
block purchases and pursuant to plans under SEC Rule 10b5-1. Repurchased shares are retired, in accordance with the Washington Business
Corporation Act.
Dividends
Cash dividends declared in 2018 totaled $ 2.14 per share, as compared to $ 8.90 per share in 2017 , which included a special cash dividend of
$7.00 per share. In April 2018 , our Board of Directors increased our quarterly cash dividend from $0.50 to $0.57 per share. Subsequent to the end
of 2018, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend in the amount of $0.57 per share, which is payable on November 23, 2018.
29

Table of Contents
Bank Credit Facilities and Commercial Paper Programs
We maintain bank credit facilities for working capital and general corporate purposes. At September 2, 2018 , we had borrowing capacity under
these facilities of $857, including a $400 revolving line of credit renewed by the U.S., which expires in June 2019. The Company currently has no
plans to draw upon this facility. Our international operations maintain $344 of the total borrowing capacity under bank credit facilities, of which $163
is guaranteed by the Company. There were no outstanding short-term borrowings under the bank credit facilities at the end of 2018 and 2017.
The Company has letter of credit facilities, for commercial and standby letters of credit, totaling $220. The outstanding standby letters of credit under
these facilities at the end of 2018 totaled $149 and expire within one year. The bank credit facilities and commercial paper programs have various
expiration dates, all within one year, and we generally intend to renew these facilities. The amount of borrowings available at any time under our
bank credit facilities is reduced by the amount of standby and commercial letters of credit then outstanding.
Contractual Obligations
At September 2, 2018 , our commitments to make future payments under contractual obligations were as follows:  
 
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
Contractual obligations
2019
2020 to 2021
2022 to 2023
2024 and thereafter
Total
Purchase obligations (merchandise) (1)
$
9,029
$
2
$
—
$
—
$
9,031
Long-term debt (2)
232
3,029
1,537
2,496
7,294
Operating leases (3)  
227
407
358
2,215
3,207
Construction and land obligations
710
12
—
—
722
Capital lease obligations (4)
34
71
72
647
824
Purchase obligations (equipment, services
and other) (5)
611
186
67
3
867
Other (6)
19
38
36
141
234
Total
$
10,862
$
3,745
$
2,070
$
5,502
$
22,179
_______________
(1)
Includes only open merchandise purchase orders.
(2)
Includes contractual interest payments and excludes deferred issuance costs.
(3)
Excludes common area maintenance, taxes, and insurance and have been reduced by $105 related to sub-lease income.
(4)
Includes build-to-suit lease obligations and contractual interest payments.
(5)
Excludes certain services negotiated at the individual warehouse or regional level that are not significant and generally contain clauses allowing for cancellation without
significant penalty.
(6)
Includes asset retirement obligations, deferred compensation obligations and current liabilities for unrecognized tax contingencies. The total amount excludes $36 of
non-current unrecognized tax contingencies and $30 of other obligations due to uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the opinion of management, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or
future effect on our financial condition or financial statements other than operating leases, included in the table above and discussed in Note 1 and
Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
30

Table of Contents
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires
that we make estimates  and assumptions  that affect  the reported amounts  of assets  and liabilities and the disclosure  of contingent  assets and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our
estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, and we continue to review and evaluate these estimates.
For further information on significant accounting policies, see discussion in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this
Report.
Insurance/Self-Insurance Liabilities
The Company is predominantly self-insured for employee health-care benefits, workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’
and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and inventory loss. Insurance coverage is maintained in certain instances to limit the exposure arising from
catastrophic events. We use different mechanisms, including a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and participate in a reinsurance program.
Liabilities associated with the risks that we retain are not discounted and are estimated by using historical claims experience, demographic factors,
severity  factors  and  other  actuarial  assumptions.  The  costs  of  claims  are  highly  unpredictable  and  can  fluctuate  as  a  result  of  inflation  rates,
regulatory or legal changes, and unforeseen developments in claims of an extended nature. While we believe our estimates are reasonable and
provide for a certain degree of coverage to account for these variables, actual claims and costs could differ significantly from recorded liabilities.
Historically, adjustments to our estimates have not been material.
Income Taxes
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of
complex tax laws. Significant judgment also is required in assessing the timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items and the probability of
sustaining uncertain tax positions. The benefits associated with uncertain tax positions are recorded only after determining a more-likely-than-not
probability that the positions will withstand challenge from tax authorities. When facts and circumstances change, we reassess these positions and
record any changes in the consolidated financial statements as appropriate. In December 2017, the 2017 Tax Act was signed into law and our
effective tax rate for fiscal 2018 reflects the provisional impact (see Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for a detailed description of recent accounting pronouncements.
Item 7A—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk (amounts in millions)
Our  exposure  to  financial  market  risk  results  from  fluctuations  in  interest  rates  and  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  We  do  not  engage  in
speculative or leveraged transactions or hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes.
Interest Rate Risk
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment holdings that are diversified among various instruments
considered to be cash equivalents, as defined in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, as well as short-
term investments in government and agency securities with effective maturities of generally three months to five years at the date of purchase. The
primary objective of our investment activities is to preserve principal and secondarily to generate yields. The majority of our short-term investments
are in fixed interest-rate securities. These securities are subject to changes in fair value due to interest rate fluctuations.
31

Table of Contents
Our policy limits investments in the U.S. to direct U.S. government and government agency obligations, repurchase agreements collateralized by
U.S.  government  and  government  agency  obligations,  and  U.S.  government  and  government  agency  money  market  funds.  Our  wholly-owned
captive insurance subsidiary invests in U.S. government and government agency obligations and U.S. government and government agency money
market funds. Our Canadian and Other International subsidiaries’ investments are primarily in money market funds, bankers’ acceptances, and bank
certificates of deposit, generally denominated in local currencies.
A 100 basis-point change in interest rates as of the end of 2018 would have had an immaterial incremental change in fair market value. For those
investments that are classified as available-for-sale, the unrealized gains or losses related to fluctuations in market volatility and interest rates are
reflected within stockholders’ equity in accumulated other comprehensive income in the consolidated balance sheets.
The nature and amount of our long-term debt may vary as a result of business requirements, market conditions, and other factors. As of the end of
2018 , long-term debt with fixed interest rates was $6,577 . Fluctuations in interest rates may affect the fair value of the fixed-rate debt. See Note 4
to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for more information on our long-term debt.
Foreign Currency-Exchange Risk
Our foreign subsidiaries conduct certain transactions in their non-functional currencies, which exposes us to fluctuations in exchange rates. We
manage  these  fluctuations,  in  part,  through  the  use  of  forward  foreign-exchange  contracts,  seeking  to  economically  hedge  the  impact  of  these
fluctuations on known future expenditures denominated in a non-functional foreign-currency. The contracts are intended primarily to economically
hedge exposure to U.S. dollar merchandise inventory expenditures made by our international subsidiaries whose functional currency is other than
the U.S. dollar. We seek to mitigate risk with the use of these contracts and do not intend to engage in speculative transactions. For additional
information related to the Company's forward foreign-exchange contracts, see Notes 1 and 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in
Item  8  of  this  Report.  A  hypothetical  10%  strengthening  of  the  functional  currency  compared  to  the  non-functional  currency  exchange  rates  at
September 2, 2018 , would have decreased the fair value of the contracts by $80 and resulted in an unrealized loss in the consolidated statements
of income for the same amount.
Commodity Price Risk
We are exposed to fluctuations in prices for energy, particularly electricity and natural gas, which we seek to partially mitigate through fixed-price
contracts for certain of our warehouses and other facilities, predominantly in the U.S. and Canada. We also enter into variable-priced contracts for
some purchases of electricity and natural gas, in addition to fuel for our gas stations, on an index basis. These contracts meet the characteristics of
derivative instruments, but generally qualify for the “normal purchases or normal sales” exception under authoritative guidance and require no mark-
to-market adjustment.
32

Table of Contents
Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
Opinion on the Consolidated Financial Statements
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  balance  sheets  of  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  and  subsidiaries  (the  Company)  as  of
September 2, 2018 and September 3, 2017 , the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for the
52-week period ended September 2, 2018 , the 53-week period ended September 3, 2017 and the 52-week period ended August 28, 2016 , and the
related notes (collectively, the consolidated financial statements). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company as of September 2, 2018 and September 3, 2017 , and the results of its operations and its cash flows
for the 52-week period ended September 2, 2018 , the 53-week period ended September 3, 2017 and the 52-week period ended August 28, 2016 ,
in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We  also  have  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of September 2, 2018, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, and our report dated October 25, 2018 expressed an
adverse opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
consolidated  financial  statements  based  on  our  audits.  We  are  a  public  accounting  firm  registered  with  the  PCAOB  and  are  required  to  be
independent  with  respect  to  the  Company  in  accordance  with  the  U.S.  federal  securities  laws  and  the  applicable  rules  and  regulations  of  the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our
audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or
fraud,  and  performing  procedures  that  respond  to  those  risks.  Such  procedures  included  examining,  on  a  test  basis,  evidence  regarding  the
amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ KPMG LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2002.
Seattle, Washington
October 25, 2018
33

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Costco Wholesale Corporation and subsidiaries’ (the Company) internal control over financial reporting as of September 2, 2018 ,
based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  -  Integrated  Framework  (2013) issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the
Treadway Commission. In our opinion, because of the effect of the material weakness, described below, on the achievement of the objectives of the
control  criteria,  the  Company  has  not  maintained  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of  September  2,  2018,  based  on  criteria
established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
We  also  have  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
consolidated balance sheets of the Company as of September 2, 2018 and September 3, 2017, and the related consolidated statements of income,
comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for the 52-week period ended September 2, 2018, the 53-week period ended September 3, 2017 and
the 52-week period ended August 28, 2016, and the related notes (collectively, the consolidated financial statements), and our report dated October
25, 2018 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements.
A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable
possibility that a material misstatement of the company’s annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
The following material weakness has been identified and included in management’s assessment:
There were ineffective information technology general controls (ITGCs) in the areas of user access and program change-management over
certain information technology (IT) systems that support the Company’s financial reporting processes. As a result, business process automated
and manual controls that were dependent on the affected ITGCs were ineffective because they could have been adversely impacted. These
control  deficiencies  were  a  result  of:  IT  control  processes  lacked  sufficient  documentation;  insufficient  knowledge  and  training  of  certain
individuals with IT expertise; and risk-assessment processes inadequate to identify and assess changes in IT environments and personnel that
could impact internal control over financial reporting.
The  material  weakness  was  considered  in  determining  the  nature,  timing,  and  extent  of  audit  tests  applied  in  our  audit  of  the  fiscal  year  2018
consolidated financial statements, and this report does not affect our report on those consolidated financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its  assessment  of  the
effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  the  accompanying  Management’s  Annual  Report  on  Internal  Control  Over
Financial Reporting (Item 9A). Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our
audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance
with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
34

Table of Contents
control based on the assessed risk. Our audit also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 25, 2018
35

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(amounts in millions, except par value and share data)
September 2, 
2018
September 3, 
2017
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
$
6,055
$
4,546
Short-term investments
1,204
1,233
Receivables, net
1,669
1,432
Merchandise inventories
11,040
9,834
Other current assets
321
272
Total current assets
20,289
17,317
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Land
6,193
5,690
Buildings and improvements
16,107
15,127
Equipment and fixtures
7,274
6,681
Construction in progress
1,140
843
30,714
28,341
Less accumulated depreciation and amortization
(11,033)
(10,180)
Net property and equipment
19,681
18,161
OTHER ASSETS
860
869
TOTAL ASSETS
$
40,830
$
36,347
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
$
11,237
$
9,608
Accrued salaries and benefits
2,994
2,703
Accrued member rewards
1,057
961
Deferred membership fees
1,624
1,498
Other current liabilities
3,014
2,725
Total current liabilities
19,926
17,495
LONG-TERM DEBT, excluding current portion
6,487
6,573
OTHER LIABILITIES
1,314
1,200
Total liabilities
27,727
25,268
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
EQUITY
Preferred stock $0.01 par value; 100,000,000 shares authorized; no shares issued and outstanding
0
0
Common stock $0.01 par value; 900,000,000 shares authorized; 438,189,000 and 437,204,000 shares
issued and outstanding
4
4
Additional paid-in capital
6,107
5,800
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(1,199)
(1,014)
Retained earnings
7,887
5,988
Total Costco stockholders’ equity
12,799
10,778
Noncontrolling interests
304
301
Total equity
13,103
11,079
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
$
40,830
$
36,347
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
36

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(amounts in millions, except per share data)
52 Weeks Ended
53 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
September 2, 
2018
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
REVENUE
Net sales
$
138,434
$
126,172
$
116,073
Membership fees
3,142
2,853
2,646
Total revenue
141,576
129,025
118,719
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
123,152
111,882
102,901
Selling, general and administrative
13,876
12,950
12,068
Preopening expenses
68
82
78
Operating income
4,480
4,111
3,672
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(159)
(134)
(133)
Interest income and other, net
121
62
80
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
4,442
4,039
3,619
Provision for income taxes
1,263
1,325
1,243
Net income including noncontrolling interests
3,179
2,714
2,376
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(45)
(35)
(26)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
3,134
$
2,679
$
2,350
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE ATTRIBUTABLE TO
COSTCO:
Basic
$
7.15
$
6.11
$
5.36
Diluted
$
7.09
$
6.08
$
5.33
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
438,515
438,437
438,585
Diluted
441,834
440,937
441,263
CASH DIVIDENDS DECLARED PER COMMON SHARE
$
2.14
$
8.90
$
1.70
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
37

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(amounts in millions)
 
52 Weeks Ended
53 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
 
September 2, 
2018
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
NET INCOME INCLUDING NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS
$
3,179
$
2,714
$
2,376
Foreign-currency translation adjustment and other, net
(192)
98
26
Comprehensive income
2,987
2,812
2,402
Less: Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests
38
48
30
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
2,949
$
2,764
$
2,372
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
38

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
(amounts in millions)
 
Common Stock
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
Retained
Earnings
Total Costco
Stockholders’
Equity
Noncontrolling
Interests
Total
Equity
 
Shares
(000’s)
Amount
BALANCE AT AUGUST 30,
2015
437,952
$
2
$
5,218
$
(1,121)
$
6,518
$
10,617
$
226
$10,843
Net income
—
—
—
—
2,350
2,350
26
2,376
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
—
—
—
22
—
22
4
26
Stock-based compensation
—
—
459
—
—
459
—
459
Stock options exercised,
including tax effects
4
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Release of vested restricted
stock units (RSUs),
including tax effects
2,749
—
(146)
—
—
(146)
—
(146)
Conversion of convertible
notes
3
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Repurchases of common
stock
(3,184)
—
(41)
—
(436)
(477)
—
(477)
Cash dividends declared
and other
—
—
—
—
(746)
(746)
(3)
(749)
BALANCE AT AUGUST 28,
2016
437,524
2
5,490
(1,099)
7,686
12,079
253
12,332
Net income
—
—
—
—
2,679
2,679
35
2,714
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
—
—
—
85
—
85
13
98
Stock-based compensation
—
—
518
—
—
518
—
518
Release of vested RSUs,
including tax effects
2,673
—
(165)
—
—
(165)
—
(165)
Conversion of convertible
notes
5
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Repurchases of common
stock
(2,998)
—
(41)
—
(432)
(473)
—
(473)
Cash dividends declared
and other
—
2
(2)
—
(3,945)
(3,945)
—
(3,945)
BALANCE AT
SEPTEMBER 3, 2017
437,204
4
5,800
(1,014)
5,988
10,778
301
11,079
Net income
—
—
—
—
3,134
3,134
45
3,179
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
—
—
—
(185)
—
(185)
(7)
(192)
Stock-based compensation
—
—
547
—
—
547
—
547
Release of vested RSUs,
including tax effects
2,741
—
(217)
—
—
(217)
—
(217)
Repurchases of common
stock
(1,756)
—
(26)
—
(296)
(322)
—
(322)
Cash dividends declared
and other
—
—
3
—
(939)
(936)
(35)
(971)
BALANCE AT
SEPTEMBER 2, 2018
438,189
$
4
$
6,107
$
(1,199)
$
7,887
$
12,799
$
304
$13,103
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
39

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(amounts in millions)
52 Weeks Ended
53 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
September 2, 
2018
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net income including noncontrolling interests
$
3,179
$
2,714
$
2,376
Adjustments to reconcile net income including noncontrolling interests to net cash provided by
operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
1,437
1,370
1,255
Stock-based compensation
544
514
459
Other non-cash operating activities, net
(6)
(14)
(57)
Deferred income taxes
(49)
(29)
269
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Merchandise inventories
(1,313)
(894)
(25)
Accounts payable
1,561
2,258
(1,532)
Other operating assets and liabilities, net
421
807
547
Net cash provided by operating activities
5,774
6,726
3,292
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Purchases of short-term investments
(1,060)
(1,279)
(1,432)
Maturities and sales of short-term investments
1,078
1,385
1,709
Additions to property and equipment
(2,969)
(2,502)
(2,649)
Other investing activities, net
4
30
27
Net cash used in investing activities
(2,947)
(2,366)
(2,345)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Change in bank checks outstanding
80
(236)
81
Repayments of short-term borrowings
—
—
(106)
Proceeds from short-term borrowings
—
—
106
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
—
3,782
185
Repayments of long-term debt
(86)
(2,200)
(1,288)
Tax withholdings on stock-based awards
(217)
(202)
(220)
Repurchases of common stock
(328)
(469)
(486)
Cash dividend payments
(689)
(3,904)
(746)
Other financing activities, net
(41)
11
55
Net cash used in financing activities
(1,281)
(3,218)
(2,419)
EFFECT OF EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES ON CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
(37)
25
50
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
1,509
1,167
(1,422)
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS BEGINNING OF YEAR
4,546
3,379
4,801
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS END OF YEAR
$
6,055
$
4,546
$
3,379
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION:
Cash paid during the year for:
Interest (reduced by $19, $16, and $19, interest capitalized in 2018, 2017, and 2016,
respectively)
$
143
$
131
$
123
Income taxes, net
$
1,204
$
1,185
$
953
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF NON-CASH INVESTING AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Property and equipment acquired, but not yet paid
$
113
$
—
$
—
Cash dividend declared, but not yet paid
$
250
$
—
$
—
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
40

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business
Costco Wholesale Corporation (Costco or the Company), a Washington corporation, and its subsidiaries operate membership warehouses based on
the concept that offering members low prices on a limited selection of nationally-branded and private-label products in a wide range of merchandise
categories will produce high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. At September 2, 2018 , Costco operated 762 warehouses worldwide: 527
United  States  (U.S.)  locations  (in 44 U.S.  states,  Washington,  D.C.,  and  Puerto  Rico), 100 Canada  locations, 39 Mexico  locations, 28 United
Kingdom (U.K.) locations, 26 Japan locations, 15 Korea locations, 13 Taiwan locations, 10 Australia locations, two Spain locations, one Iceland
location, and one France location. The Company operates e-commerce websites in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, U.K., Korea, and Taiwan.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements  include the accounts of Costco Wholesale Corporation, its wholly-owned subsidiaries, and subsidiaries in
which it has a controlling interest. The Company reports noncontrolling interests in consolidated entities as a component of equity separate from the
Company’s  equity.  All  material  inter-company  transactions  between  and  among  the  Company  and  its  consolidated  subsidiaries  have  been
eliminated in consolidation. The Company’s net income excludes income attributable to the noncontrolling interest in Taiwan. During the first quarter
of 2018 , Costco purchased its former joint-venture partner's remaining equity interest in its Korean operations. Unless otherwise noted, references
to net income relate to net income attributable to Costco.
Fiscal Year End
The Company operates on a 52/53 week fiscal year basis with the fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to August 31. References to 2018 and
2016 relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended September 2, 2018 , and August 28, 2016 , respectively. References to 2017 relate to the 53-week
fiscal year ended September 3, 2017 .
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those
estimates and assumptions.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers as cash and cash equivalents all cash on deposit, highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at the
date  of  purchase,  and  proceeds  due  from  credit  and  debit  card  transactions  with  settlement  terms  of  up  to  four  days.  Credit  and  debit  card
receivables were $ 1,348 and $ 1,255 at the end of 2018 and 2017 , respectively.
The Company provides for the daily replenishment of major bank accounts as checks are presented. Included in accounts payable at the end of
2018 and 2017 are $ 463 and $ 383 , respectively, representing the excess of outstanding checks over cash on deposit at the banks on which the
checks were drawn.
41

Table of Contents
Short-Term Investments
In general, short-term investments have a maturity at the date of purchase of three months to five years. Investments with maturities beyond five
years may be classified, based on the Company’s determination, as short-term based on their highly liquid nature and because they represent the
investment of cash that is available for current operations. Short-term investments classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value using the
specific  identification  method  with  the  unrealized  gains  and  losses  reflected  in  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (loss)  until  realized.
Realized gains and losses from the sale of available-for-sale securities, if any, are determined on a specific identification basis and are recorded in
interest  income  and  other,  net  in  the  consolidated  statements  of  income.  Short-term  investments  classified  as  held-to-maturity  are  financial
instruments that the Company has the intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported net of any related amortization and are not remeasured
to fair value on a recurring basis.
The Company periodically evaluates unrealized losses in its investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment, using both qualitative and
quantitative criteria. In the event a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, the Company recognizes the loss in interest income
and other, net in the consolidated statements of income.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company accounts for certain assets and liabilities at fair value. The carrying value of the Company’s financial instruments, including cash and
cash equivalents, receivables and accounts payable, approximate fair value due to their short-term nature or variable interest rates. See Notes 2, 3,
and 4 for the carrying value and fair value of the Company’s investments, derivative instruments, and fixed-rate debt, respectively.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market
participants at the measurement date. Fair value is estimated by applying a fair value hierarchy, which requires maximizing the use of observable
inputs when measuring fair value. The three levels of inputs are:
Level 1: Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data.
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data.
The Company’s valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of money market mutual funds are based on quoted market prices, such as
quoted net asset values published by the fund as supported in an active market. Valuation methodologies used to measure the fair value of all other
non-derivative  financial  instruments  are  based  on  independent  external  valuation  information.  The  pricing  process  uses  data  from  a  variety  of
independent external valuation information providers, including trades, bid price or spread, two-sided markets, quotes, benchmark curves including
but not limited to treasury benchmarks and Libor and swap curves, discount rates, and market data feeds. All are observable in the market or can be
derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data. The Company reports transfers in and out of Levels 1, 2, and 3, as applicable,
using the fair value of the individual securities as of the beginning of the reporting period in which the transfer(s) occurred.
Current financial liabilities have fair values that approximate their carrying values. Long-term financial liabilities include the Company's long-term
debt, which are recorded on the balance sheet at issuance price and adjusted for unamortized discounts or premiums and debt issuance costs, and
are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the loan. The estimated fair value of the Company's long-term debt is based primarily on
reported market values, recently completed market transactions, and estimates based upon interest rates, maturities, and credit.
42

Table of Contents
Receivables, Net
Receivables consist primarily of vendor, reinsurance, credit card incentive, third-party pharmacy and other receivables. Vendor receivables include
coupons, volume rebates or other purchase discounts. Balances are generally presented on a gross basis, separate from any related payable due.
In certain circumstances, these receivables may be settled against the related payable to that vendor, in which case the receivables are presented
on a net basis. Reinsurance receivables are held by the Company’s wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and primarily represent amounts
ceded through reinsurance arrangements gross of the amounts assumed under reinsurance, which are presented within other current liabilities in
the  consolidated  balance  sheets.  Credit  card  incentive  receivables  primarily  represent  amounts  earned  under  the  co-branded  credit  card
arrangement in the U.S. Third-party pharmacy receivables generally relate to amounts due from members’ insurers. Other receivables primarily
consist of amounts due from governmental entities, mostly tax-related items.
Receivables are recorded net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance is based on historical experience and application of the specific
identification method. Write-offs of receivables were immaterial for fiscal years 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 .
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories consist of the following:
2018
2017
United States
$
8,081
$
7,091
Canada
1,189
1,040
Other International
1,770
1,703
Merchandise inventories
$
11,040
$
9,834
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. U.S. merchandise inventories are valued by the cost method of accounting, using
the last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis. The Company believes the LIFO method more fairly presents the results of operations by more closely matching
current costs with current revenues. The Company records an adjustment each quarter, if necessary, for the projected annual effect of inflation or
deflation, and these estimates are adjusted to actual results determined at year-end, after actual inflation or deflation rates and inventory levels for
the  year  have  been  determined.  Canadian  and  Other  International  merchandise  inventories  are  predominantly  valued  using  the  cost  and  retail
inventory methods, respectively, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis.
As of September 2, 2018 and September 3, 2017 , U.S. merchandise inventories valued at LIFO approximated FIFO after considering the lower of
cost or market principle. Due to net deflation, a benefit of $64 was recorded to merchandise costs in 2016 .
The Company provides for estimated inventory losses between physical inventory counts as a percentage of net sales, using estimates based on
the Company’s experience. The provision is adjusted periodically to reflect physical inventory counts, which generally occur in the second and fourth
fiscal quarters. Inventory cost, where appropriate, is reduced by estimates of vendor rebates when earned or as the Company progresses towards
earning those rebates, provided that they are probable and reasonably estimable.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost. In general, new building additions are classified into components, each with an estimated useful life,
generally five to fifty years for buildings and improvements and three to twenty years for equipment and fixtures. Depreciation and amortization
expense is computed using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives or the lease term, if shorter. Leasehold improvements made after the
beginning of the initial lease term are depreciated over the shorter of the estimated useful life of
43

Table of Contents
the asset or the remaining term of the initial lease plus any renewals that are reasonably assured at the date the leasehold improvements are made.
The Company capitalizes  certain  computer  software  and software  development  costs  incurred  in developing or obtaining  computer  software  for
internal  use.  These  costs  are  included  in  equipment  and  fixtures  and  amortized  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  estimated  useful  lives  of  the
software, generally three to seven years.
Repair and maintenance costs are expensed when incurred. Expenditures for remodels, refurbishments and improvements that add to or change
the  way  an  asset  functions  or  that  extend  the  useful  life  are  capitalized.  Assets  that  were  removed  during  the  remodel,  refurbishment  or
improvement are retired. Assets classified as held-for-sale at the end of 2018 and 2017 were immaterial.
The Company evaluates long-lived assets for impairment on an annual basis, when relocating or closing a facility, or when events or changes in
circumstances may indicate the carrying amount of the asset group, generally an individual warehouse, may not be fully recoverable. For asset
groups held and used, including warehouses to be relocated, the carrying value of the asset group is considered recoverable when the estimated
future undiscounted cash flows generated from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group exceed the respective carrying value. In the
event that the carrying value is not considered recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized for the asset group to be held and used equal to the
excess of the carrying value above the estimated fair value of the asset group. For asset groups classified as held-for-sale (disposal group), the
carrying value is compared to the disposal group’s fair value less costs to sell. The Company estimates fair value by obtaining market appraisals
from third party brokers or using other valuation techniques. There were no impairment charges recognized in 2018 , 2017 or 2016 .
Insurance/Self-Insurance Liabilities
The Company is predominantly self-insured for employee health care benefits, workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’
and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and inventory loss. Insurance coverage is maintained in certain instances to limit the exposure arising from
catastrophic  events.  It  uses  different  mechanisms  including  a  wholly-owned  captive  insurance  subsidiary  (the  captive)  and  participates  in  a
reinsurance  program.  Liabilities  associated  with  the  risks  that  are  retained  by  the  Company  are  not  discounted  and  are  estimated,  in  part,  by
considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors, and other actuarial assumptions. The estimated accruals for these
liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends. At the end of 2018 and
2017 , these insurance liabilities were $ 1,148 and $ 1,059 in the aggregate, respectively, and were included in accrued salaries and benefits and
other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets, classified based on their nature.
The captive receives direct premiums, which are netted against the Company’s premium costs in selling, general and administrative expenses, in
the  consolidated  statements  of  income.  The  captive  participates  in  a  reinsurance  program  that  includes  other  third-party  participants.  The
reinsurance agreement is one year in duration, and new agreements are entered into by each participant at their discretion at the commencement of
the next calendar year. The participant agreements and practices of the reinsurance program limit a participating members’ individual risk. Income
statement adjustments related to the reinsurance program and related impacts to the consolidated balance sheets are recognized as information
becomes known. In the event the Company leaves the reinsurance program, the Company retains its primary obligation to the policyholders for prior
activity.
Derivatives
The Company is exposed to foreign-currency exchange-rate fluctuations in the normal course of business. It manages these fluctuations, in part,
through the use of forward foreign-exchange contracts, seeking to economically hedge the impact of fluctuations of foreign exchange on known
future  expenditures  denominated  in  a  non-functional  foreign-currency.  The  contracts  relate  primarily  to  U.S.  dollar  merchandise  inventory
expenditures made by the Company’s international subsidiaries with functional currencies other
44

Table of Contents
than the U.S. dollar. Currently, these contracts do not qualify for derivative hedge accounting. The Company seeks to mitigate risk with the use of
these contracts and does not intend to engage in speculative transactions. Some of these contracts contain credit-risk-related contingent features
that require settlement of outstanding contracts upon certain triggering events. At the end of 2018 and 2017 , the aggregate fair value amounts of
derivative instruments in a net liability position and the amount needed to settle the instruments immediately if the credit-risk-related contingent
features were triggered were immaterial. The aggregate notional amounts of open, unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts were $ 717 and $
637 at the end of 2018 and 2017 , respectively. See Note 3 for information on the fair value of unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts at the
end of 2018 and 2017 .
The unrealized gains or losses recognized in interest income and other, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of income relating to the
net changes in the fair value of unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts were immaterial in 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 .
The Company is exposed to fluctuations in prices for energy, particularly electricity and natural gas, which it seeks to partially mitigate through the
use  of  fixed-price  contracts  for  certain  of  its  warehouses  and  other  facilities,  primarily  in  the  U.S.  and  Canada.  The  Company  also  enters  into
variable-priced contracts for some purchases of natural gas, in addition to fuel for its gas stations, on an index basis. These contracts meet the
characteristics of derivative instruments, but generally qualify for the “normal purchases or normal sales” exception under authoritative guidance and
require no mark-to-market adjustment.
Foreign Currency
The functional currencies of the Company’s international subsidiaries are the local currency of the country in which the subsidiary is located. Assets
and liabilities recorded in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate on the balance sheet date. Translation adjustments are recorded in
accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss.  Revenues  and  expenses  of  the  Company’s  consolidated  foreign  operations  are  translated  at  average
exchange rates prevailing during the year.
The Company recognizes foreign-currency transaction gains and losses related to revaluing or settling monetary assets and liabilities denominated
in currencies other than the functional currency in interest income and other, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. Generally,
these  include  the  U.S.  dollar  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  the  U.S.  dollar  payables  of  consolidated  subsidiaries  revalued  to  their  functional
currency. Also included are realized foreign-currency gains or losses from settlements of forward foreign-exchange contracts. These items were
immaterial for 2018 and 2017 and resulted in net gains of $38 for 2016 .
Revenue Recognition
The  Company  generally  recognizes  sales,  which  include  gross  shipping  fees  where  applicable,  net  of  returns,  at  the  time  the  member  takes
possession  of  merchandise  or  receives  services.  When  the  Company  collects  payments  from  members  prior  to  the  transfer  of  ownership  of
merchandise or the performance of services, the amounts received are generally recorded as deferred sales, included in other current liabilities in
the  consolidated  balance  sheets,  until  the  sale  or  service  is  completed.  The  Company  reserves  for  estimated  sales  returns  based  on  historical
trends in merchandise returns and reduces sales and merchandise costs accordingly. The sales returns reserve is based on an estimate of the net
realizable value of merchandise inventories expected to be returned. Amounts collected from members for sales or value added taxes are recorded
on a net basis.
Generally, when Costco is the primary obligor, is subject to inventory risk, has latitude in establishing prices and selecting suppliers, can influence
product or service specifications, or has several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded on a gross basis. It otherwise records the net
amounts earned, which is reflected in net sales.
The Company accounts for membership fee revenue, net of refunds, on a deferred basis, ratably over the one-year membership. The Company's
Executive members qualify for a 2% reward on qualified purchases
45

Table of Contents
(up to a maximum reward of approximately $ 1,000 per year), which can be redeemed only at Costco warehouses. The Company accounts for this
reward as a reduction in sales. The sales reduction and corresponding liability (classified as accrued member rewards in the consolidated balance
sheets) are computed after giving effect to the estimated impact of non-redemptions, based on historical data. The net reduction in sales was $
1,394 , $ 1,281 , and $ 1,172 in 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 , respectively.
Merchandise Costs
Merchandise costs consist of the purchase price or manufacturing costs of inventory sold, inbound and outbound shipping charges and all costs
related  to  the  Company’s  depot  operations,  including  freight  from  depots  to  selling  warehouses,  and  are  reduced  by  vendor  consideration.
Merchandise costs also include salaries, benefits, depreciation, and utilities in fresh foods and certain ancillary departments.
Vendor Consideration
The Company has agreements  to receive funds from vendors for coupons and a variety of other programs.  These programs are evidenced by
signed agreements that are reflected in the carrying value of the inventory when earned or as the Company progresses towards earning the rebate
or discount, and as a component of merchandise costs as the merchandise is sold. Other vendor consideration is generally recorded as a reduction
of merchandise costs upon completion of contractual milestones, terms of the related agreement, or by another systematic approach.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses  consist  primarily  of  salaries,  benefits  and  workers’  compensation  costs  for  warehouse  employees
(other than fresh foods departments and certain ancillary businesses) as well as all regional and home office employees, including buying personnel.
Selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses  also  include  substantially  all  building  and  equipment  depreciation,  stock  compensation  expense,
utilities, credit and debit card processing fees, as well as other operating costs incurred to support warehouse operations.
Retirement Plans
The Company's 401(k) retirement plan is available to all U.S. employees who have completed 90 days of employment. The plan allows participants
to  make  wage  deferral  contributions,  a  portion  of  which  the  Company  matches.  In  addition,  the  Company  provides  each  eligible  participant  an
annual discretionary contribution. The Company also has a defined contribution plan for Canadian employees and contributes a percentage of each
employee's wages. Certain subsidiaries in the Company's Other International operations have defined benefit and defined contribution plans that are
not material. Amounts expensed under all plans were $578 , $543 , and $489 for 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 , respectively, and are predominantly
included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
Stock-Based Compensation
Restricted stock units (RSUs) granted to employees generally vest over five years and allow for quarterly vesting of the pro-rata number of stock-
based awards that would vest on the next anniversary of the grant date in the event of retirement or voluntary termination. Actual forfeitures are
recognized as they occur.
Compensation expense for stock-based awards is predominantly recognized using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for the
entire  award.  Awards  for  employees  and  non-employee  directors  provide  for  accelerated  vesting  of  a  portion  of  outstanding  shares  based  on
cumulative years of service with the Company. Compensation expense for the accelerated shares is recognized upon achievement of the long-
service term. The cumulative amount of compensation cost recognized at any point in time equals at least the portion of the grant-date fair value of
the award that is vested at that date. The fair value of RSUs is calculated as the market value of the common stock on the measurement date less
the present value of the expected dividends forgone during the vesting period.
46

Table of Contents
Stock-based compensation expense is predominantly included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of
income. Certain stock-based compensation costs are capitalized or included in the cost of merchandise. See Note 7 for additional information on the
Company’s stock-based compensation plans.
Leases
The  Company  leases  land  and/or  buildings  at  warehouses  and  certain  other  office  and  distribution  facilities,  primarily  under  operating  leases.
Operating leases expire at various dates through 2064 , with the exception of one lease in the U.K., which expires in 2151 . These leases generally
contain one or more of the following options, which the Company can exercise at the end of the initial lease term: (a) renewal of the lease for a
defined number of years at the then-fair market rental rate or rate stipulated in the lease agreement; (b) purchase of the property at the then-fair
market value; or (c) right of first refusal in the event of a third-party purchase offer.
The Company accounts for its lease expense with free rent periods and step-rent provisions on a straight-line basis over the original term of the
lease and any extension options that the Company more likely than not expects to exercise, from the date the Company has control of the property.
Certain leases provide for periodic rental increases based on price indices, or the greater of minimum guaranteed amounts or sales volume.
The Company has capital leases for certain warehouse locations, expiring at various dates through 2059 . Capital lease assets are included in land
and buildings and improvements in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amortization expense on capital lease assets is recorded as
depreciation  expense  and  is  included  in  selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses.  Capital  lease  liabilities  are  recorded  at  the  lesser  of  the
estimated fair market value of the leased property or the net present value of the aggregate future minimum lease payments and are included in
other current liabilities and other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Interest on these obligations is included in interest
expense in the consolidated statements of income.
The Company records an asset and related financing obligation for the estimated construction costs under build-to-suit lease arrangements where it
is  considered  the  owner  for  accounting  purposes,  to  the  extent  the  Company  is  involved  in  the  construction  of  the  building  or  structural
improvements or has construction risk prior to commencement of a lease. Upon occupancy, the Company assesses whether these arrangements
qualify for sales recognition under the sale-leaseback accounting guidance. If the Company continues to be the deemed owner, it accounts for the
arrangement as a financing lease.
The Company’s asset retirement obligations (ARO) primarily relate to leasehold improvements that at the end of a lease must be removed. These
obligations are recorded as a liability with an offsetting asset at the inception of the lease term based upon the estimated fair value of the costs to
remove the leasehold improvements. These liabilities are accreted over time to the projected future value of the obligation using the Company’s
incremental borrowing rate. The ARO assets are depreciated using the same depreciation method as the leasehold improvement assets and are
included with buildings and improvements. Estimated ARO liabilities associated with these leases were immaterial at the end of 2018 and 2017 ,
respectively, and are included in other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Preopening Expenses
Preopening expenses include costs for startup operations related to new warehouses and relocations, developments in new international markets,
new manufacturing and distribution facilities, and expansions at existing warehouses and are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax
consequences attributed to differences between the financial
47

Table of Contents
statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and tax credits and loss carry-forwards. Deferred tax
assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences
and carry-forwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in
income  in  the  period  that  includes  the  enactment  date.  A  valuation  allowance  is  established  when  necessary  to  reduce  deferred  tax  assets  to
amounts that are more likely than not expected to be realized.
The timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items and the probability of sustaining uncertain tax positions requires significant judgment. The
benefits of uncertain tax positions are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial statements only after determining a more-likely-than-not
probability  that  the  uncertain  tax  positions  will  withstand  challenge  from  tax  authorities.  When  facts  and  circumstances  change,  the  Company
reassesses these probabilities and records any changes as appropriate.
Net Income per Common Share Attributable to Costco
The  computation  of  basic  net  income  per  share  uses  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares  that  were  outstanding  during  the  period.  The
computation of diluted net income per share uses the weighted average number of shares in the basic net income per share calculation plus the
number of common shares that would be issued assuming vesting of all potentially dilutive common shares outstanding using the treasury stock
method for shares subject to RSUs.
Stock Repurchase Programs
Repurchased shares of common stock are retired, in accordance with the Washington Business Corporation Act. The par value of repurchased
shares is deducted from common stock and the excess repurchase price over par value is deducted by allocation to additional paid-in capital and
retained earnings. The amount allocated to additional paid-in capital is the current value of additional paid-in capital per share outstanding and is
applied to the number of shares repurchased. Any remaining amount is allocated to retained earnings. See Note 6 for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
In March 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-09 related to the accounting for
share-based payment transactions. The guidance relates to income taxes, forfeitures, and minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. The new
standard was effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those years beginning after December 15, 2016, with early adoption permitted. The
Company adopted this guidance at the beginning of its first quarter of fiscal year 2018. As a result, the Company recognized a net tax benefit in
fiscal 2018 of $ 33 as part of its income tax provision in the accompanying consolidated statements of income, which includes the impact of the
lower  tax  rate  from  the  2017  Tax  Act.  Previously,  tax  benefits  associated  with  the  release  of  employee  RSUs  were  reflected  in  equity.  These
amounts are now reflected as cash flows from operations instead of cash flows from financing activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows
on a prospective basis. Adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on the consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of
cash flows, or related disclosures.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU 2014-09 providing for changes in the recognition of revenue from contracts  with customers.  The guidance
converges  the  requirements  for  reporting  revenue  and  requires  disclosures  sufficient  to  describe  the  nature,  amount,  timing,  and uncertainty  of
revenue and cash flows arising from these contracts. The new standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those years beginning
after  December  15,  2017.  The  Company  plans  to  adopt  this  guidance  at  the  beginning  of  its  first  quarter  of  fiscal  2019,  using  the  modified
retrospective approach through a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings. The Company has substantially completed its assessment of
the new standard and it does not believe the impacts to be material to the Company's consolidated financial statements. The Company continues to
evaluate the disclosure requirements related to the new standard.
48

Table of Contents
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 which will require recognition on the balance sheet for the rights and obligations created by leases
with  terms  greater  than  twelve  months.  The  new  standard  is  effective  for  fiscal  years  and  interim  periods  within  those  years  beginning  after
December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted. The Company plans to adopt this guidance at the beginning of its first quarter of fiscal 2020 and
plans to utilize the transition option which does not require application of the guidance to comparative periods in the year of adoption. While the
Company  continues  to evaluate  this  standard  and the effect  on related  disclosures,  the primary  effect  of  adoption  will be recording  right-of-use
assets and corresponding lease obligations for current operating leases. The adoption is expected to have a material impact on the Company's
consolidated  balance  sheets,  but  not  on  the  consolidated  statements  of  income  or  cash  flows.  Additionally,  the  Company  is  in  the  process  of
reviewing  current  accounting  policies,  changes  to  business  processes,  systems  and  controls  to  support  adoption  of  the  new  standard,  which
includes implementing a new lease accounting system.
Note 2—Investments
The Company’s investments were as follows:
2018:
Cost
Basis
Unrealized
Losses, Net
Recorded
Basis
Available-for-sale:
Government and agency securities
$
912
$
(14)
$
898
Held-to-maturity:
Certificates of deposit
306
306
Total short-term investments
$
1,218
$
(14)
$
1,204
2017:
Cost
Basis
Unrealized
Gains, Net
Recorded
Basis
Available-for-sale:
Government and agency securities
$
947
$
0
$
947
Mortgage-backed securities
1
0
1
Total available-for-sale
948
0
948
Held-to-maturity:
Certificates of deposit
285
285
Total short-term investments
$
1,233
$
0
$
1,233
Gross unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities were not material in 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 . At the end of 2018 and 2017 , the
Company's available-for-sale securities that were in a continuous unrealized-loss position were not material. The Company had no available-for-sale
securities in a continuous unrealized-loss position in 2016. Gross unrealized gains and losses on cash equivalents were not material at the end of
2018 , and there were no gross unrealized gains and losses on cash equivalents at the end of 2017 or 2016 .
The proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities were $39 , $202 , and $291 during 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 , respectively. Gross realized
gains or losses from sales of available-for-sale securities were not material in 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 .
49

Table of Contents
The maturities of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities at the end of 2018 were as follows:
 
Available-For-Sale
Held-To-Maturity
 
Cost Basis
Fair Value
Due in one year or less
$
307
$
305
$
306
Due after one year through five years
584
572
0
Due after five years
21
21
0
       Total
$
912
$
898
$
306
Note 3—Fair Value Measurement
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The tables below present information regarding the Company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis and indicate the level within the hierarchy reflecting the valuation techniques utilized to determine such fair value.
2018:
Level 1
Level 2
Money market mutual funds (1)
$
9
$
0
Investment in government and agency securities (2)
0
903
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in asset position (3)
0
16
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in (liability) position (3)
0
(2)
Total
$
9
$
917
 
2017:
Level 1
Level 2
Money market mutual funds (1)
$
7
$
0
Investment in government and agency securities (2)
0
947
Investment in mortgage-backed securities
0
1
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in asset position (3)
0
2
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in (liability) position (3)
0
(8)
Total
$
7
$
942
______________
(1)
Included in cash and cash equivalents in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
(2)
At September 2, 2018, immaterial cash and cash equivalents and $898 short-term investments are included in the accompanying condensed consolidated balance
sheets.  At  September  3,  2017,  there  were  no  securities  included  in  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and $947 included  in  short-term  investments  in  the  accompanying
condensed consolidated balance sheets.
(3)
The asset and the liability values are included in other current assets and other current liabilities, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. See
Note 1 for additional information on derivative instruments.
During and at the end of both 2018 and 2017 , the Company did not hold any Level 3 financial assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value
on a recurring basis. There were no transfers in or out of Level 1 or 2 during 2018 and 2017 .
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis
Assets and liabilities recognized and disclosed at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include items such as financial assets measured at amortized
cost and long-lived nonfinancial assets. These assets are measured at fair value if determined to be impaired. There were no fair value adjustments
to these items during 2018 and 2017 .
50

Table of Contents
Note 4—Debt
Short-Term Borrowings
The Company maintains various short-term  bank credit facilities with a borrowing capacity of $857 and $833 , in 2018 and 2017 , respectively.
Borrowings on these short-term facilities were immaterial during 2018 and 2017, and there were no outstanding borrowings at the end of 2018 and
2017 .
Long-Term Debt
The  Company's  long-term  debt  consists  primarily  of  Senior  Notes,  which  have  various  principal  balances,  interest  rates,  and  maturity  dates  as
described below. In May 2017, the Company issued $3,800 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes, with maturity dates between May 2021
and May 2027. Additionally, in 2017 the Company repaid long-term debt totaling $2,200 .
The  Company  at  its  option  may  redeem  the  Senior  Notes  at  any  time,  in  whole  or  in  part,  at  a  redemption  price  plus  accrued  interest.  The
redemption price is equal to the greater of 100% of the principal amount or the sum of the present value of the remaining scheduled payments of
principal and interest to maturity. Additionally, upon certain events, as defined by the terms of the Senior Notes, the holder has the right to require
the Company to purchase this security at a price of 101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest to the date of the event. Interest
on all outstanding long-term debt is payable semi-annually.
The estimated fair value of Senior Notes is valued using Level 2 inputs. Other long-term debt consists of Guaranteed Senior Notes issued by the
Company's Japanese subsidiary and are valued using Level 3 inputs. At the end of 2018 and 2017 , the fair value of the Company's long-term debt,
including the current portion, was approximately $6,492 and $6,753 , respectively. The carrying value of long-term debt consisted of the following:
 
2018
2017
1.70% Senior Notes due December 2019
$
1,199
$
1,198
1.75% Senior Notes due February 2020
499
498
2.15% Senior Notes due May 2021
995
994
2.25% Senior Notes due February 2022
498
497
2.30% Senior Notes due May 2022
794
793
2.75% Senior Notes due May 2024
992
991
3.00% Senior Notes due May 2027
987
986
Other long-term debt
613
702
Total long-term debt
6,577
6,659
Less current portion (1)
90
86
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
$
6,487
$
6,573
_______________
(1) Included in other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
51

Table of Contents
Maturities of long-term debt during the next five fiscal years and thereafter are as follows:  
2019
$
90
2020
1,700
2021
1,091
2022
1,300
2023
90
Thereafter
2,343
Total
$
6,614
Note 5—Leases
Operating Leases
The aggregate rental expense for 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 was $ 265 , $ 258 , and $ 250 , respectively. Sub-lease income and contingent rent were
not material in 2018 , 2017 , or 2016 .
Capital and Build-to-Suit Leases
Gross assets recorded under capital and build-to-suit leases were $ 427 and $ 404 at the end of 2018 and 2017 , respectively. These assets are
recorded net of accumulated amortization of $ 94 and $ 78 at the end of 2018 and 2017 , respectively.
At the end of 2018 , future minimum payments, net of sub-lease income of $ 105 for all years combined, under non-cancelable operating leases with
terms of at least one year and capital leases were as follows:
Operating
Leases
Capital
Leases (1)
2019
$
227
$
34
2020
214
35
2021
193
36
2022
183
36
2023
175
36
Thereafter
2,215
647
Total
$
3,207
824
Less amount representing interest
(427)
Net present value of minimum lease payments
397
Less current installments (2)
(7)
Long-term capital lease obligations less current installments (3)
$
390
_______________
(1)
Includes build-to-suit lease obligations.
(2)
Included in other current liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
(3)
Included in other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
52

Table of Contents
Note 6—Stockholders’ Equity
Dividends
The Company’s current quarterly dividend rate is $0.57 per share. In May 2017, the Company paid a special cash dividend of $7.00 per share. The
aggregate payment was approximately $3,100 . Subsequent to the end of 2018, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend in the
amount of $0.57 per share, which is payable on November 23, 2018.
Stock Repurchase Programs
The Company’s stock repurchase program is conducted under a $4,000 authorization by the Board of Directors, which expires April 17, 2019 . As of
the end of 2018 , the remaining amount available for stock repurchases under the approved plan was $2,427 . The following table summarizes the
Company’s stock repurchase activity:
Shares
Repurchased
(000’s)
Average
Price per
Share
Total Cost
2018
1,756
$
183.13
$
322
2017
2,998
157.87
473
2016
3,184
149.90
477
These  amounts  may  differ  from  the  stock  repurchase  balances  in  the  accompanying  consolidated  statements  of  cash  flows  due  to  changes  in
unsettled stock repurchases at the end of each fiscal year.
Note 7—Stock-Based Compensation Plans
The  Company  grants  stock-based  compensation  primarily  to  employees  and  non-employee  directors.  RSU  grants  to  all  executive  officers  are
performance-based. Through a series of shareholder approvals, there have been amended and restated plans and new provisions implemented by
the Company. RSUs are subject to quarterly vesting upon retirement or voluntary termination. Employees who attain certain years of service with
the Company receive shares under accelerated vesting provisions on the annual vesting date rather than upon retirement. The Seventh Restated
2002 Stock Incentive Plan (Seventh Plan) is the Company’s only stock-based compensation plan with shares available for grant at the end of 2018 .
Each share issued in respect of stock awards is counted as 1.75 shares toward the limit of shares made available under the Seventh Plan. The
Seventh  Plan  authorized  the  issuance  of 23,500,000 shares  ( 13,429,000 RSUs)  of  common  stock  for  future  grants  in  addition  to  the  shares
authorized  under  the  previous  plan.  The  Company  issues  new  shares  of  common  stock  upon  vesting  of  RSUs.  Shares  for  vested  RSUs  are
generally delivered to participants annually, net of statutory withholding taxes.
Summary of Restricted Stock Unit Activity
RSUs granted to employees and to non-employee directors generally vest over five and three years, respectively. Additionally, the terms of the
RSUs, including performance-based awards, provide for accelerated vesting for employees and non-employee directors who have attained 25 or
more and five or more years of service with the Company, respectively. Recipients are not entitled to vote or receive dividends on non-vested and
undelivered shares. At the end of 2018 , 8,313,000 shares were available to be granted as RSUs under the Seventh Plan.
53

Table of Contents
The following awards were outstanding at the end of 2018:
•
7,246,000 time-based RSUs that vest upon continued employment over specified periods of time;
•
332,000 performance-based  RSUs,  of  which 205,000 were  granted  to  executive  officers  subject  to  the  certification  of  the  attainment  of
specified performance targets for 2018 . This certification occurred in October 2018 , at which time a portion vested as a result of the long
service of all executive officers. The remaining awards vest upon continued employment over specified periods of time.
The following table summarizes RSU transactions during 2018 :
Number of
Units
(in 000’s)
Weighted-Average
Grant Date Fair
Value
Outstanding at the end of 2017
8,199
$
128.15
Granted
3,722
156.19
Vested and delivered
(4,088)
129.49
Forfeited
(255)
138.57
Outstanding at the end of 2018
7,578
$
140.85
The weighted-average grant date fair value of RSUs granted was $156.19 , $144.12 , and $153.46 in 2018 , 2017 , and 2016 , respectively. The
remaining unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs at the end of 2018 was $ 693 and the weighted-average period of time over
which this cost will be recognized is 1.6 years. Included in the outstanding balance at the end of 2018 were approximately 2,658,000 RSUs vested
but not yet delivered.
Summary of Stock-Based Compensation
The following table summarizes stock-based compensation expense and the related tax benefits under the Company’s plans:
2018
2017
2016
Stock-based compensation expense before income taxes
$
544
$
514
$
459
Less income tax benefit  (1)
(116)
(167)
(150)
Stock-based compensation expense, net of income taxes
$
428
$
347
$
309
_______________
(1)
In 2018, the income tax benefit reflects the reduction in the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate from  35%  to  21% .
Note 8—Income Taxes
Income before income taxes is comprised of the following:
2018
2017
2016
Domestic
$
3,182
$
2,988
$
2,622
Foreign
1,260
1,051
997
Total
$
4,442
$
4,039
$
3,619
54

Table of Contents
The provisions for income taxes are as follows:
2018
2017
2016
Federal:
Current
$
636
$
802
$
468
Deferred
(35)
7
233
Total federal
601
809
701
State:
Current
190
161
108
Deferred
22
8
21
Total state
212
169
129
Foreign:
Current
487
389
398
Deferred
(37)
(42)
15
Total foreign
450
347
413
Total provision for income taxes
$
1,263
$
1,325
$
1,243
In December 2017, the 2017 Tax Act was signed into law. Except for certain provisions, the 2017 Tax Act is effective for tax years beginning on or
after January 1, 2018. The Company is a fiscal-year taxpayer, so most provisions will become effective for fiscal 2019, including limitations on the
Company’s  ability  to  claim  foreign  tax  credits,  repeal  of  the  domestic  manufacturing  deduction,  and  limitations  on  certain  business  deductions.
Provisions  with  significant  impacts  that  were  effective  starting  in the  second quarter  of fiscal  2018 and throughout  the  remainder  of fiscal  2018
included:  a  decrease  in  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  rate,  remeasurement  of  certain  net  deferred  tax  liabilities,  and  a  transition  tax  on  deemed
repatriation of certain foreign earnings. The decrease in the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate to  21.0%  resulted in a blended rate for the
Company of  25.6%  for fiscal 2018.
The reconciliation between the statutory tax rate and the effective rate is as follows:
 
2018
2017
2016
Federal taxes at statutory rate
$
1,136
25.6 %
$
1,414
35.0 %
$
1,267
35.0 %
State taxes, net
154
3.4
116
2.9
91
2.5
Foreign taxes, net
32
0.7
(64)
(1.6)
(21)
(0.6)
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP)
(14)
(0.3)
(104)
(2.6)
(17)
(0.5)
2017 Tax Act
19
0.4
—
—
—
—
Other
(64)
(1.4)
(37)
(0.9)
(77)
(2.1)
Total
$
1,263
28.4 %
$
1,325
32.8 %
$
1,243
34.3 %
During fiscal 2018, the Company recognized a net tax expense of  $19 related to the 2017 Tax Act. This expense included $ 142  for the estimated
tax on deemed repatriation of foreign earnings, and $ 43  for the reduction in foreign tax credits and other immaterial items, largely offset by a tax
benefit of $ 166  for the provisional remeasurement of certain deferred tax liabilities. These items were predominantly recorded in the second quarter
as provisional amounts and reflect the Company's current interpretations and estimates that it believes are reasonable. As the Company continues
to evaluate the 2017 Tax Act and available data, it anticipates that adjustments may be made in future periods up to and including the second
quarter of fiscal 2019 in accordance with Staff Accounting Bulletin 118.
In fiscal 2018, we also recognized net tax benefits of $ 76 , which was largely driven by the adoption of an accounting standard related to stock-
based compensation and other immaterial net benefits. In fiscal 2017, the Company ’ s provision for income taxes was favorably impacted by a net
tax benefit of $ 104 , primarily
55

Table of Contents
due to tax benefits recorded in connection with the May 2017 special cash dividends paid by the Company to employees through the Company's
401(k) retirement plan of $ 82 . Dividends on these shares are deductible for U.S. income tax purposes. There was no similar special cash dividend
in 2018 or 2016.
The components of the deferred tax assets (liabilities) are as follows:
2018
2017
Equity compensation
$
72
$
109
Deferred income/membership fees
136
167
Accrued liabilities and reserves
484
647
Property and equipment
(478)
(747)
Merchandise inventories
(175)
(252)
Other (1)
(40)
18
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets
$
(1)
$
(58)
_______________
(1)
Includes foreign tax credits of $36 for 2017. There were no foreign tax credits in 2018.
The deferred tax accounts at the end of fiscal 2018 and 2017 include deferred income tax assets of $316 and $254 , respectively, included in other
assets; and deferred income tax liabilities of $317 and $312 , respectively, included in other liabilities.
The Company no longer considers current fiscal 2018 and future earnings of our non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries to be permanently reinvested
and has recorded the estimated incremental foreign withholding (net of available foreign tax credits) on current fiscal year earnings and state income
taxes  payable  assuming  a  hypothetical  repatriation  to  the  U.S.  The  Company  continues  to  consider  undistributed  earnings  of  certain  non-U.S.
consolidated subsidiaries prior to fiscal 2018, which totaled $ 3,071 , to be indefinitely reinvested and has not provided for withholding or state taxes.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits for 2018 and 2017 is as follows:
2018
2017
Gross unrecognized tax benefit at beginning of year
$
52
$
52
Gross increases—current year tax positions
6
3
Gross increases—tax positions in prior years
6
17
Gross decreases—tax positions in prior years
(17)
0
Settlements
(1)
(11)
Lapse of statute of limitations
(10)
(9)
Gross unrecognized tax benefit at end of year
$
36
$
52
The gross unrecognized tax benefit includes tax positions for which the ultimate deductibility is highly certain but there is uncertainty about the timing
of such deductibility. At the end of 2018 and 2017 , these amounts were immaterial. Because of the impact of deferred tax accounting, other than
interest and penalties, the disallowance of these tax positions would not affect the annual effective tax rate but would accelerate the payment of
cash to the taxing authority. The total amount of such unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would favorably affect the effective income tax
rate in future periods is $32 and $29 at the end of 2018 and 2017 , respectively.
Accrued  interest  and  penalties  related  to  income  tax  matters  are  classified  as  a  component  of  income  tax  expense.  Interest  and  penalties
recognized during 2018 and 2017 and accrued at the end of each respective period were not material.
56

Table of Contents
The Company is currently under audit by several jurisdictions in the United States and in several foreign countries. Some audits may conclude in the
next 12 months and the unrecognized tax benefits recorded in relation to the audits may differ from actual settlement amounts. It is not practical to
estimate the effect, if any, of any amount of such change during the next 12 months to previously recorded uncertain tax positions in connection with
the audits. The Company does not anticipate that there will be a material increase or decrease in the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits in
the next 12 months.
The Company files income tax returns in the United States, various state and local jurisdictions, in Canada, and in several other foreign jurisdictions.
With few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state or local examination for years before fiscal 2014. The Company is
currently subject to examination in California for fiscal years 2007 to present. No other examinations are believed to be material.
Note 9—Net Income per Common and Common Equivalent Share
The following table shows the amounts used in computing net income per share and the weighted average number of shares of potentially dilutive
common shares outstanding (shares in 000’s):  
2018
2017
2016
Net income attributable to Costco
$
3,134
$
2,679
$
2,350
Weighted average number of common shares used in basic net income per common share
438,515
438,437
438,585
RSUs and other
3,319
2,500
2,678
Weighted average number of common shares and dilutive potential of common stock used in
diluted net income per share
441,834
440,937
441,263
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies
Legal Proceedings
The Company is involved in a number of claims, proceedings and litigation arising from its business and property ownership. In accordance with
applicable accounting guidance, the Company establishes an accrual for legal proceedings if and when those matters reach a stage where they
present loss contingencies that are both probable and reasonably estimable. There may be exposure to loss in excess of any amounts accrued. The
Company monitors those matters for developments that would affect the likelihood of a loss (taking into account where applicable indemnification
arrangements concerning suppliers and insurers) and the accrued amount, if any, thereof, and adjusts the amount as appropriate. As of the date of
this Report, the Company has recorded an immaterial accrual with respect to one matter described below, in addition to other immaterial accruals
for matters not described below. If the loss contingency at issue is not both probable and reasonably estimable, the Company does not establish an
accrual, but will continue to monitor the matter for developments that will make the loss contingency both probable and reasonably estimable. In
each case, there is a reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred, including a loss in excess of the applicable accrual. For matters where no
accrual  has  been  recorded,  the  possible  loss  or  range  of  loss  (including  any  loss  in  excess  of  the  accrual)  cannot,  in  the  Company's  view,  be
reasonably estimated because, among other things: (i) the remedies or penalties sought are indeterminate or unspecified; (ii) the legal and/or factual
theories are not well developed; and/or (iii) the matters involve complex or novel legal theories or a large number of parties.
The Company is a defendant in a class action alleging violation of California Wage Order 7-2001 for failing to provide seating to member service
assistants who act as greeters and exit attendants in the Company’s California warehouses. Canela v. Costco Wholesale Corp., et al. (Case No.
5:13-cv-03598, N.D. Cal. filed July 1, 2013). The complaint seeks relief under the California Labor Code, including civil penalties and attorneys’ fees.
The Company filed an answer denying the material allegations of the complaint. The plaintiff has since indicated that exit attendants are no longer a
subject of the litigation. The action in the district court
57

Table of Contents
has  been  stayed  pending  review  by  the  Ninth  Circuit  of  the  order  certifying  a  class.  On  September  6,  2018,  counsel  claiming  to  represent  an
employee notified the California Labor and Workforce Development agency of an intention to bring similar claims concerning Costco employees
engaged at member services counters.
On November 23, 2016, the Company’s Canadian subsidiary received from the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care a request for an
inspection and information concerning compliance with the anti-rebate provisions in the Ontario Drug Benefit Act and the Drug Interchangeability
and Dispensing Fee Act. The Company is seeking to cooperate with the request. The Ministry has indicated it has reason to believe the Company
received payments in violation of these laws and is seeking disgorgement of these sums.
In December 2017, the United States Judicial Panel on Multidistrict  Litigation consolidated numerous cases filed against various defendants by
counties, cities, hospitals, Native American tribes and third-party payors concerning the impacts of opioid abuse. In re National Prescription Opiate
Litigation (MDL No. 2804) (N.D. Ohio). Included are federal court cases that name the Company, including actions filed by a number of counties and
cities in Michigan, New Jersey and Ohio, and a third-party payor in Ohio. Similar cases that name the Company have been filed in state courts in
New Jersey and Oklahoma. The Company is defending these matters.
In November 2016 and September 2017, the Company received notices of violation from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection regarding hazardous waste practices at its Connecticut warehouses, primarily concerning unsalable pharmaceuticals. The Company is
seeking to cooperate concerning the resolution of these notices.
The Company does not believe that any pending claim, proceeding or litigation, either alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows; however, it is possible that an unfavorable outcome of some or all of the
matters, however unlikely, could result in a charge that might be material to the results of an individual fiscal quarter.
58

Table of Contents
Note 11—Segment Reporting
The Company and its subsidiaries are principally engaged in the operation of membership warehouses in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, U.K., Japan,
Korea,  Australia,  Spain,  Iceland,  and  France  and  through  a  majority-owned  subsidiary  in  Taiwan.  Reportable  segments  are  largely  based  on
management’s  organization  of  the  operating  segments  for  operational  decisions  and  assessments  of  financial  performance,  which  considers
geographic locations. The material accounting policies of the segments are as described in Note 1. Inter-segment net sales and expenses have
been eliminated in computing total revenue and operating income. Certain operating expenses, predominantly stock-based compensation, incurred
on behalf of the Company's Canadian and Other International operations, are included in the U.S. operations because those costs generally come
under the responsibility of U.S. management.
United States
Operations
Canadian
Operations
Other
International
Operations
Total
2018
Total revenue
$
102,286
$
20,689
$
18,601
$
141,576
Operating income
2,787
939
754
4,480
Depreciation and amortization
1,078
135
224
1,437
Additions to property and equipment
2,046
268
655
2,969
Net property and equipment
13,353
1,900
4,428
19,681
Total assets
28,207
4,303
8,320
40,830
2017
Total revenue
$
93,889
$
18,775
$
16,361
$
129,025
Operating income
2,644
841
626
4,111
Depreciation and amortization
1,044
124
202
1,370
Additions to property and equipment
1,714
277
511
2,502
Net property and equipment
12,339
1,820
4,002
18,161
Total assets
24,068
4,471
7,808
36,347
2016
Total revenue
$
86,579
$
17,028
$
15,112
$
118,719
Operating income
2,326
778
568
3,672
Depreciation and amortization
946
109
200
1,255
Additions to property and equipment
1,823
299
527
2,649
Net property and equipment
11,745
1,628
3,670
17,043
Total assets
22,511
3,480
7,172
33,163
The following table summarizes the percentage of net sales by merchandise category:
2018
2017
2016
Food and Sundries
41%
41%
43%
Hardlines
16%
16%
16%
Fresh Foods
14%
14%
14%
Softlines
11%
12%
12%
Ancillary
18%
17%
15%
59

Table of Contents
Note 12—Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
The two tables that follow reflect the unaudited quarterly results of operations for 2018 and 2017 .
 
52 Weeks Ended September 2, 2018
 
First
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Second
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Third
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Fourth
Quarter
(16 Weeks)
Total
(52 Weeks)
REVENUE
Net sales
$
31,117
$
32,279
$
31,624
$
43,414
$
138,434
Membership fees
692
716
737
997
3,142
Total revenue
31,809
32,995
32,361
44,411
141,576
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
27,617
28,733
28,131
38,671
123,152
Selling, general and administrative
3,224
3,234
3,155
4,263
13,876
Preopening expenses
17
12
8
31
68
Operating income
951
1,016
1,067
1,446
4,480
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(37)
(37)
(37)
(48)
(159)
Interest income and other, net
22
7
41
51
121
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
936
986
1,071
1,449
4,442
Provision for income taxes
285
273
309
396
1,263
Net income including noncontrolling interests
651
713
762
1,053
3,179
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(11)
(12)
(12)
(10)
(45)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
640
$
701
$
750
$
1,043
$
3,134
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
1.46
$
1.60
$
1.71
$
2.38
$
7.15
Diluted
$
1.45
$
1.59
$
1.70
$
2.36
$
7.09
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
437,965
439,022
438,740
438,379
438,515
Diluted
440,851
441,568
441,715
442,427
441,834
CASH DIVIDENDS DECLARED PER COMMON
SHARE
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
0.57
$
0.57
$
2.14
60

Table of Contents
 
53 Weeks Ended September 3, 2017
 
First
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Second
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Third
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Fourth
Quarter
(17 Weeks)
Total (53 Weeks)
REVENUE
Net sales
$
27,469
$
29,130
$
28,216
$
41,357
$
126,172
Membership fees
630
636
644
943
2,853
Total revenue
28,099
29,766
28,860
42,300
129,025
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
24,288
25,927
24,970
36,697
111,882
Selling, general and administrative
2,940
2,980
2,907
4,123
12,950
Preopening expenses
22
15
15
30
82
Operating income
849
844
968
1,450
4,111
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(29)
(31)
(21)
(53)
(134)
Interest income and other, net
26
(4)
18
22
62
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
846
809
965
1,419
4,039
Provision for income taxes
291
288
259
(1)  
487
1,325
Net income including noncontrolling interests
555
521
706
932
2,714
Net income attributable to noncontrolling
interests
(10)
(6)
(6)
(13)
(35)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
545
$
515
$
700
$
919
$
2,679
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
1.24
$
1.17
$
1.59
$
2.10
$
6.11
Diluted
$
1.24
$
1.17
$
1.59
$
2.08
$
6.08
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
438,007
439,127
438,817
437,987
438,437
Diluted
440,525
440,657
441,056
441,036
440,937
CASH DIVIDENDS DECLARED PER COMMON
SHARE
$
0.45
$
0.45
$
7.50
(2)   $
0.50
$
8.90
_______________
(1)
Includes an $82 tax benefit recorded in the third quarter in connection with the special cash dividend paid to employees through the Company's 401(k) Retirement Plan.
(2)
Includes the special cash dividend of $7.00 per share paid in May 2017.
61

Table of Contents
Item 9—Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A—Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) or 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) are
designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed,
summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the rules and forms of the Securities and Exchange Commission and to ensure that
information required to be disclosed is accumulated and communicated to management, including our principal executive and financial officers, to
allow timely decisions regarding disclosure. The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), with assistance from other
members of management, have reviewed the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as of September 2, 2018 and, based on their
evaluation, have concluded that the disclosure controls and procedures were not effective as of such date due to a material weakness in internal
control over financial reporting, described below.
Management's Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under
the Exchange Act.  Our  internal  control  over financial  reporting  is designed to  provide reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  U.S.  GAAP  and  includes  those  policies  and
procedures that: (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions and the dispositions
of our assets; (2) provide reasonable assurance that our transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  and  that  our  receipts  and  expenditures  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with
appropriate  authorizations;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use  or
disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on our financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness for future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Under the supervision of and with the participation of our management, we assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as of September 2, 2018, using the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal
Control — Integrated Framework (2013). A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial
reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented
or detected on a timely basis.
We identified  a material  weakness  in internal  control  related  to  ineffective  information  technology  general  controls  (ITGCs)  in the areas  of  user
access  and  program  change-management  over  certain  information  technology  (IT)  systems  that  support  the  Company’s  financial  reporting
processes.  Our  business  process  controls  (automated  and  manual)  that  are  dependent  on  the  affected  ITGCs  were  also  deemed  ineffective
because  they  could  have  been  adversely  impacted.  We  believe  that  these  control  deficiencies  were  a  result  of:  IT  control  processes  lacking
sufficient documentation such that the successful operation of ITGCs was overly dependent upon knowledge and actions of certain individuals with
IT expertise, which led to failures resulting from changes in IT personnel; insufficient training of IT personnel on the importance of ITGCs; and risk-
assessment processes inadequate to identify and assess changes in IT environments that could impact internal control over financial reporting. The
material weakness did not result in any identified misstatements
62

Table of Contents
to the financial statements, and there were no changes to previously released financial results. Based on this material weakness, the Company’s
management concluded that at September 2, 2018, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was not effective.
The  Company’s  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  KPMG  LLP  has  issued  an  adverse  audit  report  on  the  effectiveness  of  the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of September 2, 2018, which appears in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Following identification of the material weakness and prior to filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we completed substantive procedures for the
year ended September 2, 2018. Based on these procedures, management believes that our consolidated financial statements included in this Form
10-K  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  U.S.  GAAP.  Our  CEO  and  CFO  have  certified  that,  based  on  their  knowledge,  the  financial
statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this  Form  10-K,  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition,  results  of
operations and cash flows of the Company as of, and for, the periods presented in this Form 10-K. KPMG LLP has issued an unqualified opinion on
our financial statements, which is included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Remediation
Management has been implementing and continues to implement measures designed to ensure that control deficiencies contributing to the material
weakness  are  remediated,  such  that  these  controls  are  designed,  implemented,  and  operating  effectively.  The  remediation  actions  include:  (i)
creating  and  filling  an  IT  Compliance  Oversight  function;  (ii)  developing  a  training  program  addressing  ITGCs  and  policies,  including  educating
control owners concerning the principles and requirements of each control, with a focus on those related to user access and change-management
over IT systems impacting financial reporting; (iii) developing and maintaining documentation underlying ITGCs to promote knowledge transfer upon
personnel  and  function  changes;  (iv)  developing  enhanced  risk  assessment  procedures  and  controls  related  to  changes  in  IT  systems;  (v)
implementing  an  IT  management  review  and  testing  plan  to  monitor  ITGCs  with  a  specific  focus  on  systems  supporting  our  financial  reporting
processes; and (vi) enhanced quarterly reporting on the remediation measures to the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
We believe that these actions will remediate the material weakness. The weakness will not be considered remediated, however, until the applicable
controls operate for a sufficient period of time and management has concluded, through testing, that these controls are operating effectively. We
expect that the remediation of this material weakness will be completed prior to the end of fiscal 2019.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Except for the material weakness identified during the quarter, as of September 2, 2018, there have been no other changes in our internal control
over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) or 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act) that occurred during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2018 that
have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
/s/    W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
/s/    R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and
Director
63

Table of Contents
Item 9B—Other Information
None.
PART III
Item 10—Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Information relating to the availability of our code of ethics for senior financial officers and a list of our executive officers appear in Part I, Item 1 of
this Report. The information required by this Item concerning our directors and nominees for director is incorporated herein by reference to the
sections  entitled  “Proposal  1:  Election  of  Directors,”  “Directors,”  “Committees  of  the  Board”  and  “Section  16(a)  Beneficial  Ownership  Reporting
Compliance” in Costco’s Proxy Statement for its 2019 annual meeting of stockholders, which will be filed with the SEC within 120 days of the end of
our fiscal year (“Proxy Statement”).
Item 11—Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  this  Item  is  incorporated  herein  by  reference  to  the  sections  entitled  “Compensation  of  Directors,”  “Executive
Compensation,” and “Compensation Discussion and Analysis” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 12—Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the section entitled “Principal Shareholders” and “Equity Compensation
Plan Information” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 13—Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the sections entitled “Proposal 1: Election of Directors,” “Directors,”
“Committees of the Board,” “Shareholder Communications to the Board,” “Meeting Attendance,” “Report of the Compensation Committee of the
Board of Directors,” “Certain Relationships and Transactions” and “Report of the Audit Committee” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 14—Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the sections entitled “Independent Public Accountants” in Costco’s Proxy
Statement.
64

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15—Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a)
Documents filed as part of this report are as follows:
1.
Financial Statements:
See the listing of Financial Statements included as a part of this Form 10-K in Item 8 of Part II.
2. 
Financial Statement Schedules:
All schedules have been omitted because the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require
submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements, including the
notes thereto.
(b)
Exhibits: The required exhibits are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K or are incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed
Herewith
Form
Period Ending
Filing Date
3.1
Articles of Incorporation as amended of Costco
Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
2/15/2015
3/11/2015
3.2
Bylaws as amended of Costco Wholesale
Corporation
8-K
11/2/2017
4.1
Form of 2.150% Senior Notes due May 18, 2021
8-K
5/16/2017
4.2
Form of 2.300% Senior Notes due May 18, 2022
8-K
5/16/2017
4.3
Form of 2.750% Senior Notes due May 18, 2024
8-K
5/16/2017
4.4
Form of 3.000% Senior Notes due May 18, 2027
8-K
5/16/2017
10.1*
Costco Wholesale Executive Health Plan
10-K
9/2/2012
10/19/2012
10.2.1*
Fifth Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
10-Q
2/14/2010
3/17/2010
10.2.2*
Sixth Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
8-K
1/31/2012
10.2.3*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
DEF 14A
12/19/2014
10.2.4*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement-U.S.
Employee
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
65

Table of Contents
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed
Herewith
Form
Period Ending
Filing Date
10.2.5*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement-Non-U.S.
Employee
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.2.6*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement-Non-
Executive Director
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.2.7*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Letter Agreement for 2016 Performance-Based
Restricted Stock Units-Executive
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.3.1*
Executive Employment Agreement, effective
January 1, 2017, between W. Craig Jelinek and
Costco Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
11/20/2016
12/16/2016
10.3.2*
Letter Dated December 18, 2017, Regarding an
Extension of the Term of the Executive
Employment Agreement, effective January 1,
2017, between W. Craig Jelinek and Costco
Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
11/26/2017
12/21/2017
10.4*
Form of Indemnification Agreement
14A
12/13/1999
10.5*
Deferred Compensation Plan
10-K
9/1/2013
10/16/2013
10.6.1**
Citibank, N.A. Co-Branded Credit Card
Agreement
10-Q/A
5/10/2015
8/31/2015
10.6.2**
First Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded Credit
Card Agreement
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.6.3**
Second Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
2/14/2016
3/9/2016
10.6.4**
Third Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded Credit
Card Agreement
10-K
8/28/2016
10/12/2016
10.6.5**
Fourth Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
2/18/2018
3/15/2018
10.7*
Fiscal 2018 Executive Bonus Plan
8-K
10/31/2017
21.1
Subsidiaries of the Company
x
23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm
x
31.1
Rule 13a – 14(a) Certifications
x
32.1
Section 1350 Certifications
x
66

Table of Contents
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed
Herewith
Form
Period Ending
Filing Date
101.INS
XBRL Instance Document
x
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
x
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase
Document
x
101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase
Document
x
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase
Document
x
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation
Linkbase Document
x
 _____________________
* Management contract, compensatory plan or arrangement.
** Portions of this exhibit have been omitted under a confidential treatment order issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(c)
Financial Statement Schedules—None.
Item 16—Form 10-K Summary
None.
67

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
October 25, 2018
C OSTCO  W HOLESALE  C ORPORATION
(Registrant)
By
/s/ R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
October 25, 2018
By
 
/s/ W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
 
By
 
/s/ H AMILTON E. J AMES
 
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
 
Hamilton E. James 
Chairman of the Board
By
 
/s/ R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
 
By
 
/s/ D ANIEL M. H INES
 
Richard A. Galanti 
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director 
(Principal Financial Officer)
 
 
Daniel M. Hines 
Senior Vice President and Corporate Controller 
(Principal Accounting Officer)
By
 
/s/ S USAN L. D ECKER
By
/s/ K ENNETH D. D ENMAN
 
Susan L. Decker 
Director
Kenneth D. Denman 
Director
By
 
/s/ J OHN  W. M EISENBACH
By
 
/s/ C HARLES  T. M UNGER
 
John W. Meisenbach 
Director
 
Charles T. Munger 
Director
By
 
/s/ J EFFREY S. R AIKES
 
By
 
/s/ J OHN W. S TANTON
 
Jeffrey S. Raikes 
Director
 
 
John W. Stanton 
Director
By
/s/ M ARY  (M AGGIE) A. W ILDEROTTER
Mary (Maggie) A. Wilderotter 
Director
68

Exhibit 21.1
SUBSIDIARIES OF THE COMPANY
The following is a list of subsidiaries of the Company as of September 2, 2018 , omitting subsidiaries which, considered in the aggregate, would not
constitute a significant subsidiary.
Subsidiaries
State or Other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization
Name under Which Subsidiary Does Business
Costco Wholesale Membership, Inc.
California
Costco Wholesale Membership, Inc.
Costco Wholesale Canada Ltd.
Canadian Federal
Costco Wholesale Canada, Ltd.
NW Re Ltd.
Arizona
NW Re Ltd.
Costco Insurance Agency, Inc.
Washington
Costco Insurance Agency, Inc.
PriceCostco International, Inc
Nevada
PriceCostco International, Inc.
Costco Wholesale Korea, Ltd.
Korea
Costco Wholesale Korea, Ltd.
Costco Wholesale Japan, Ltd.
Japan
Costco Wholesale Japan, Ltd.
Costco De Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Mexico
Costco De Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Costco Wholesale United Kingdom Ltd.
United Kingdom
Costco Wholesale United Kingdom Ltd.

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (Nos. 333‑82782, 333-120523, 333‑129172, 333-135052, 333-150014,
333-151748, 333-165550, 333-180163, 333-187418, 333-202673, 333‑204739 and 333-218397) on Form S-8 and the registration statement (No.
333-207417) on Form S-3 of Costco Wholesale Corporation of our report dated October 25, 2018, with respect to the consolidated balance sheets
of  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  as  of  September  2,  2018  and  September  3,  2017,  and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  income,
comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for the 52-week period ended September 2, 2018, the 53-week period ended September 3, 2017,
and the 52-week period ended August 28, 2016, and the related notes (collectively, the "consolidated financial statements"), which report appears in
the September 2, 2018 annual report on Form 10‑K of Costco Wholesale Corporation.
Our report dated October 25, 2018, on the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of September 2, 2018, expresses our opinion
that Costco Wholesale Corporation did not maintain effective internal control over financial reporting as of September 2, 2018 because of the effect
of a material weakness on the achievement of the objectives of the control criteria and contains an explanatory paragraph that states:
There were ineffective information technology general controls (ITGCs) in the areas of user access and program change-management over
certain information technology (IT) systems that support the Company’s financial reporting processes. As a result, business process automated
and manual controls that were dependent on the affected ITGCs were ineffective because they could have been adversely impacted. These
control  deficiencies  were  a  result  of:  IT  control  processes  lacked  sufficient  documentation;  insufficient  knowledge  and  training  of  certain
individuals with IT expertise; and risk-assessment processes inadequate to identify and assess changes in IT environments and personnel that
could impact internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 25, 2018

Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I, W. Craig Jelinek, certify that:
1)
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation (“the registrant”);
2)
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3)
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to
us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions
about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting.
October 25, 2018
 
/s/    W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director

CERTIFICATIONS
I, Richard A. Galanti, certify that:
1)
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation (“the registrant”);
2)
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3)
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to
us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions
about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting.
October 25, 2018
 
/s/    R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director

Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Costco Wholesale Corporation (the Company) on Form 10-K for the year ended September 2, 2018 , as
filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the  Report),  I,  W.  Craig  Jelinek,  President,  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Director  of  the
Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company.
/s/ W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
 
Date: October 25, 2018
W. Craig Jelinek
 
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
A  signed  original  of  this  written  statement  has  been  provided  to  and  will  be  retained  by  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  and  furnished  to  the
Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.

CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Costco Wholesale Corporation (the Company) on Form 10-K for the year ended September 2, 2018 , as
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the Report), I, Richard A. Galanti, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
of the Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company.
/s/ R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
 
Date: October 25, 2018
Richard A. Galanti
 
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
 
A  signed  original  of  this  written  statement  has  been  provided  to  and  will  be  retained  by  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  and  furnished  to  the
Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.
