Table of Contents
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549 
FORM 10-K
☒ 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended August 30, 2020
or
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Commission file number 0-20355
Costco Wholesale Corporation
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Washington
 
91-1223280
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
999 Lake Drive, Issaquah, WA 98027
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (425) 313-8100
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol
 
Name of each exchange on 
which registered
Common Stock, $.01 Par Value
COST
The NASDAQ Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☒   No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐   No ☒ 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during
the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. Yes ☒   No ☐
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  has  submitted  electronically  every  Interactive  Data  File  required  to  be  submitted  pursuant  to  Rule  405  of
Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes
☒   No ☐
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  a  non-accelerated  filer,  a  smaller  reporting  company,  or  an
emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer”, “smaller reporting company”, and "emerging growth company" in
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control
over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its
audit report. ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). Yes ☐   No ☒
The aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of February 16, 2020 was $140,245,657,604.
The number of shares outstanding of the registrant’s common stock as of September 29, 2020 was 441,228,027.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the Company’s Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on January 21, 2021, are incorporated by reference into Part III of
this Form 10-K.

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED AUGUST 30, 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
Page
PART I
Item 1.
Business
3
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
8
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
17
Item 2.
Properties
17
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
18
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
18
PART II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
18
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
19
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
21
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
30
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
32
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
66
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
66
Item 9B.
Other Information
67
PART III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
67
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
67
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
67
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
67
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
67
PART IV
Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
68
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
70
Signatures
71
2

Table of Contents
INFORMATION RELATING TO FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Report constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. They include statements that address
activities, events, conditions or developments that we expect or anticipate may occur in the future and may relate to such matters as sales growth,
changes  in  comparable  sales,  cannibalization  of  existing  locations  by  new  openings,  price  or  fee  changes,  earnings  performance,  earnings  per
share,  stock-based  compensation  expense,  warehouse  openings  and  closures,  capital  spending,  the  effect  of  adopting  certain  accounting
standards, future financial reporting, financing, margins, return on invested capital, strategic direction, expense controls, membership renewal rates,
shopping  frequency,  litigation,  and  the  demand  for  our  products  and  services.  Forward-looking  statements  may  also  be  identified  by  the  words
“anticipate,”  “believe,”  “continue,”  “could,”  “estimate,”  “expect,”  “intend,”  "likely,"  “may,”  “might,”  “plan,”  “potential,”  “predict,”  “project,”  “seek,”
“should,”  “target,”  “will,”  “would,”  or  similar  expressions  and  the  negatives  of  those  terms.  Such  forward-looking  statements  involve  risks  and
uncertainties that may cause actual events, results, or performance to differ materially from those indicated by such statements, including, without
limitation,  the  factors  set  forth  in  the  section  titled  “Item  1A-Risk  Factors”,  and  other  factors  noted  in  the  section  titled  “Item  7-Management's
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and in the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8
of this Report. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not undertake to update these statements, except as
required by law.
PART I
Item 1—Business
Costco Wholesale Corporation and its subsidiaries (Costco or the Company) began operations in 1983, in Seattle, Washington. We are principally
engaged in the operation of membership warehouses in the United States (U.S.) and Puerto Rico, Canada, United Kingdom (U.K.), Mexico, Japan,
Korea,  Australia,  Spain,  France,  Iceland,  China,  and  through  a  majority-owned  subsidiary  in  Taiwan.  Costco  operated  795,  782,  and  762
warehouses worldwide at August 30, 2020, September 1, 2019, and September 2, 2018, respectively. The Company operates e-commerce websites
in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, U.K., Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and Australia. Our common stock trades on the NASDAQ Global Select Market, under the
symbol “COST.”
We report on a 52/53-week fiscal year, consisting of thirteen four-week periods and ending on the Sunday nearest the end of August. The first three
quarters consist of three periods each, and the fourth quarter consists of four periods (five weeks in the thirteenth period in a 53-week year). The
material seasonal impact in our operations is increased net sales and earnings during the winter holiday season. References to 2020, 2019, and
2018 relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended August 30, 2020, September 1, 2019, and September 2, 2018, respectively.
General
We operate membership warehouses based on the concept that offering our members low prices on a limited selection of nationally-branded and
private-label products in a wide range of categories will produce high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. When combined with the operating
efficiencies achieved by volume purchasing, efficient distribution and reduced handling of merchandise in no-frills, self-service warehouse facilities,
these volumes and turnover enable us to operate profitably at significantly lower gross margins (net sales less merchandise costs) than most other
retailers. We generally sell inventory before we are required to pay for it, even while taking advantage of early payment discounts.
We  buy  most  of  our  merchandise  directly  from  manufacturers  and  route  it  to  cross-docking  consolidation  points  (depots)  or  directly  to  our
warehouses. Our depots receive large shipments from manufacturers and quickly ship these goods to warehouses. This process creates freight
volume and handling efficiencies, lowering costs associated with traditional multiple-step distribution channels.
3

Table of Contents
Our average warehouse space is approximately 146,000 square feet, with newer units being slightly larger. Floor plans are designed for economy
and efficiency in the use of selling space, the handling of merchandise, and the control of inventory. Because shoppers are attracted principally by
the quality of merchandise and low prices, our warehouses are not elaborate. By strictly controlling the entrances and exits and using a membership
format, we believe our inventory losses (shrinkage) are well below those of typical retail operations.
Our warehouses on average operate on a seven-day, 70-hour week. Gasoline operations generally have extended hours. Because the hours of
operation are shorter than other retailers, and due to other efficiencies inherent in a warehouse-type operation, labor costs are lower relative to the
volume of sales. Merchandise is generally stored on racks above the sales floor and displayed on pallets containing large quantities, reducing labor
required. In general, with variations by country, our warehouses accept certain credit cards, including Costco co-branded cards, debit cards, cash
and checks, co-brand cardholder rebates, executive member 2% reward certificates and our proprietary stored-value card (shop card).
Our strategy is to provide our members with a broad range of high-quality merchandise at prices we believe are consistently lower than elsewhere.
We seek to limit most items to fast-selling models, sizes, and colors. We carry an average of approximately 3,700 active stock keeping units (SKUs)
per warehouse in our core warehouse business, significantly less than other broadline retailers. We average anywhere from 8,000 to 10,000 SKUs
online,  some  of  which  are  also  available  in  our  warehouses.  Many  consumable  products  are  offered  for  sale  in  case,  carton,  or  multiple-pack
quantities only.
In keeping with our policy of member satisfaction, we generally accept returns of merchandise. On certain electronic items, we typically have a 90-
day return policy and provide, free of charge, technical support services, as well as an extended warranty. Additional third-party warranty coverage is
sold on certain electronic items.
We offer merchandise in the following categories:
•
Food  and  Sundries (including  dry  foods,  packaged  foods,  groceries,  snack  foods,  candy,  alcoholic  and  nonalcoholic  beverages,  and
cleaning supplies)
•
Hardlines (including major appliances, electronics, health and beauty aids, hardware, and garden and patio)
•
Fresh Foods (including meat, produce, deli, and bakery)
•
Softlines (including apparel and small appliances)
•
Ancillary (including gasoline and pharmacy businesses)
Ancillary businesses within or next to our warehouses provide expanded products and services, encouraging members to shop more frequently.
These businesses include gas stations, pharmacies, optical dispensing centers, food courts, and hearing-aid centers. The number of warehouses
with gas stations varies significantly by country, and we do not currently operate our gasoline business in Korea or China. We operated 615 gas
stations at the end of 2020. Net sales for our gasoline business represented approximately 9% of total net sales in 2020.
Our e-commerce  operations allow us to connect with our members  online and provide additional products and services,  many not found in our
warehouses. Net sales for e-commerce represented approximately 6% of total net sales in 2020. This figure does not consider other services we
offer online in certain countries such as business delivery, travel, same-day grocery, and various other services.
We  have  direct  buying  relationships  with  many  producers  of  national  brand-name  merchandise.  We  do  not  obtain  a  significant  portion  of
merchandise from any one supplier. The COVID-19 pandemic created unprecedented supply constraints including disruptions and delays that have
impacted and could continue to impact the flow and availability of certain products. When sources of supply become unavailable, we seek alternative
sources.  We also purchase and manufacture  private-label  merchandise,  as long as quality and member demand are high and the value to our
members is significant.
4

Table of Contents
Certain financial information  for our segments and geographic areas is included in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements  included in
Item 8 of this Report.
Membership
Our  members  may  utilize  their  memberships  at  our  warehouses  worldwide.  Gold  Star  memberships  are  available  to  individuals;  Business
memberships  are  limited  to  businesses,  including  individuals  with  a  business  license,  retail  sales  license  or  comparable  document.  Business
members may add additional cardholders (affiliates), to which the same annual fee applies. Affiliates are not available for Gold Star members. Our
annual fee for these memberships is $60 in our U.S. and Canadian operations and varies in other countries. All paid memberships include a free
household card.
Our member renewal rate was 91% in the U.S. and Canada and 88% on a worldwide basis at the end of 2020. The majority of members renew
within six months following their renewal date. Our renewal rate is a trailing calculation that captures renewals during the period seven to eighteen
months prior to the reporting date.
Our membership counts include active memberships as well as memberships that have not renewed within the 12 months prior to the reporting date.
At the end of 2020, we standardized our membership count methodology globally to be consistent with the U.S. and Canada, which resulted in the
addition to the count of approximately 2.0 million total cardholders for 2020, of which 1.3 million were paid members. The change did not impact
2019 or 2018. Membership  fee income and the renewal rate calculations  were not affected.  Our membership  was made up of the following (in
thousands):
2020
2019
2018
Gold Star
46,800 
42,900 
40,700 
Business, including affiliates
11,300 
11,000 
10,900 
Total paid members
58,100 
53,900 
51,600 
Household cards
47,400 
44,600 
42,700 
    Total cardholders
105,500 
98,500 
94,300 
Paid cardholders (except affiliates) are eligible to upgrade to an Executive membership in the U.S. and Canada, for an additional annual fee of $60.
Executive memberships are also available in Mexico, the U.K., Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, for which the additional annual fee varies. Executive
members earn a 2% reward on qualified purchases (generally up to a maximum reward of $1,000 per year), which can be redeemed only at Costco
warehouses. This program also offers (except in Mexico, Japan, and Korea), access to additional savings and benefits on various business and
consumer  services,  such  as  auto  and  home  insurance,  the  Costco  auto  purchase  program,  and  check  printing.  These  services  are  generally
provided by third parties and vary by state and country. Executive members, who totaled 22.6 million and represented 39% of paid members at the
end of 2020, generally shop more frequently and spend more than other members.
Labor
Our employee count was as follows:
2020
2019
2018
Full-time employees
156,000 
149,000 
143,000 
Part-time employees
117,000 
105,000 
102,000 
Total employees
273,000 
254,000 
245,000 
Approximately 17,100 employees are union employees. We consider our employee relations to be very good.
5

Table of Contents
Competition
Our industry is highly competitive, based on factors such as price, merchandise quality and selection, location, convenience, distribution strategy,
and  customer  service.  We  compete  on  a  worldwide  basis  with  global,  national,  and  regional  wholesalers  and  retailers,  including  supermarkets,
supercenters,  internet  retailers,  gasoline  stations,  hard  discounters,  department  and  specialty  stores,  and  operators  selling  a  single  category  or
narrow range of merchandise. Walmart, Target, Kroger, and Amazon are among our significant general merchandise retail competitors. We also
compete with other warehouse clubs (primarily Walmart’s Sam’s Club and BJ’s Wholesale Club), and many of the major metropolitan areas in the
U.S. and certain of our Other International locations have multiple clubs.
Intellectual Property
We believe that, to varying degrees, our trademarks, trade names, copyrights, proprietary processes, trade secrets, trade dress, domain names and
similar  intellectual  property  add  significant  value  to  our  business  and  are  important  to  our  success.  We  have  invested  significantly  in  the
development  and  protection  of  our  well-recognized  brands,  including  the  Costco  Wholesale® trademarks  and  our  private-label  brand,  Kirkland
Signature®. We believe that Kirkland Signature products are high quality, offered at prices that are generally lower than national brands, and help
lower costs, differentiate our merchandise offerings, and generally earn higher margins. We expect to continue to increase the sales penetration of
our private-label items.
We rely on trademark and copyright laws, trade-secret protection, and confidentiality, license and other agreements with our suppliers, employees
and others to protect our intellectual property. The availability and duration of trademark registrations vary by country; however, trademarks are
generally valid and may be renewed indefinitely as long as they are in use and registrations are maintained.
Available Information
Our U.S. website is www.costco.com. We make available through the Investor Relations section of that site, free of charge, our Annual Reports on
Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, Proxy Statements and Forms 3, 4 and 5, and any amendments to those
reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after filing such materials with or furnishing such documents to the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). The information found on our website is not part of this or any other report filed with or furnished to the SEC. The SEC maintains a site that
contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers, such as the Company, that file electronically with the
SEC at www.sec.gov.
We have adopted a code of ethics for senior financial officers pursuant to Section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Copies of the code are available
free  of  charge  by  writing  to  Secretary,  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation,  999  Lake  Drive,  Issaquah,  WA  98027.  If  the  Company  makes  any
amendments to this code (other than technical, administrative, or non-substantive amendments) or grants any waivers, including implicit waivers, to
the CEO, chief financial officer or principal accounting officer and controller, we will disclose (on our website or in a Form 8-K report filed with the
SEC) the nature of the amendment or waiver, its effective date, and to whom it applies.
6

Table of Contents
Information about our Executive Officers
The executive officers of Costco, their position, and ages are listed below. All executive officers have over 25 years of service with the Company.
Name
Position
Executive 
Officer 
Since
Age
W. Craig Jelinek
President and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Jelinek has been President and
Chief Executive Officer since January 2012 and a director since February
2010. He was President and Chief Operating Officer from February 2010 to
December  2011.  Prior  to  that  he  was  Executive  Vice  President,  Chief
Operating Officer, Merchandising since 2004.
1995
68
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Galanti has been
a director since January 1995.
1993
64
Jim C. Klauer
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Northern  Division.  Mr.
Klauer  was  Senior  Vice  President,  Non  Foods  and  E-commerce
Merchandise, from 2013 to January 2018.
2018
58
Patrick J. Callans
Executive  Vice  President,  Administration.  Mr.  Callans  was  Senior  Vice
President,  Human  Resources  and  Risk  Management,  from  2013  to
December 2018.
2019
58
Russ D. Miller
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Southern  Division  and
Mexico.  Mr.  Miller  was  Senior  Vice  President,  Western  Canada  Region,
from 2001 to January 2018.
2018
63
Paul G. Moulton
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Information  Officer.  Mr.  Moulton  was
Executive Vice President, Real Estate Development, from 2001 until March
2010.
2001
69
James P. Murphy
Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, International. Mr. Murphy
was Senior Vice President, International, from 2004 to October 2010.
2011
67
Joseph P. Portera
Executive  Vice President,  Chief Operating  Officer,  Eastern  and Canadian
Divisions. Mr. Portera has held these positions since 1994 and has been
the Chief Diversity Officer since 2010.
1994
68
Timothy L. Rose
Executive  Vice  President,  Ancillary  Businesses,  Manufacturing,  and
Business  Centers.  Mr.  Rose  was  Senior  Vice  President,  Merchandising,
Food and Sundries and Private Label, from 1995 to December 2012.
2013
68
Ron M. Vachris
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Merchandising.  Mr.
Vachris was Senior Vice President, Real Estate Development, from August
2015  to  June  2016,  and  Senior  Vice  President,  General  Manager,
Northwest Region, from 2010 to July 2015.
2016
55
7

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors
The  risks  described  below  could  materially  and  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.  We  could  also  be
affected by additional risks that apply to all companies operating in the U.S. and globally, as well as other risks that are not presently known to us or
that we currently consider to be immaterial. These Risk Factors should be carefully reviewed in conjunction with Management's Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Item 7 and our consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8 of this
Report.
Business and Operating Risks
We are highly dependent on the financial performance of our U.S. and Canadian operations.
Our financial and operational performance is highly dependent on our U.S. and Canadian operations, which comprised 87% and 83% of net sales
and operating income in 2020, respectively. Within the U.S., we are highly dependent on our California operations, which comprised 29% of U.S. net
sales in 2020. Our California market, in general, has a larger percentage of higher volume warehouses as compared to our other domestic markets.
Any substantial slowing or sustained decline in these operations could materially adversely affect our business and financial results. Declines in
financial performance  of our U.S. operations, particularly in California, and our Canadian operations could arise from, among other things: slow
growth or declines in comparable warehouse sales (comparable sales); negative trends in operating expenses, including increased labor, healthcare
and energy costs; failing to meet targets for warehouse openings; cannibalizing existing locations with new warehouses; shifts in sales mix toward
lower  gross  margin  products;  changes  or  uncertainties  in  economic  conditions  in  our  markets,  including  higher  levels  of  unemployment  and
depressed home values; and failing to consistently provide high quality and innovative new products.
We may be unsuccessful implementing our growth strategy, including expanding our business in existing markets and new markets, and
integrating acquisitions, which could have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Our growth is dependent, in part, on our ability to acquire property and build or lease new warehouses and depots. We compete with other retailers
and businesses for suitable locations. Local land use and other regulations restricting the construction and operation of our warehouses and depots,
as well as local community actions opposed to the location of our warehouses or depots at specific sites and the adoption of local laws restricting our
operations and environmental regulations, may impact our ability to find suitable locations and increase the cost of sites and of constructing, leasing
and operating warehouses and depots. We also may have difficulty negotiating leases or purchase agreements on acceptable terms. In addition,
certain jurisdictions have enacted or proposed laws and regulations that would prevent or restrict the operation or expansion plans of certain large
retailers and warehouse clubs, including us. Failure to effectively manage these and other similar factors may affect our ability to timely build or
lease and operate new warehouses and depots, which could have a material adverse effect on our future growth and profitability.
We seek to expand in existing markets to attain a greater overall market  share. A new warehouse may draw members  away from our existing
warehouses and adversely affect their comparable sales performance, member traffic, and profitability.
We intend to continue to open warehouses in new markets. Associated risks include difficulties in attracting members due to a lack of familiarity with
us,  attracting  members  of  other wholesale club operators,  our  lesser  familiarity  with local member  preferences,  and seasonal  differences  in the
market. Entry into new markets may bring us into competition with new competitors or with existing competitors with a large, established market
presence. We cannot ensure that new warehouses and new e-commerce websites will be profitable and, as a result, future profitability could be
delayed or otherwise materially adversely affected.
8

Table of Contents
We have made and may continue to make investments and acquisitions to improve the speed, accuracy and efficiency of our supply chains. The
effectiveness of these investments can be less predictable than opening new locations and might not provide the anticipated benefits or desired
rates of return.
Our failure to maintain membership growth, loyalty and brand recognition could adversely affect our results of operations.
Membership  loyalty  and  growth  are  essential  to  our  business.  The  extent  to  which  we  achieve  growth  in  our  membership  base,  increase  the
penetration of Executive members, and sustain high renewal rates materially influences our profitability. Damage to our brands or reputation may
negatively impact comparable sales, diminish member trust, and reduce renewal rates and, accordingly, net sales and membership fee revenue,
negatively impacting our results of operations.
We  sell  many  products  under  our  Kirkland  Signature  brand.  Maintaining  consistent  product  quality,  competitive  pricing,  and  availability  of  these
products  is  essential  to  developing  and  maintaining  member  loyalty.  These  products  also  generally  carry  higher  margins  than  national  brand
products  and  represent  a  growing  portion  of  our  overall  sales.  If  the  Kirkland  Signature  brand  experiences  a  loss  of  member  acceptance  or
confidence, our sales and gross margin results could be adversely affected.
Disruptions in merchandise distribution or processing, packaging, manufacturing, and other facilities could adversely affect sales and
member satisfaction.
We  depend  on  the  orderly  operation  of  the  merchandise  receiving  and  distribution  process,  primarily  through  our  depots.  We  also  rely  upon
processing,  packaging,  manufacturing  and  other  facilities  to  support  our  business,  which  includes  the  production  of  certain  private-label  items.
Although  we  believe  that  our  operations  are  efficient,  disruptions  due  to  fires,  tornadoes,  hurricanes,  earthquakes,  pandemics  or  other  extreme
weather  conditions  or  catastrophic  events,  labor  issues  or  other  shipping  problems  may  result  in  delays  in  the  production  and  delivery  of
merchandise  to  our  warehouses,  which  could  adversely  affect  sales  and  the  satisfaction  of  our  members.  Our  e-commerce  business  depends
heavily on third-party logistics providers and that business is negatively affected when these providers are unable to provide services in a timely
fashion.
We may not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends, which could negatively affect our relationship with our members,
the demand for our products and services, and our market share.
It is difficult to consistently and successfully predict the products and services that our members will desire. Our success depends, in part, on our
ability to identify and respond to trends in demographics and consumer preferences. Failure to identify timely or effectively respond to changing
consumer  tastes,  preferences  (including  those  relating  to  sustainability  of  product  sources  and  animal  welfare)  and  spending  patterns  could
negatively affect our relationship with our members, the demand for our products and services, and our market share. If we are not successful at
predicting our sales trends and adjusting our purchases accordingly, we may have excess inventory, which could result in additional markdowns, or
we  may  experience  out-of-stock  positions  and  delivery  delays,  which  could  result  in  higher  costs,  both  of  which  would  reduce  our  operating
performance. This could have an adverse effect on net sales, gross margin and operating income.
Availability and performance of our information technology (IT) systems are vital for our business to operate efficiently. Failure to execute
complex IT projects, and have these IT systems available to our business will adversely impact our operations.
IT systems play a crucial role in conducting our business on a daily basis. These systems are utilized to process a very high volume of transactions,
conduct payment transactions, track and value our inventory and produce reports which are critical for making business decisions on a daily, weekly
and periodic basis. Failure or disruption of these IT systems could have an adverse impact on our ability to buy products from our suppliers, produce
goods  in  our  manufacturing  plants,  move  the  products  in  an  efficient  manner  to  our  warehouses  and  sell  products  to  our  members.  We  are
undertaking large technology and IT transformation projects. The failure of these projects could adversely impact our business plans and
9

Table of Contents
potentially impair our day to day business operations. Given the high volume of transactions we process, it is important that we build strong digital
resiliency for our business-critical systems to prevent disruption from events such as power outages, computer and telecommunications failures,
computer viruses, internal or external security breaches, errors by employees, and catastrophic events such as fires, earthquakes tornadoes and
hurricanes. Any debilitating failure of our critical IT systems, data centers and backup systems would require significant investments in resources to
restore IT services and may cause serious impairment in our business operations including loss of business services, increased cost of moving
merchandise and failure to provide service to our members. We are currently making significant investments in enhancing our digital resiliency and
failure or delay in execution of these projects could delay our ability to be resilient to disruptive events. Failure to deliver our IT transformation efforts
efficiently and effectively could result in the loss of our competitive position and adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations.
We are required to maintain the privacy and security of personal and business information  amidst evolving threat landscapes and in
compliance  with  emerging  privacy  and  data  protection  regulations  globally.  Failure  to  meet  the  requirements  could  damage  our
reputation with members, suppliers and employees, cause us to incur substantial additional costs, and become subject to litigation.
Increased IT security threats and more sophisticated computer crime pose a risk to our systems, networks, products and services. We rely upon IT
systems and networks, some of which are managed by third parties, in connection with a variety of business activities. Additionally, we collect, store
and process  sensitive  information  relating to  our business,  members,  suppliers  and employees.  Operating  these IT  systems  and networks,  and
processing and maintaining this data, in a secure manner, is critical to our business operations and strategy. The increased use of remote work
infrastructure  due  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic  has  also  increased  the  possible  attack  surfaces.  Security  threats  designed  to  gain  unauthorized
access to our systems, networks and data, are increasing in frequency and sophistication. Cybersecurity attacks may range from random attempts
to coordinated and targeted attacks, including sophisticated computer crimes and advanced persistent threats. These threats pose a risk to the
security of our systems and networks and the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of our data. It is possible that our IT systems and networks, or
those  managed  by  third  parties  such  as  cloud  providers,  could  have  vulnerabilities,  which  could  go  unnoticed  for  a  period  of  time.  While  our
cybersecurity and compliance posture seeks to mitigate such risks, there can be no guarantee that the actions and controls we and our third-party
service providers have implemented and are implementing, will be sufficient to protect our systems, information or other property.
The potential impacts of a future material cybersecurity attack includes reputational damage, litigation, government enforcement actions, penalties,
disruption  to  systems,  unauthorized  release  of  confidential  or  otherwise  protected  information,  corruption  of  data,  diminution  in  the  value  of  our
investment in IT systems and increased cybersecurity protection and remediation costs. This could adversely affect our competitiveness, results of
operations and financial condition and loss of member confidence. Further, the amount of insurance coverage we maintain may be inadequate to
cover  claims  or  liabilities  relating  to  a  cybersecurity  attack.  In  addition,  data  we  collect,  store  and  process  is  subject  to  a  variety  of  U.S.  and
international  laws  and regulations,  such  as  the  European  Union's  General  Data  Protection  Regulation,  California  Consumer  Privacy  Act,  Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, China cybersecurity law and other emerging privacy and cybersecurity laws across the various states
and around the globe, which may carry significant potential penalties for noncompliance.
We are subject to payment-related risks.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including select credit and debit cards, cash and checks, co-brand cardholder rebates, executive
member  2%  reward  certificates,  and  our  shop  card.  As  we  offer  new  payment  options  to  our  members,  we  may  be  subject  to  additional  rules,
regulations, compliance requirements, and higher fraud losses. For certain payment methods, we pay interchange and other related acceptance
fees, along with additional transaction processing fees. We rely on third parties to
10

Table of Contents
provide payment transaction processing services for credit and debit cards and our shop card. It could disrupt our business if these parties become
unwilling or unable to provide these services to us. We are also subject to evolving payment card association and network operating rules, including
data security rules, certification requirements and rules governing electronic funds transfers. For example, we are subject to Payment Card Industry
Data Security Standards, which contain compliance guidelines and standards with regard to our security surrounding the physical and electronic
storage, processing and transmission of individual cardholder data. If our internal systems are breached or compromised, we may be liable for card
re-issuance costs, subject to fines and higher transaction fees and lose our ability to accept card payments from our members, and our business and
operating results could be adversely affected.
We might sell products that cause illness or injury to our members, harm to our reputation, and expose us to litigation.
If our merchandise, including food and prepared food products for human consumption, drugs, children's products, pet products and durable goods,
do not meet or are perceived not to meet applicable safety standards or our members' expectations regarding safety, we could experience lost
sales, increased costs, litigation or reputational harm. The sale of these items involves the risk of illness or injury to our members. Such illnesses or
injuries  could  result  from  tampering  by  unauthorized  third  parties,  product  contamination  or  spoilage,  including  the  presence  of  foreign  objects,
substances, chemicals, other agents, or residues introduced during the growing, manufacturing, storage, handling and transportation phases, or
faulty design. Our suppliers are generally contractually required to comply with product safety laws, and we are dependent on them to ensure that
the products we buy comply with safety and other standards. While we are subject to governmental inspection and regulations and work to comply in
all material respects with applicable laws and regulations, we cannot be sure that consumption or use of our products will not cause illness or injury
or that we will not be subject to claims, lawsuits, or government investigations relating to such matters, resulting in costly product recalls and other
liabilities that could adversely affect our business and results of operations. Even if a product liability claim is unsuccessful or is not fully pursued,
negative publicity could adversely affect our reputation with existing and potential members and our corporate and brand image, and these effects
could be long-term.
If we do not successfully develop and maintain a relevant omnichannel experience for our members, our results of operations could be
adversely impacted.
Omnichannel retailing is rapidly evolving, and we must keep pace with changing member expectations and new developments by our competitors.
Our members are increasingly using mobile phones, tablets, computers, and other devices to shop and to interact with us through social media,
particularly in the wake of COVID-19. We are making investments in our websites and mobile applications. If we are unable to make, improve, or
develop relevant member-facing technology in a timely manner, our ability to compete and our results of operations could be adversely affected.
Inability to attract, train and retain highly qualified employees could adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
Our success depends on the continued contributions of our employees, including members of our senior management and other key operations, IT,
merchandising and administrative personnel. Failure to identify and implement a succession plan for senior management could negatively impact
our  business.  We  must  attract,  train  and  retain  a  large  and  growing  number  of  qualified  employees,  while  controlling  related  labor  costs  and
maintaining our core values. Our ability to control labor and benefit costs is subject to numerous internal and external factors, including regulatory
changes,  prevailing  wage  rates,  and  healthcare  and  other  insurance  costs.  We  compete  with  other  retail  and  non-retail  businesses  for  these
employees and invest significant resources in training and motivating them. There is no assurance that we will be able to attract or retain highly
qualified employees in the future, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
11

Table of Contents
We may incur property, casualty or other losses not covered by our insurance.
Claims for employee health care benefits, workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability,
inventory loss, and other exposures are funded predominantly through self-insurance. Insurance coverage is maintained in certain instances to limit
exposures arising from very large losses. The types and amounts of insurance may vary from time to time based on our decisions with respect to
risk retention and regulatory requirements. Significant claims or events, regulatory changes, a substantial rise in costs of health care or costs to
maintain our insurance or the failure to maintain adequate insurance coverage could have an adverse impact on our financial condition and results
of operations.
Although we maintain specific coverages for catastrophic property losses, we still bear a significant portion of the risk of losses incurred as a result of
any physical damage to, or the destruction of, any warehouses, depots, manufacturing or home office facilities, loss or spoilage of inventory, and
business interruption. Such losses could materially impact our cash flows and results of operations.
Market and Other External Risks
We  face  strong  competition  from  other  retailers  and  warehouse  club  operators,  which  could  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial
condition and results of operations.
The retail business is highly competitive. We compete for members, employees, sites, products and services and in other important respects with a
wide range of local, regional and national wholesalers and retailers, both in the United States and in foreign countries, including other warehouse-
club operators, supermarkets, supercenters, internet retailers, gasoline stations, hard discounters, department and specialty stores and operators
selling a single category or narrow range of merchandise. Such retailers and warehouse club operators compete in a variety of ways, including
pricing,  selection  and  availability,  services,  location,  convenience,  store  hours,  and  the  attractiveness  and  ease  of  use  of  websites  and  mobile
applications. The evolution of retailing in online and mobile channels has improved the ability of customers to comparison shop, which has enhanced
competition. Some competitors may have greater financial resources and technology capabilities, better access to merchandise, and greater market
penetration than we do. Our inability to respond effectively to competitive pressures, changes in the retail markets and customer expectations could
result in lost market share and negatively affect our financial results.
General  economic  factors,  domestically  and  internationally,  may  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition,  and  results  of
operations.
Higher  energy  and  gasoline  costs,  inflation,  levels  of  unemployment,  healthcare  costs,  consumer  debt  levels,  foreign-currency  exchange  rates,
unsettled financial markets, weaknesses in housing and real estate markets, reduced consumer confidence, changes and uncertainties related to
government fiscal and tax policies including changes in tax rates, duties, tariffs, or other restrictions, sovereign debt crises, pandemics and other
health crises, and other economic factors could adversely affect demand for our products and services, require a change in product mix, or impact
the cost of or ability to purchase inventory. Additionally, actions in various countries, particularly China and the United States, have raised the cost of
many  items  and  created  uncertainty  with  respect  to  tariff  impacts  on  the  costs  of  some  of  our  merchandise.  The  degree  of  our  exposure  is
dependent on (among other things) the type of goods, rates imposed, and timing of the tariffs. The impact to our business, including net sales and
gross margin, will be influenced in part by merchandising and pricing strategies in response to potential cost increases by us and our competitors.
While these potential impacts are uncertain, they could have an adverse impact on our financial results.
Prices of certain commodities, including gasoline and consumable goods used in manufacturing and our warehouse retail operations, are historically
volatile  and are  subject  to fluctuations  arising from  changes in domestic  and international  supply  and demand,  labor  costs,  competition,  market
speculation, government regulations, taxes and periodic delays in delivery. Rapid and significant changes in commodity prices and
12

Table of Contents
our  ability  and  desire  to  pass  them  through  to  our  members  may  affect  our  sales  and  profit  margins.  These  factors  could  also  increase  our
merchandise costs and selling, general and administrative expenses, and otherwise adversely affect our operations and financial results. General
economic conditions can also be affected by events like the outbreak of war or acts of terrorism.
Suppliers may be unable to timely supply us with quality merchandise at competitive prices or may fail to adhere to our high standards,
resulting in adverse effects on our business, merchandise inventories, sales, and profit margins.
We depend heavily on our ability to purchase quality merchandise in sufficient quantities at competitive prices. As the quantities we require continue
to grow, we have no assurances of continued supply, appropriate pricing or access to new products, and any supplier has the ability to change the
terms upon which they sell to us or discontinue selling to us. Member demands may lead to out-of-stock positions causing a loss of sales and profits.
We buy from numerous domestic and foreign manufacturers and importers. Our inability to acquire suitable merchandise on acceptable terms or the
loss of key suppliers could negatively affect us. We may not be able to develop relationships with new suppliers, and products from alternative
sources, if any, may be of a lesser quality or more expensive. Because of our efforts to adhere to high quality standards for which available supply
may be limited, particularly for certain food items, the large volumes we demand may not be consistently available.
Our suppliers (and those they depend upon for materials and services) are subject to risks, including labor disputes, union organizing activities,
financial liquidity, natural disasters, extreme weather conditions, public health emergencies, supply constraints and general economic and political
conditions that could limit their ability to timely provide us with acceptable merchandise. One or more of our suppliers might not adhere to our quality
control, legal, regulatory, labor, environmental or animal welfare standards. These deficiencies may delay or preclude delivery of merchandise to us
and might not be identified before we sell such merchandise to our members. This failure could lead to recalls and litigation and otherwise damage
our reputation and our brands, increase costs, and otherwise adversely impact our business.
Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may adversely affect our results of operations.
During 2020, our international operations, including Canada, generated 27% and 33% of our net sales and operating income, respectively. Our
international operations have accounted for an increasing portion of our warehouses, and we plan to continue international growth. To prepare our
consolidated financial statements, we translate the financial statements of our international operations from local currencies into U.S. dollars using
current  exchange  rates.  Future  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  that  are  unfavorable  to  us  may  adversely  affect  the  financial  performance  of  our
Canadian  and  Other  International  operations  and  have  a  corresponding  adverse  period-over-period  effect  on  our  results  of  operations.  As  we
continue to expand internationally, our exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may increase.
A portion of the products we purchase is paid for in a currency other than the local currency of the country in which the goods are sold. Currency
fluctuations may increase our cost of goods and may not be passed on to members. Consequently, fluctuations in currency exchange rates may
adversely affect our results of operations.
Natural  disasters,  extreme  weather  conditions,  public  health  emergencies  or  other  catastrophic  events  could  negatively  affect  our
business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Natural disasters and extreme weather conditions, such as hurricanes, typhoons, floods, earthquakes; acts of terrorism or violence, including active
shooter situations; public health issues, including pandemics and quarantines, particularly in California or Washington state, where our centralized
operating systems and administrative personnel are located, could negatively affect our operations and financial performance. Such events could
result in physical damage to our properties, limitations on store operating hours, less frequent visits by members to physical locations, the temporary
closure of warehouses,
13

Table of Contents
depots, manufacturing or home office facilities, the temporary lack of an adequate work force, disruptions to our IT systems, the temporary or long-
term  disruption  in  the  supply  of  products  from  some  local  or  overseas  suppliers,  the  temporary  disruption  in  the  transport  of  goods  to  or  from
overseas, delays in the delivery of goods to our warehouses or depots, and the temporary reduction in the availability of products in our warehouses.
Public health issues, whether occurring in the U.S. or abroad, could disrupt our operations, disrupt the operations of suppliers or members, or have
an adverse impact on consumer spending and confidence levels. These events could also reduce demand for our products or make it difficult or
impossible to procure products. We may be required to suspend operations in some or all of our locations, which could have a material adverse
effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our business, financial condition and results of operations in many respects.
The continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly unpredictable and volatile, and are affecting certain business operations, demand for
our products and services, in-stock positions, costs of doing business, availability of labor, access to inventory, supply chain operations, our ability to
predict future performance, exposure to litigation, and our financial performance, among other things.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in widespread and continuing impacts on the global economy and on our employees, members, suppliers and
other people and entities with which we do business. There is considerable uncertainty regarding the extent to which COVID-19 will continue to
spread and the extent and duration of measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders
and business and government shutdowns. We are taking precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of the virus to our employees,
including temporarily requiring some employees to work remotely. To reward our employees for exemplary service in difficult times we temporarily
increased compensation levels and otherwise incurred increased spending for wages and benefits, including overtime pay. The pandemic and any
preventative or protective actions that governments or we may take are likely to result in a period of business disruption, reduced member traffic and
reduced sales in certain merchandise categories, and increased operating expenses.
The pandemic has significantly impacted the global supply chain, with restrictions and limitations on business activities causing disruption and delay.
These disruptions and delays have strained certain domestic and international supply chains, which have affected and could continue to negatively
affect the flow or availability of certain products. Member demand for certain products has also fluctuated as the pandemic has progressed and
member behaviors have changed, which has challenged our ability to anticipate and/or adjust inventory levels to meet that demand. These factors
have resulted in higher out-of-stock positions in certain products, as well as delays in delivering those products. Even if we are able to find alternate
sources for certain products, they may cost more or require us to incur higher transportation costs, adversely impacting our profitability and financial
condition. Similarly, increased demand for online purchases of products has impacted our fulfillment operations, resulting in delays in delivering
products to members.
If we do not respond appropriately to the pandemic, or if our members do not participate in social distancing and other safety measures, the well-
being of our employees and members could be at risk, and a failure to appropriately respond, or the perception of an inadequate response, could
cause reputational  harm to our brand and subject us to lost sales and claims from employees,  members,  suppliers,  regulators or other parties.
Additionally, a future outbreak of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in our facilities could result in temporary or sustained workforce shortages or facility
closures, which would negatively impact our business and results of operations. Some jurisdictions have taken measures intended to expand the
availability of workers compensation or to change the presumptions applicable to workers compensation measures. These actions may increase our
exposure to claims and increase our costs.
14

Table of Contents
In an effort to strengthen our liquidity position, during the year we issued $4,000 million Senior Notes, a portion of which was used to repay, prior to
maturity, $1,500 million of our 2.150% and 2.250% Senior Notes. Financial and credit markets have experienced and may continue to experience
significant volatility and turmoil. Our continued access to external sources of liquidity depends on multiple factors, including the condition of debt
capital markets, our operating performance, and maintaining strong credit ratings. If the impacts of the pandemic continue to disrupt the financial
markets, or if rating agencies lower our credit ratings, it could adversely affect our ability to access the debt markets, our cost of funds, and other
terms for new debt or other sources of external liquidity, if needed.
Other factors and uncertainties include, but are not limited to:
•
The severity and duration of the pandemic, including whether there is a “second wave” caused by additional periods of increases or spikes
in the number of COVID-19 cases, future mutations or related strains of the virus in areas in which we operate;
•
Evolving macroeconomic factors, including general economic uncertainty, unemployment rates, and recessionary pressures;
•
Unknown consequences on our business performance and initiatives stemming from the substantial investment of time and other resources
to the pandemic response;
•
The pace of recovery when the pandemic subsides; and
•
The long-term impact of the pandemic on our business, including consumer behaviors.
To the extent that COVID-19 continues to adversely affect the U.S. and global economy, our business, results of operations, cash flows, or financial
condition, it may also heighten other risks described in this section, including but not limited to those related to consumer behavior and expectations,
competition, brand reputation, implementation of strategic initiatives, cybersecurity threats, payment-related risks, technology systems disruption,
supply chain disruptions, labor availability and cost, litigation, operational risk as a result of remote work arrangements and regulatory requirements.
Factors associated with climate change could adversely affect our business.
We  use  natural  gas,  diesel  fuel,  gasoline,  and  electricity  in  our  distribution  and  warehouse  operations.  Government  regulations  limiting  carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions may increase compliance and merchandise costs, and other regulation affecting energy inputs could
materially affect our profitability. Climate change, extreme weather conditions, and rising sea levels could affect our ability to procure commodities at
costs and in quantities we currently experience. We also sell a substantial amount of gasoline, the demand for which could be impacted by concerns
about climate change and which face increased regulation.
Failure to meet financial market expectations could adversely affect the market price and volatility of our stock.
We believe that the price of our stock currently reflects high market expectations for our future operating results. Any failure to meet or delay in
meeting these expectations, including our warehouse and e-commerce comparable sales growth rates, membership renewal rates, new member
sign-ups, gross margin, earnings, earnings per share, new warehouse openings, or dividend or stock repurchase policies could cause the market
price of our stock to decline.
Legal and Regulatory Risks
We  are  subject  to  risks  associated  with  the  legislative,  judicial,  accounting,  regulatory,  political  and  economic  factors  specific  to  the
countries or regions in which we operate, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
At  the  end  of  2020,  we  operated  243  warehouses  outside  of  the  U.S.,  and  we  plan  to  continue  expanding  our  international  operations.  Future
operating results internationally could be negatively affected by a variety of factors, many similar to those we face in the U.S., certain of which are
beyond our control.
15

Table of Contents
These factors include political and economic conditions, regulatory constraints, currency regulations, policy changes such as the withdrawal of the
U.K. from the European Union, and other matters in any of the countries or regions in which we operate, now or in the future. Other factors that may
impact international operations include foreign trade (including tariffs and trade sanctions), monetary and fiscal policies and the laws and regulations
of the U.S. and foreign governments, agencies and similar organizations, and risks associated with having major facilities in locations which have
been  historically  less  stable  than  the  U.S.  Risks  inherent  in  international  operations  also  include,  among  others,  the  costs  and  difficulties  of
managing international operations, adverse tax consequences, and difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights.
We are exposed to risks relating to evaluations of controls required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires management assessments of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
and disclosure controls and procedures. If we are unable to maintain effective internal control over financial reporting or disclosure controls and
procedures, our ability to record, process and report financial information accurately and to prepare financial statements within required time periods
could be adversely affected, which could subject us to litigation or investigations requiring management resources and payment of legal and other
expenses, negatively affect investor confidence in our financial statements and adversely impact our stock price.
Changes in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by management related to complex accounting
matters could significantly affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Accounting principles and related pronouncements,  implementation  guidelines, and interpretations  we apply to a wide range of matters that are
relevant to our business, including self-insurance liabilities, are highly complex and involve subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by our
management.  Changes  in  rules  or  interpretation  or  changes  in  underlying  assumptions,  estimates  or  judgments  by  our  management  could
significantly change our reported or expected financial performance and have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
We could be subject to additional tax liabilities.
We are subject to a variety of taxes and tax collection and remittance obligations in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Additionally, at any
point in time, we may be under examination for value added, sales-based, payroll, product, import or other non-income taxes. We may recognize
additional  tax  expense,  be  subject  to  additional  tax  liabilities,  or  incur  losses  and  penalties,  due  to  changes  in  laws,  regulations,  administrative
practices,  principles,  assessments  by  authorities  and  interpretations  related  to  tax,  including  tax  rules  in  various  jurisdictions.  We  compute  our
income tax provision based on enacted tax rates in the countries in which we operate. As tax rates vary among countries, a change in earnings
attributable to the various jurisdictions in which we operate could result in an unfavorable change in our overall tax provision. Additionally, changes in
the enacted tax rates or adverse outcomes in tax audits, including transfer pricing disputes, could have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition and results of operations.
Significant changes in or failure to comply with regulations relating to the use, storage, discharge and disposal of hazardous materials,
hazardous  and  non-hazardous  wastes  and  other  environmental  matters  could  adversely  impact  our  business,  financial  condition  and
results of operations.
We are subject to a wide and increasingly broad array of federal, state, regional, local and international laws and regulations relating to the use,
storage, discharge and disposal of hazardous materials, hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and other environmental matters. Failure to comply
with these laws could result in harm to our members, employees or others, significant costs to satisfy environmental compliance, remediation or
compensatory  requirements,  or  the  imposition  of  severe  penalties  or  restrictions  on  operations  by  governmental  agencies  or  courts  that  could
adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
16

Table of Contents
Operations at our facilities require the treatment and disposal of wastewater, stormwater and agricultural and food processing wastes, the use and
maintenance  of  refrigeration  systems,  including  ammonia-based  chillers,  noise,  odor  and  dust  management,  the  operation  of  mechanized
processing equipment, and other operations that potentially could affect the environment and public health and safety. Failure to comply with current
and future environmental, health and safety standards could result in the imposition of fines and penalties, illness or injury of our employees, and
claims or lawsuits related to such illnesses or injuries, and temporary closures or limits on the operations of facilities.
We are involved in a number of legal proceedings and audits and some of these outcomes could adversely affect our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
Our  business  requires  compliance  with  many  laws  and  regulations.  Failure  to  achieve  compliance  could  subject  us  to  lawsuits  and  other
proceedings, and lead to damage awards, fines, penalties, and remediation costs. We are or may become involved in a number of legal proceedings
and audits, including grand jury investigations, government and agency investigations, and consumer, employment, tort, unclaimed property laws,
and  other  litigation.  We  cannot  predict  with  certainty  the  outcomes  of  these  proceedings  and  other  contingencies,  including  environmental
remediation  and  other  proceedings  commenced  by  governmental  authorities.  The  outcome  of  some  of  these  proceedings,  audits,  unclaimed
property laws, and other contingencies could require us to take, or refrain from taking, actions which could negatively affect our operations or could
require us to pay substantial amounts of money, adversely affecting our financial condition and results of operations. Additionally, defending against
these lawsuits and proceedings may involve significant expense and diversion of management's attention and resources.
Item 1B—Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
Item 2—Properties
Warehouse Properties
At August 30, 2020, we operated 795 membership warehouses:
Own Land 
and Building
Lease Land
and/or
Building(1)
Total
United States and Puerto Rico
443 
109 
552 
Canada
87 
14 
101 
Other International
99 
43 
142 
Total
629 
166 
795 
_______________
(1)
119 of the 166 leases are land-only leases, where Costco owns the building.
At the end of 2020, our warehouses contained approximately 116.1 million square feet of operating floor space: 81.4 million in the U.S.; 14.3 million
in  Canada;  and  20.4  million  in Other  International.  Total  square  feet  associated  with  distribution  and  logistics  facilities  were  approximately  28.0
million.  Additionally,  we  operate  various  processing,  packaging,  manufacturing  and  other  facilities  to  support  our  business,  which  includes  the
production of certain private-label items.
17

Table of Contents
Item 3—Legal Proceedings
See discussion of Legal Proceedings in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Item 4—Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
PART II
Item 5—Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Market Information and Dividend Policy
Our common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “COST.” On September 29, 2020, we had 9,690 stockholders
of record.
Payment of dividends is subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. Factors considered in determining dividends include our profitability and
expected capital needs. Subject to these qualifications, we presently expect to continue to pay dividends on a quarterly basis.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following table sets forth information on our common stock repurchase activity for the fourth quarter of 2020 (dollars in millions, except per share
data):
Period
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
Average Price Paid
per Share
Total Number of Shares
Purchased as Part of
Publicly Announced
Program(1)
Maximum Dollar Value
of Shares that May Yet
be Purchased under
the Program
May 11—June 7, 2020
— 
$
— 
— 
$
3,833 
June 8—July 5, 2020
94,000 
301.79 
94,000 
3,805 
July 6—August 2, 2020
93,000 
324.51 
93,000 
3,775 
August 3—August 30, 2020
88,000 
340.17 
88,000 
3,745 
     Total fourth quarter
275,000 
$
321.73 
275,000 
_______________
(1)
The repurchase program is conducted under a $4,000 authorization approved by our Board of Directors in April 2019, which expires in April 2023.
18

Table of Contents
Performance Graph
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return (stock price appreciation and the reinvestment of dividends) on an investment
of $100 in Costco common stock, S&P 500 Index, and the S&P 500 Retail Index over the five years from August 30, 2015, through August 30, 2020.
Item 6—Selected Financial Data
The following graph provides information concerning average sales per warehouse over a 10 year period.
Average Sales Per Warehouse*
(Sales In Millions)
Year Opened
# of Whses
2020
13
$
132 
2019
20
$
129 $
138 
2018
21
$
116 $
119 $
141 
2017
26
$
121 $
142 $
158 $
176 
2016
29
$
87 $
97 $
118 $
131 $
145 
2015
23
$
83 $
85 $
94 $
112 $
122 $
136 
2014
30
$
108 $
109 $
115 $
125 $
140 $
144 $
155 
2013
26
$
99 $
109 $
113 $
116 $
124 $
137 $
144 $
158 
2012
15
$
105 $
115 $
124 $
128 $
130 $
139 $
152 $
158 $
173 
2011 & Before
592 $
146 $
156 $
164 $
171 $
171 $
170 $
176 $
189 $
196 $
206 
Totals
795 $
146 $
155 $
160 $
164 $
162 $
159 $
163 $
176 $
182 $
192 
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Fiscal Year
*First year sales annualized.
2012 and 2017 were 53-week fiscal years
19

Table of Contents
The  following  table  sets  forth  information  concerning  our  consolidated  financial  condition,  operating  results,  and  key  operating  metrics.  This
information should be read in conjunction with Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, included in
Item 7 of this Report, and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, included in Item 8 of this Report.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
(dollars in millions, except per share data)
Aug. 30, 2020
Sept. 1, 2019
Sept. 2, 2018
Sept. 3, 2017
Aug. 28, 2016
As of and for the year ended
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(53 weeks)
(52 weeks)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net sales
$
163,220 
$
149,351 
$
138,434 
$
126,172 
$
116,073 
Membership fees
3,541 
3,352 
3,142 
2,853 
2,646 
Gross margin(1) as a percentage of net sales
11.20 %
11.02 %
11.04 %
11.33 %
11.35 %
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a
percentage of net sales
10.01 %
10.04 %
10.02 %
10.26 %
10.40 %
Operating income
$
5,435 
$
4,737 
$
4,480 
$
4,111 
$
3,672 
Net income attributable to Costco
4,002 
3,659 
3,134 
2,679 
2,350 
Net income per diluted common share attributable to
Costco
9.02 
8.26 
7.09 
6.08 
5.33 
Cash dividends declared per common share
2.70 
2.44 
2.14 
8.90 
1.70 
Changes in comparable sales(2)
United States
8 %
8 %
9 %
4 %
1 %
Canada
5 %
2 %
9 %
5 %
(3)%
Other International
9 %
2 %
11 %
2 %
(3)%
Total Company
8 %
6 %
9 %
4 %
0 %
Changes in Total Company comparable sales excluding the
impact of changes in foreign currency and gasoline prices
(3)
9 %
6 %
7 %
4 %
4 %
BALANCE SHEET DATA
Net property and equipment
$
21,807 
$
20,890 
$
19,681 
$
18,161 
$
17,043 
Total assets
55,556 
45,400 
40,830 
36,347 
33,163 
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
7,514 
5,124 
6,487 
6,573 
4,061 
Costco stockholders’ equity
18,284 
15,243 
12,799 
10,778 
12,079 
WAREHOUSE INFORMATION
Warehouses in Operation
Beginning of year
782 
762 
741 
715 
686 
Opened
16 
25 
25 
28 
33 
Closed due to relocation
(3)
(5)
(4)
(2)
(4)
End of year
795 
782 
762 
741 
715 
MEMBERSHIP INFORMATION
Total paid members (000's) (4)
58,100 
53,900 
51,600 
49,400 
47,600 
Total executive members (000's) (5)
22,600 
20,800 
19,300 
18,500 
17,400 
______________
(1)
Net sales less merchandise costs.
(2)
Includes net sales from warehouses and websites operating for more than one year. For 2017, the prior year includes the comparable 53 weeks.
(3)
Excluding the impact of the revenue recognition standard for the year ended September 1, 2019.
(4)
2020 includes an additional 1.3 million due to standardizing our membership count methodology globally to be consistent with the U.S. and Canada. See Item 1.
(5)
Counts are included in total paid members
20

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data)
Overview
We believe that the most important driver of our profitability is increasing net sales, particularly comparable sales growth. Net sales includes our core
merchandise categories (food and sundries, hardlines, softlines, and fresh foods), warehouse ancillary and other businesses. We define comparable
sales as net sales from warehouses open for more than one year, including remodels, relocations and expansions, and sales related to e-commerce
websites operating for more than one year. Comparable sales growth is achieved through increasing shopping frequency from new and existing
members and the amount they spend on each visit (average ticket). Sales comparisons can also be particularly influenced by certain factors that are
beyond our control: fluctuations in currency exchange rates (with respect to the consolidation of the results of our international operations); and
changes  in  the  cost  of  gasoline  and  associated  competitive  conditions  (primarily  impacting  our  U.S.  and  Canadian  operations).  The  higher  our
comparable sales exclusive of these items, the more we can leverage certain of our selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses, reducing
them as a percentage of sales and enhancing profitability. Generating comparable sales growth is foremost a question of making available to our
members the right merchandise at the right prices, a skill that we believe we have repeatedly demonstrated over the long-term. Another substantial
factor in net sales growth is the health of the economies in which we do business, including the effects of inflation or deflation, especially the United
States. Net sales growth and gross margins are also impacted by our competition, which is vigorous and widespread, across a wide range of global,
national and regional wholesalers and retailers, including those with e-commerce operations. While we cannot control or reliably predict general
economic health or changes in competition, we believe that we have been successful historically in adapting our business to these changes, such as
through adjustments to our pricing and merchandise mix, including increasing the penetration of our private-label items and through online offerings.
Our philosophy is to provide our members with quality goods and services at competitive prices. We do not focus in the short-term on maximizing
prices charged, but instead seek to maintain what we believe is a perception among our members of our “pricing authority”  on quality goods –
consistently providing the most competitive values. Our investments in merchandise pricing may include reducing prices on merchandise to drive
sales or meet competition and holding prices steady despite cost increases instead of passing the increases on to our members,  all negatively
impacting gross margin as a percentage of net sales (gross margin percentage). We believe our gasoline business draws members, but it generally
has a lower gross margin percentage relative to our non-gasoline business. It also has lower SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales compared to
our  non-gasoline  business.  A  higher  penetration  of  gasoline  sales  will  generally  lower  our  gross  margin  percentage.  Rapidly  changing  gasoline
prices may significantly impact our near-term net sales growth. Generally, rising gasoline prices benefit net sales growth which, given the higher
sales base, negatively impacts our gross margin percentage but decreases our SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales. A decline in gasoline
prices  has  the  inverse  effect.  Additionally,  actions  in  various  countries,  particularly  China  and  the  United  States,  have  created  uncertainty  with
respect to how tariffs will affect the costs of some of our merchandise. The degree of our exposure is dependent on (among other things) the type of
goods, rates imposed, and timing of the tariffs. The impact to our net sales and gross margin will be influenced in part by our merchandising and
pricing strategies in response to cost increases. While these potential impacts are uncertain, they could have an adverse impact on our results.
We also achieve net sales growth by opening new warehouses. As our warehouse base grows, available and desirable sites become more difficult
to  secure,  and  square  footage  growth  becomes  a  comparatively  less  substantial  component  of  growth.  The  negative  aspects  of  such  growth,
however,  including  lower  initial  operating  profitability  relative  to  existing  warehouses  and  cannibalization  of  sales  at  existing  warehouses  when
openings occur in existing markets, are continuing to decline in significance as they relate to the results of our total operations. Our rate of operating
floor space square footage growth is generally higher in foreign markets, due to the smaller base in those markets, and we expect that to
21

Table of Contents
continue. Our e-commerce business growth, domestically and internationally, has also increased our sales but it generally has a lower gross margin
percentage relative to our warehouse business.
The  membership  format  is  an  integral  part  of  our  business  and  has  a  significant  effect  on  our  profitability.  This  format  is  designed  to  reinforce
member loyalty and provide continuing fee revenue. The extent to which we achieve growth in our membership base, increase the penetration of our
Executive  members,  and  sustain  high  renewal  rates  materially  influences  our  profitability.  Our  paid  membership  growth  rate  may  be  adversely
impacted when warehouse openings occur in existing markets as compared to new markets.
Our financial performance depends heavily on controlling costs. While we believe that we have achieved successes in this area, some significant
costs  are  partially  outside  our  control,  particularly  health  care  and  utility  expenses.  With  respect  to  the  compensation  of  our  employees,  our
philosophy is not to seek to minimize their wages and benefits. Rather, we believe that achieving our longer-term objectives of reducing employee
turnover and enhancing employee satisfaction requires maintaining compensation levels that are better than the industry average for much of our
workforce. This may cause us, for example, to absorb costs that other employers might seek to pass through to their workforces. Because our
business operates on very low margins, modest changes in various items in the consolidated statements of income, particularly merchandise costs
and selling, general and administrative expenses, can have substantial impacts on net income.
Our operating model is generally the same across our U.S., Canada, and Other International operating segments (see Note 12 to the consolidated
financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report). Certain countries in the Other International segment have relatively higher rates of square
footage growth, lower wage and benefit costs as a percentage of country sales, less or no direct membership warehouse competition, and may lack
an e-commerce business.
In discussions of our consolidated operating results, we refer to the impact of changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which are
references to the differences between the foreign-exchange rates we use to convert the financial results of our international operations from local
currencies into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. This impact of foreign-exchange rate changes is calculated based on the difference
between the current period's currency exchange rates and that of the comparable prior period. The impact of changes in gasoline prices on net sales
is calculated based on the difference between the current period's average price per gallon sold and that of the comparable prior period.
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday closest to August 31. References to 2020, 2019, and 2018 relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended August 30,
2020, September 1, 2019, and September 2, 2018, respectively. Certain percentages presented are calculated using actual results prior to rounding.
Unless otherwise noted, references to net income relate to net income attributable to Costco.
For  discussion  related  to  the  results  of  operations  and  changes  in  financial  condition  for  2019  compared  to  2018  refer  to  Part  II,  Item  7,
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our fiscal year 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission on October 11, 2019.
22

Table of Contents
Highlights for 2020 included:
•
We opened 16 new warehouses, including 3 relocations: 9 new in the U.S., 3 new in our Other International segment, and 1 net new location in
our Canadian segment, compared to 25 new warehouses, including 5 relocations in 2019;
•
Net sales increased 9% to $163,220 driven by a 8% increase in comparable sales and sales at new warehouses opened in 2019 and 2020;
•
Membership fee revenue increased 6% to $3,541, primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses;
•
Gross margin percentage increased 18 basis points, driven primarily by certain core merchandise categories, partially offset by certain ancillary
and other businesses, which were negatively impacted by COVID-19 related closures or restrictions;
•
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased three basis points primarily due to leveraging increased sales and partial reversal of a
previous year tax assessment. These benefits were partially offset by incremental wage and sanitation costs as a result of COVID-19;
•
The effective tax rate in 2020 was 24.4% compared to 22.3% in 2019;
•
Net income increased 9% to $4,002, or $9.02 per diluted share compared to $3,659, or $8.26 per diluted share in 2019;
•
In February 2020, we acquired a 35% interest in Navitus Health Solutions, a pharmacy benefit manager. In March 2020, we acquired Innovel
Solutions, a company that provides final-mile delivery, installation and white-glove capabilities for big and bulky products across the United
States and Puerto Rico;
•
In April 2020, we issued $4,000 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes, some proceeds of which were used to repay $1,500 of Senior
Notes; and
•
In April 2020, the Board of Directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend from $0.65 to $0.70 per share.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization announced that COVID-19 infections had become a pandemic, and shortly afterward the U.S.
declared a National Emergency. The outbreak has led to widespread and continuing impacts on the global economy and is affecting many aspects
of our business and the operations of others with which we do business. In our response to the pandemic and in an effort to protect our members
and employees, we have taken several measures, as described in Item 1A Risk Factors, and their implications on our results of operations have
impacted us across all our reportable segments to varying degrees. Throughout the pandemic our warehouses have largely remained open as a
result of being deemed an “essential business” in most markets and resulted in strong sales increases in our food and sundries and fresh foods
merchandise categories compared to pre-pandemic time periods. This growth in certain of our core business categories has led to improved gross
margin and SG&A percentages as we leveraged these sales to achieve greater efficiency. Our e-commerce business has also benefited, as more
members have shopped online during the pandemic. Conversely, we have experienced decreases in both the sales and profitability of many of our
ancillary and other businesses due to temporary closures or limited demand. Additionally, we paid $564 in incremental wage and sanitation costs
during 2020 related to COVID-19.
23

Table of Contents
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
2020
2019
2018
Net Sales
$
163,220 
$
149,351 
 $
138,434 
Changes in net sales:
U.S.
9 %
9 %
9 %
Canada
5 %
3 %
10 %
Other International
13 %
5 %
14 %
Total Company
9 %
8 %
10 %
Changes in comparable sales:
U.S.
8 %
8 %
9 %
Canada
5 %
2 %
9 %
Other International
9 %
2 %
11 %
Total Company
8 %
6 %
9 %
Increases in comparable sales excluding the impact of changes in foreign currency
and gasoline prices(1):
U.S.
9 %
6 %
7 %
Canada
7 %
5 %
4 %
Other International
11 %
6 %
7 %
Total Company
9 %
6 %
7 %
_______________
(1)
Excluding the impact of the revenue recognition standard for the year ended September 1, 2019.
Net Sales
Net sales increased $13,869 or 9% during 2020, primarily due to an 8% increase in comparable sales and sales at new warehouses opened in 2019
and 2020. During the second half of 2020, we experienced a significant sales shift from certain of our ancillary and other businesses to our core
merchandise categories, primarily food and sundries and fresh foods, as a result of COVID-19. This shift was largely driven by price deflation and
lower volume in our gasoline business; temporary closures of most of our optical, hearing aid and photo departments; limited service in our food
courts; and minimal demand in our travel business.
Changes in gasoline prices negatively impacted net sales by $1,504, or 101 basis points, compared to 2019, due to a 10% decrease in the average
price per gallon. The volume of gasoline sold decreased approximately 4%, negatively impacting net sales by $699, or 47 basis points. Changes in
foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted net sales by approximately $663, or 44 basis points, compared to 2019, attributable
to our Canadian and Other International Operations.
Comparable Sales
Comparable sales increased 8% during 2020 and were positively impacted by increases in average ticket. While traffic increased slightly in 2020, it
decreased in the second half of the year due to capacity restrictions and regulations related to COVID-19. There was an increase of 50% in e-
commerce comparable sales in 2020, with an increase of 80% in the second half of the year.
24

Table of Contents
Membership Fees
2020
2019
2018
Membership fees
$
3,541 
$
3,352 
$
3,142 
Membership fees increase
6 %
7 %
10 %
Membership fees as a percentage of net sales
2.17 %
2.24 %
2.27 %
The increase in membership fees was primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses. At the end of 2020, our member
renewal rates were 91% in the U.S. and Canada and 88% worldwide. Our renewal rate is a trailing calculation that captures renewals during the
period seven to eighteen months prior to the reporting date.
We account for membership fee revenue on a deferred basis, recognized ratably over the one-year membership period. Our membership counts
include active memberships as well as memberships that have not renewed within the 12 months prior to the reporting date.
Gross Margin
2020
2019
2018
Net sales
$
163,220 
$
149,351 
$
138,434 
Less merchandise costs
144,939 
132,886 
123,152 
Gross margin
$
18,281 
$
16,465 
$
15,282 
Gross margin percentage
11.20 %
11.02 %
11.04 %
The gross margin of our core merchandise categories (food and sundries, hardlines, softlines and fresh foods), when expressed as a percentage of
core merchandise sales (rather than total net sales), increased 16 basis points, primarily due to increases in fresh foods and softlines, partially offset
by a decrease in hardlines. This measure eliminates the impact of changes in sales penetration and gross margins from our warehouse ancillary and
other businesses. Fresh foods gross margin increased as a result of efficiencies from increased sales, partially offset by operating losses from our
poultry complex.
Total gross margin percentage increased 18 basis points compared to 2019. Excluding the impact of gasoline price deflation on net sales, gross
margin  percentage  was  11.10%,  an  increase  of  eight  basis  points.  This  increase  was  primarily  due  to  a  32  basis  point  increase  in  our  core
merchandise categories, predominantly fresh foods and food and sundries, partially offset by a decrease in softlines and hardlines. This increase
was also positively impacted by our co-branded credit card program, which included an adjustment in 2019 to our estimate of breakage on rewards
earned. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of 14 basis points in our warehouse ancillary and other businesses, predominantly
certain ancillary businesses that were negatively impacted by COVID-19 related closures or restrictions. However, certain of our ancillary and other
businesses, such as tire shop, gasoline and e-commerce businesses, did improve. Gross margin was also negatively impacted by incremental wage
and  sanitation  costs  related  to  COVID-19  of  six  basis  points,  a  reserve  for  certain  inventory  of  three  basis  points,  and  increased  spending  by
members  under  the  Executive  Membership  2%  reward  program  of  one  basis  point.  Changes  in  foreign  currencies  relative  to  the  U.S.  dollar
negatively impacted gross margin by approximately $68 in 2020.
Gross margin on a segment basis, when expressed as a percentage of the segment's own sales and excluding the impact of changes in gasoline
prices on net sales (segment gross margin percentage), was impacted by increases in fresh foods and food and sundries and decreases in softlines
and  hardlines  in  each  of  our  U.S.,  Canadian,  and  Other  International  segments.  Each  of  our  segments  were  also  negatively  impacted  by  the
incremental  wage  and  sanitation  costs  as  a  result  of  COVID-19.  The  segment  gross  margin  percentage  increased  in  our  U.S.  operations,
predominantly in our core merchandise categories which includes the impact from our co-branded credit card program, as discussed above,
25

Table of Contents
partially offset by certain ancillary businesses that were negatively impacted by COVID-19 related closures or restrictions. Our Canadian segment
gross margin percentage decreased primarily  due to certain of our warehouse ancillary and other businesses that were negatively impacted by
COVID-19 related closures or restrictions. The segment gross margin percentage increased in our Other International operations primarily due to
core  merchandise  categories,  as  discussed  above,  and  was  also  positively  impacted  by  certain  warehouse  ancillary  and  other  businesses,
predominantly e-commerce. These increases were partially offset by increased spending by members under the Executive Membership 2% reward
program.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
2020
2019
2018
SG&A expenses
$
16,332 
$
14,994 
$
13,876 
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales
10.01 %
10.04 %
10.02 %
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased three basis points compared to 2019. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales,
excluding  the  impact  of  gasoline  price  deflation,  was  9.91%,  a  decrease  of  13  basis  points.  SG&A  expenses  were  negatively  impacted  by
approximately $456, or 28 basis points, due to incremental wage and sanitation costs as a result of COVID-19, and approximately $24 or one basis
point  due  to  costs  associated  with  the  acquisition  of  Innovel  (see Note  2 to  the  consolidated  financial  statements).  Operating  costs  related  to
warehouse  operations  and  other  businesses,  which  include  e-commerce  and  travel,  were  lower  by  26  basis  points,  primarily  due  to  leveraging
increased sales. SG&A expenses were also benefited by 13 basis points related to a product tax assessment charge in 2019 which was partially
reversed in 2020. Stock compensation was lower by two basis points, and central operating costs were lower by one basis point. Our Canadian
segment SG&A percentage was higher compared to 2019 due primarily to the incremental wage and sanitation costs related to COVID as outlined
above. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar positively impacted SG&A expenses by approximately $58.
Preopening
2020
2019
2018
Preopening expenses
$
55 
$
86 
$
68 
Warehouse openings, including relocations
United States
9 
18 
17 
Canada
4 
3 
3 
Other International
3 
4 
5 
Total warehouse openings, including relocations
16 
25 
25 
Preopening expenses include costs for startup operations related to new warehouses and relocations, developments in new international markets,
new manufacturing and distribution facilities, and expansions at existing warehouses. Preopening expenses vary due to the number of warehouse
and facility openings, the timing of the opening relative to our year-end, whether a warehouse is owned or leased, and whether openings are in an
existing,  new,  or  international  market.  In  2020,  operations  commenced  at  our  new  poultry  processing  plant,  and  in  2019,  we  opened  our  first
warehouse in China.
Interest Expense
2020
2019
2018
Interest expense
$
160 
$
150 
$
159 
Interest expense primarily relates to Senior Notes. In December 2019 and February 2020, we repaid $1,200 and $500 in total outstanding principal
of the 1.700% and 1.750% Senior Notes, respectively. In
26

Table of Contents
April 2020, we issued $4,000 in aggregate principal amount of long-term debt consisting of $1,250 of 1.375% Senior Notes due June 2027; $1,750
of 1.600% Senior Notes due April 2030; and $1,000 of 1.750% Senior Notes due April 2032. A portion of the proceeds was used to repay, prior to
maturity,  $1,000  and  $500  of  the  2.150%  and  2.250%  Senior  Notes.  For  more  information  on  our  debt  arrangements  refer  to Note  5 to  the
consolidated financial statements.
Interest Income and Other, Net
2020
2019
2018
Interest income
$
89 
$
126 
$
75 
Foreign-currency transaction gains, net
7 
27 
23 
Other, net
(4)
25 
23 
Interest income and other, net
$
92 
$
178 
$
121 
The decrease in interest income in 2020 was primarily due to lower interest rates in the U.S. and Canada, partially offset by higher average cash and
investment balances. Foreign-currency transaction gains, net include the revaluation and settlement of monetary assets and liabilities and mark-to-
market  adjustments  for  forward  foreign-exchange  contracts  by  our  Canadian  and  Other  International  operations.  See  Derivatives  and  Foreign
Currency sections in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. Other, net was impacted by a $36 charge related to the repayment of certain
Senior Notes, as discussed above and in Note 5.
Provision for Income Taxes
2020
2019
2018
Provision for income taxes
$
1,308 
$
1,061 
$
1,263 
Effective tax rate
24.4 %
22.3 %
28.4 %
The  effective  tax  rate  for  2020  included  discrete  net  tax  benefits  of  $81,  including  a  benefit  of  $77  due  to  excess  tax  benefits  from  stock
compensation. Excluding these benefits, the tax rate was 25.9% for 2020.
The  effective  tax  rate  for  2019  included  discrete  net  tax  benefits  of  $221,  including  a  benefit  of  $59  due  to  excess  tax  benefits  from  stock
compensation. This also included a tax benefit of $105 related to U.S. taxation of deemed foreign dividends, offset by losses of foreign tax credits,
which impacted the effective tax rate. Excluding these benefits, the tax rate was 26.9% for 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes our significant sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents:
2020
2019
2018
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
8,861 
$
6,356 
$
5,774 
Net cash used in investing activities
(3,891)
(2,865)
(2,947)
Net cash used in financing activities
(1,147)
(1,147)
(1,281)
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from our operations, cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. Cash and
cash equivalents and short-term investments were $13,305 and $9,444 at the end of 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of these balances, unsettled
credit  and  debit  card  receivables  represented  approximately  $1,636  and  $1,434  at  the  end  of  2020  and  2019,  respectively.  These  receivables
generally settle within four days. Cash and cash equivalents were positively impacted by a change in exchange rates of $70 in 2020, and negatively
impacted by $15 and $37 in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
27

Table of Contents
Management  believes  that  our  cash  position  and  operating  cash  flows  will  be  sufficient  to  meet  our  liquidity  and  capital  requirements  for  the
foreseeable future. We believe that our U.S. current and projected asset position is sufficient to meet our U.S. liquidity requirements. We no longer
consider earnings after 2017 of our non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $8,861 in 2020, compared to $6,356 in 2019. Our cash flow provided by operations is primarily
derived from net sales and membership fees. Cash flow used in operations generally consists of payments to our merchandise suppliers, warehouse
operating costs, including payroll and employee benefits, utilities, and credit and debit card processing fees. Cash used in operations also includes
payments  for  income  taxes.  Changes  in  our  net  investment  in  merchandise  inventories  (the  difference  between  merchandise  inventories  and
accounts payable) is impacted by several factors, including how fast inventory is sold, payment terms with our suppliers, and the amount of payables
paid early to obtain discounts from our suppliers.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $3,891 in 2020, compared to $2,865 in 2019, and primarily related to capital expenditures. In 2020, we
acquired Innovel and a minority interest in Navitus. For more information see Notes 1 and 2 to the consolidated financial statements. Net cash flows
from investing activities also includes maturities and purchases of short-term investments.
Capital Expenditures
Our primary requirement for capital is acquiring land, buildings, and equipment for new and remodeled warehouses. Capital is also required for
information systems, manufacturing and distribution facilities, initial warehouse operations, and working capital. In 2020, we spent $2,810 on capital
expenditures, and it is our current intention to spend approximately $3,000 to $3,200 during fiscal 2021. These expenditures are expected to be
financed with cash from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments. We opened 16 new warehouses, including
three relocations, in 2020, and plan to open approximately 23 additional new warehouses, including three relocations, in 2021. We have experienced
delays in real estate and construction activities due to COVID-19. There can be no assurance that current expectations will be realized and plans are
subject to change upon further review of our capital expenditure needs or based on the current economic environment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $1,147 in both 2020 and 2019. In April 2020, we issued $4,000 in aggregate principal amount of Senior
Notes as follows:  $1,250  of 1.375% due June 2027; $1,750 of 1.600% due April 2030; and $1,000 of 1.750% due April 2032.  A portion  of the
proceeds  was  used  to  repay,  prior  to  maturity,  the  outstanding  $1,000  and  $500  principal  balances  on  the  2.150%  and  2.250%  Senior  Notes,
respectively,  at  a  redemption  price  plus  accrued  interest  as  specified  in  the  Notes'  agreements.  The  remaining  funds  are  intended  for  general
corporate purposes.
Financing  activities  also  included  $1,200  and  $500  repayment  of  our  1.700%  and  1.750%  Senior  Notes,  respectively,  payment  of  dividends,
withholding taxes on stock-based awards, and repurchases of common stock.
Stock Repurchase Programs
During 2020 and 2019, we repurchased 643,000 and 1,097,000 shares of common stock, at average prices of $308.45 and $225.16, respectively,
totaling  approximately  $198  and  $247,  respectively.  These  amounts  may  differ  from  the  stock  repurchase  balances  in  the  accompanying
consolidated statements of cash flows due to changes in unsettled stock repurchases at the end of each fiscal year. Purchases are made from time-
to-time, as conditions warrant, in the open market or in block purchases and pursuant to plans under SEC Rule 10b5-1. Repurchased shares are
retired, in accordance with the Washington
28

Table of Contents
Business Corporation Act. The remaining amount available to be purchased under our approved plan was $3,745 at the end of 2020.
Dividends
Cash dividends declared in 2020 totaled $2.70 per share, as compared to $2.44 per share in 2019. Dividends totaling $1,479 were paid during 2020,
of which $286 related to the dividend declared in August 2019. In April 2020, the Board of Directors increased our quarterly cash dividend from
$0.65 to $0.70 per share. In July 2020, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend in the amount of $0.70 per share, which was paid
on August 14, 2020.
Bank Credit Facilities and Commercial Paper Programs
We maintain bank credit facilities for working capital and general corporate purposes. At August 30, 2020, we had borrowing capacity under these
facilities of $967. Our international operations maintain $500 of the total borrowing capacity under bank credit facilities, of which $204 is guaranteed
by the Company. There were no outstanding short-term borrowings under the bank credit facilities at the end of 2020 and 2019.
The Company has letter of credit facilities, for commercial and standby letters of credit, totaling $183. The outstanding commitments under these
facilities at the end of 2020 totaled $166, most of which were standby letters of credit which do not expire or have expiration dates within one year.
The bank credit facilities have various expiration dates, most of which are within one year, and we generally intend to renew these facilities. The
amount of borrowings available at any time under our bank credit facilities is reduced by the amount of standby and commercial letters of credit
outstanding.
Contractual Obligations
At August 30, 2020, our commitments to make future payments under contractual obligations were as follows: 
 
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
Contractual obligations
2021
2022 to 2023
2024 to 2025
2026 and
thereafter
Total
Purchase obligations(1)
$
12,575 
$
9 
$
— 
$
— 
$
12,584 
Long-term debt(2)
241 
1,163 
1,475 
5,776 
8,655 
Operating leases (3) (4)
273 
499 
388 
2,410 
3,570 
Construction and land obligations
979 
35 
— 
— 
1,014 
Finance lease obligations(4)
61 
128 
197 
742 
1,128 
Purchase obligations (equipment, services
and other)(5)
674 
205 
72 
187 
1,138 
Other(6)
60 
36 
28 
108 
232 
Total
$
14,863 
$
2,075 
$
2,160 
$
9,223 
$
28,321 
_______________
(1)
Includes open purchase orders primarily related to merchandise and supplies.
(2)
Includes contractual interest payments and excludes deferred issuance costs.
(3)
Operating lease payments have not been reduced by future sublease income of $101.
(4)
Includes amounts representing interest.
(5)
Excludes certain services negotiated at the individual warehouse or regional level that are not significant and generally contain clauses allowing for cancellation without
significant penalty.
(6)
Includes asset retirement obligations and deferred compensation obligations. The amount excludes $25 of non-current unrecognized tax contingencies and $48 of other
obligations due to uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash payments.
29

Table of Contents
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the opinion of management, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a material current or
future effect on our financial condition or financial statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires
that  we make  estimates  and assumptions  that  affect  the  reported  amounts  of  assets  and liabilities  and the disclosure  of  contingent  assets  and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our
estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, and we continue to review and evaluate these estimates.
For further information on significant accounting policies, see discussion in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this
Report.
Insurance/Self-insurance Liabilities
Claims for employee health-care benefits, workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability,
inventory loss, and other exposures are funded predominantly through self-insurance. Insurance coverage is maintained in certain instances to seek
to  limit  exposures  arising  from  very  large  losses.  We  use  different  risk  management  mechanisms,  including  a  wholly-owned  captive  insurance
subsidiary, and participate in a reinsurance program. Liabilities associated with the risks that we retain are not discounted and are estimated by
using  historical  claims  experience,  demographic  factors,  severity  factors,  and  other  actuarial  assumptions.  The  costs  of  claims  are  highly
unpredictable and can fluctuate as a result of inflation rates, regulatory or legal changes, and unforeseen developments in claims over time. While
we believe our estimates are reasonable and provide for a certain degree of coverage to account for these variables, actual claims and costs could
differ significantly from recorded liabilities. Historically, adjustments to our estimates have not been material.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for a detailed description of recent accounting pronouncements.
Item 7A—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk (amounts in millions)
Our  exposure  to  financial  market  risk  results  from  fluctuations  in  interest  rates  and  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  We  do  not  engage  in
speculative or leveraged transactions or hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes.
Interest Rate Risk
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment holdings that are diversified among various instruments
considered to be cash equivalents, as defined in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, as well as short-
term investments in government and agency securities with effective maturities of generally three months to five years at the date of purchase. The
primary objective of our investment activities is to preserve principal and secondarily to generate yields. The majority of our short-term investments
are in fixed interest-rate securities. These securities are subject to changes in fair value due to interest rate fluctuations.
30

Table of Contents
Our policy limits investments in the U.S. to direct U.S. government and government agency obligations, repurchase agreements collateralized by
U.S. government and government agency obligations, U.S. government and government agency money market funds, and insured bank balances.
Our  wholly-owned  captive  insurance  subsidiary  invests  in  U.S.  government  and  government  agency  obligations  and  U.S.  government  and
government agency money market funds. Our Canadian and Other International  subsidiaries’ investments  are primarily in money market funds,
bankers’ acceptances, and bank certificates of deposit, generally denominated in local currencies.
A 100 basis point change in interest rates as of the end of 2020 would have had an immaterial incremental change in fair market value. For those
investments that are classified as available-for-sale, the unrealized gains or losses related to fluctuations in market volatility and interest rates are
reflected within stockholders’ equity in accumulated other comprehensive income in the consolidated balance sheets.
The nature and amount of our long-term debt may vary as a result of business requirements, market conditions, and other factors. As of the end of
2020, long-term debt with fixed interest rates was $7,657. Fluctuations in interest rates may affect the fair value of the fixed-rate debt. See Note 5 to
the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for more information on our long-term debt.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our foreign subsidiaries conduct certain transactions in non-functional currencies, which exposes us to fluctuations in exchange rates. We manage
these fluctuations, in part, through the use of forward foreign-exchange contracts, seeking to economically hedge the impact of these fluctuations on
known future expenditures denominated in a non-functional foreign-currency. The contracts are intended primarily to economically hedge exposure
to U.S. dollar merchandise inventory expenditures made by our international subsidiaries whose functional currency is other than the U.S. dollar. We
seek to mitigate risk with the use of these contracts and do not intend to engage in speculative transactions. For additional information related to the
Company's forward foreign-exchange contracts, see Notes 1 and 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report. A
hypothetical 10% strengthening of the functional currency compared to the non-functional currency exchange rates at August 30, 2020, would have
decreased the fair value of the contracts by $111 and resulted in an unrealized loss in the consolidated statements of income for the same amount.
Commodity Price Risk
We are exposed to fluctuations in prices for energy, particularly electricity and natural gas, and other commodities used in retail and manufacturing
operations, which we seek to partially mitigate through fixed-price contracts for certain of our warehouses and other facilities, predominantly in the
U.S. and Canada. We also enter into variable-priced contracts for some purchases of electricity and natural gas, in addition to some of the fuel for
our  gas  stations,  on  an  index  basis.  These  contracts  meet  the  characteristics  of  derivative  instruments,  but  generally  qualify  for  the  “normal
purchases and normal sales” exception under authoritative guidance and require no mark-to-market adjustment.
31

Table of Contents
Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
Opinion on the Consolidated Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Costco Wholesale Corporation and subsidiaries (the Company) as of August 30,
2020  and  September  1,  2019,  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  income,  comprehensive  income,  equity,  and  cash  flows  for  the  52-week
periods  ended  August  30,  2020,  September  1,  2019  and  September  2,  2018,  and  the  related  notes  (collectively,  the  consolidated  financial
statements). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of
August 30, 2020 and September 1, 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the 52-week periods ended August 30, 2020,
September 1, 2019 and September 2, 2018, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We  also  have  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of August 30, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, and our report dated October 6, 2020 expressed an
unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company has changed its method of accounting for leases as of September 2,
2019 due to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2016-02 – Leases (ASC 842).
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
consolidated  financial  statements  based  on  our  audits.  We  are  a  public  accounting  firm  registered  with  the  PCAOB  and  are  required  to  be
independent  with  respect  to  the  Company  in  accordance  with  the  U.S.  federal  securities  laws  and  the  applicable  rules  and  regulations  of  the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our
audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or
fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts
and  disclosures  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements.  Our  audits  also  included  evaluating  the  accounting  principles  used  and  significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matter
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that was
communicated  or  required  to  be  communicated  to  the  audit  committee  and  that:  (1)  relates  to  accounts  or  disclosures  that  are  material  to  the
consolidated financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of a critical
audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the
critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
32

Table of Contents
Evaluation of self-insurance liabilities
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company estimates its self-insurance liabilities by considering historical
claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors, and other actuarial assumptions. The estimated insurance/self-insurance liabilities
as of August 30, 2020 were $1,188 million, a portion of which related to workers’ compensation and general liability self-insurance liabilities
for the United States and Canadian operations.
We identified the evaluation of the Company’s workers’ compensation and general liability self-insurance liabilities for the United States and
Canadian operations as a critical audit matter because of the extent of specialized skill and knowledge needed to evaluate the Company’s
actuarial models and the judgments required to assess the underlying assumptions made by the Company. Specifically, subjective auditor
judgment  was  required  to  evaluate  certain  assumptions  underlying  the  Company’s  actuarial  estimates,  including  reporting  and  payment
patterns used in the projections of the ultimate loss; loss and exposure trends; the selected loss rates and initial expected losses used in the
Paid and Incurred Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods; and the selection of the ultimate loss derived from the various methods.
The following are the primary procedures we performed to address this critical audit matter. We evaluated the design and tested operating
effectiveness of certain internal controls over the Company’s self-insurance process. This included controls related to the development and
selection  of  the  assumptions  listed  above  used  in  the  actuarial  calculation  and  review  of  the  actuarial  report.  We  involved  actuarial
professionals with specialized skills and knowledge who assisted in:
•
Assessing the actuarial models used by the Company for consistency with generally
accepted actuarial standards
•
Evaluating the Company’s ability to estimate self-insurance liabilities by comparing its
historical estimate with actual incurred losses and paid losses
•
Evaluating the above listed assumptions underlying the Company’s actuarial estimates by
developing  an  independent  expectation  of  the  self-insurance  liabilities  and  comparing  them  to  the  amounts  recorded  by  the
Company
/s/ KPMG LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2002.
Seattle, Washington
October 6, 2020
33

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Costco Wholesale Corporation and subsidiaries’ (the Company) internal control over financial reporting as of August 30, 2020,
based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the
Treadway  Commission.  In our opinion, the  Company maintained,  in all material  respects,  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as of
August  30,  2020,  based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013) issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
We  also  have  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
consolidated  balance  sheets  of  the  Company  as  of  August  30,  2020  and  September  1,  2019,  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  income,
comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for the 52-week periods ended August 30, 2020, September 1, 2019 and September 2, 2018, and the
related notes (collectively, the consolidated financial statements), and our report dated October 6, 2020 expressed an unqualified opinion on those
consolidated financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its  assessment  of  the
effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  the  accompanying  Management’s  Annual  Report  on  Internal  Control  Over
Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are
a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S.
federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audit also
included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 6, 2020
34

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(amounts in millions, except per share data)
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
August 30, 
2020
September 1, 
2019
September 2, 
2018
REVENUE
Net sales
$
163,220 
$
149,351 
$
138,434 
Membership fees
3,541 
3,352 
3,142 
Total revenue
166,761 
152,703 
141,576 
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
144,939 
132,886 
123,152 
Selling, general and administrative
16,332 
14,994 
13,876 
Preopening expenses
55 
86 
68 
Operating income
5,435 
4,737 
4,480 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(160)
(150)
(159)
Interest income and other, net
92 
178 
121 
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
5,367 
4,765 
4,442 
Provision for income taxes
1,308 
1,061 
1,263 
Net income including noncontrolling interests
4,059 
3,704 
3,179 
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(57)
(45)
(45)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
4,002 
$
3,659 
$
3,134 
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
9.05 
$
8.32 
$
7.15 
Diluted
$
9.02 
$
8.26 
$
7.09 
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
442,297 
439,755 
438,515 
Diluted
443,901 
442,923 
441,834 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
35

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(amounts in millions)
 
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
 
August 30, 
2020
September 1, 
2019
September 2, 
2018
NET INCOME INCLUDING NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS
$
4,059 
$
3,704 
$
3,179 
Foreign-currency translation adjustment and other, net
162 
(245)
(192)
Comprehensive income
4,221 
3,459 
2,987 
Less: Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests
80 
37 
38 
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
4,141 
$
3,422 
$
2,949 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
36

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(amounts in millions, except par value and share data)
August 30, 
2020
September 1, 
2019
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
$
12,277 
$
8,384 
Short-term investments
1,028 
1,060 
Receivables, net
1,550 
1,535 
Merchandise inventories
12,242 
11,395 
Other current assets
1,023 
1,111 
Total current assets
28,120 
23,485 
OTHER ASSETS
Property and equipment, net
21,807 
20,890 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
2,788 
— 
Other long-term assets
2,841 
1,025 
TOTAL ASSETS
$
55,556 
$
45,400 
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
$
14,172 
$
11,679 
Accrued salaries and benefits
3,605 
3,176 
Accrued member rewards
1,393 
1,180 
Deferred membership fees
1,851 
1,711 
Current portion of long-term debt
95 
1,699 
Other current liabilities
3,728 
3,792 
Total current liabilities
24,844 
23,237 
OTHER LIABILITIES
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
7,514 
5,124 
Long-term operating lease liabilities
2,558 
— 
Other long-term liabilities
1,935 
1,455 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
36,851 
29,816 
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
EQUITY
Preferred stock $0.01 par value; 100,000,000 shares authorized; no shares issued and outstanding
— 
— 
Common stock $0.01 par value; 900,000,000 shares authorized; 441,255,000 and 439,625,000 shares
issued and outstanding
4 
4 
Additional paid-in capital
6,698 
6,417 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(1,297)
(1,436)
Retained earnings
12,879 
10,258 
Total Costco stockholders’ equity
18,284 
15,243 
Noncontrolling interests
421 
341 
Total equity
18,705 
15,584 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
$
55,556 
$
45,400 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
37

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
(amounts in millions)
 
Common Stock
Additional 
Paid-in 
Capital
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income (Loss)
Retained 
Earnings
Total Costco 
Stockholders’ 
Equity
Noncontrolling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
 
Shares
(000’s)
Amount
BALANCE AT SEPTEMBER 3,
2017
437,204 
$
4 
$
5,800 
$
(1,014)
$
5,988 
$
10,778 
$
301 
$
11,079 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
3,134 
3,134 
45 
3,179 
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
— 
— 
— 
(185)
— 
(185)
(7)
(192)
Stock-based compensation
— 
— 
547 
— 
— 
547 
— 
547 
Release of vested restricted stock
units (RSUs), including tax
effects
2,741 
— 
(217)
— 
— 
(217)
— 
(217)
Repurchases of common stock
(1,756)
— 
(26)
— 
(296)
(322)
— 
(322)
Cash dividends declared and
other
— 
— 
3 
— 
(939)
(936)
(35)
(971)
BALANCE AT SEPTEMBER 2,
2018
438,189 
4 
6,107 
(1,199)
7,887 
12,799 
304 
13,103 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
3,659 
3,659 
45 
3,704 
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
— 
— 
— 
(237)
— 
(237)
(8)
(245)
Stock-based compensation
— 
— 
598 
— 
— 
598 
— 
598 
Release of vested RSUs,
including tax effects
2,533 
— 
(272)
— 
— 
(272)
— 
(272)
Repurchases of common stock
(1,097)
— 
(16)
— 
(231)
(247)
— 
(247)
Cash dividends declared and
other
— 
— 
— 
— 
(1,057)
(1,057)
— 
(1,057)
BALANCE AT SEPTEMBER 1,
2019
439,625 
4 
6,417 
(1,436)
10,258 
15,243 
341 
15,584 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
4,002 
4,002 
57 
4,059 
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
— 
— 
— 
139 
— 
139 
23 
162 
Stock-based compensation
— 
— 
621 
— 
— 
621 
— 
621 
Release of vested RSUs,
including tax effects
2,273 
— 
(330)
— 
— 
(330)
— 
(330)
Repurchases of common stock
(643)
— 
(10)
— 
(188)
(198)
— 
(198)
Cash dividends declared
— 
— 
— 
— 
(1,193)
(1,193)
— 
(1,193)
BALANCE AT AUGUST 30, 2020
441,255 
$
4 
$
6,698 
$
(1,297)
$
12,879 
$
18,284 
$
421 
$
18,705 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
38

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(amounts in millions)
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
August 30, 
2020
September 1, 
2019
September 2, 
2018
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net income including noncontrolling interests
$
4,059 
$
3,704 
$
3,179 
Adjustments to reconcile net income including noncontrolling interests to net cash provided by
operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
1,645 
1,492 
1,437 
Non-cash lease expense
194 
— 
— 
Stock-based compensation
619 
595 
544 
Other non-cash operating activities, net
42 
9 
(6)
Deferred income taxes
104 
147 
(49)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Merchandise inventories
(791)
(536)
(1,313)
Accounts payable
2,261 
322 
1,561 
Other operating assets and liabilities, net
728 
623 
421 
Net cash provided by operating activities
8,861 
6,356 
5,774 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Purchases of short-term investments
(1,626)
(1,094)
(1,060)
Maturities and sales of short-term investments
1,678 
1,231 
1,078 
Additions to property and equipment
(2,810)
(2,998)
(2,969)
Acquisitions
(1,163)
— 
— 
Other investing activities, net
30 
(4)
4 
Net cash used in investing activities
(3,891)
(2,865)
(2,947)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Change in bank payments outstanding
137 
210 
80 
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
3,992 
298 
— 
Repayments of long-term debt
(3,200)
(89)
(86)
Tax withholdings on stock-based awards
(330)
(272)
(217)
Repurchases of common stock
(196)
(247)
(328)
Cash dividend payments
(1,479)
(1,038)
(689)
Other financing activities, net
(71)
(9)
(41)
Net cash used in financing activities
(1,147)
(1,147)
(1,281)
EFFECT OF EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES ON CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
70 
(15)
(37)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
3,893 
2,329 
1,509 
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS BEGINNING OF YEAR
8,384 
6,055 
4,546 
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS END OF YEAR
$
12,277 
$
8,384 
$
6,055 
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION:
Cash paid during the year for:
Interest
$
124 
$
141 
$
143 
Income taxes, net
$
1,052 
$
1,187 
$
1,204 
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF NON-CASH INVESTING AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Cash dividend declared, but not yet paid
$
— 
$
286 
$
250 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
39

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business
Costco Wholesale Corporation (Costco or the Company), a Washington corporation, and its subsidiaries operate membership warehouses based on
the concept that offering members low prices on a limited selection of nationally-branded and private-label products in a wide range of merchandise
categories will produce high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. At August 30, 2020, Costco operated 795 warehouses worldwide: 552 in
the United States (U.S.) located in 45 states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico, 101 in Canada, 39 in Mexico, 29 in the United Kingdom (U.K.), 27
in  Japan,  16  in  Korea,  13  in  Taiwan,  12  in  Australia,  three  in  Spain,  and  one  each  in  Iceland,  France  and  China.  The  Company  operates  e-
commerce websites in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, U.K., Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and Australia.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Costco, its wholly-owned subsidiaries, and subsidiaries in which it has a controlling
interest. The Company reports noncontrolling interests in consolidated entities as a component of equity separate from the Company’s equity. All
material inter-company transactions between and among the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries have been eliminated in consolidation. In
February 2020, the Company acquired a 35% interest in Navitus Health Solutions, a pharmacy benefit manager. This investment is included in other
long-term  assets  and  is  accounted  for  using  the  equity-method  with  earnings/losses  recorded  in  other  income  in  the  consolidated  statement  of
income. The Company’s net income excludes income attributable to the noncontrolling interest in Taiwan. Unless otherwise noted, references to net
income relate to net income attributable to Costco.
Fiscal Year End
The Company operates on a 52/53 week fiscal year basis with the year ending on the Sunday closest to August 31. References to 2020, 2019, and
2018 relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended August 30, 2020, September 1, 2019, and September 2, 2018, respectively.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates and assumptions take
into  account  historical  and  forward  looking  factors  that  the  Company  believes  are  reasonable,  including  but  not  limited  to  the  potential  impacts
arising from the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and related public and private sector policies and initiatives. Actual results could differ from those
estimates and assumptions.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers as cash and cash equivalents all cash on deposit, highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at the
date  of  purchase,  and  proceeds  due  from  credit  and  debit  card  transactions  with  settlement  terms  of  up  to  four  days.  Credit  and  debit  card
receivables were $1,636 and $1,434 at the end of 2020 and 2019, respectively.
40

Table of Contents
The Company provides for the daily replenishment of major bank accounts as payments are presented. Included in accounts payable at the end of
2020 and 2019 are $810 and $673, respectively, representing the excess of outstanding payments over cash on deposit at the banks on which the
payments were drawn.
Short-Term Investments
Short-term investments generally consist of debt securities (U.S. Government and Agency Notes), with maturities at the date of purchase of three
months to five years. Investments with maturities beyond five years may be classified, based on the Company’s determination, as short-term based
on their  highly liquid nature  and because they represent  the  investment  of  cash that  is available for  current  operations.  Short-term  investments
classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value using the specific identification method with the unrealized gains and losses reflected in
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until realized. Realized gains and losses from the sale of available-for-sale securities, if any, are
determined on a specific identification basis and are recorded in interest income and other, net in the consolidated statements of income. Short-term
investments classified as held-to-maturity are financial instruments that the Company has the intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported
net of any related amortization and are not remeasured to fair value on a recurring basis.
The Company periodically evaluates unrealized losses in its investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment, using both qualitative and
quantitative criteria. In the event a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, the Company recognizes the loss in interest income
and other, net in the consolidated statements of income.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company accounts for certain assets and liabilities at fair value. The carrying value of the Company’s financial instruments, including cash and
cash equivalents, receivables and accounts payable, approximate fair value due to their short-term nature or variable interest rates. See Notes 3, 4,
and 5 for the carrying value and fair value of the Company’s investments, derivative instruments, and fixed-rate debt, respectively.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market
participants at the measurement date. Fair value is estimated by applying a fair value hierarchy, which requires maximizing the use of observable
inputs when measuring fair value. The three levels of inputs are:
Level 1: Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market
data.
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data.
The Company’s valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of money market mutual funds are based on quoted market prices, such as
quoted net asset values published by the fund as supported in an active market. Valuation methodologies used to measure the fair value of all other
non-derivative  financial  instruments  are  based  on  independent  external  valuation  information.  The  pricing  process  uses  data  from  a  variety  of
independent external valuation information providers, including trades, bid price or spread, two-sided markets, quotes, benchmark curves including
but not limited to treasury benchmarks and Libor and swap curves, discount rates, and market data feeds. All are observable in the market or can be
derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data. The Company reports transfers in and out of Levels 1, 2, and 3, as applicable,
using the fair value of the individual securities as of the beginning of the reporting period in which the transfer(s) occurred.
41

Table of Contents
Current financial liabilities have fair values that approximate their carrying values. Long-term financial liabilities include the Company's long-term
debt, which are recorded on the balance sheet at issuance price and adjusted for unamortized discounts or premiums and debt issuance costs, and
are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the loan. The estimated fair value of the Company's long-term debt is based primarily on
reported market values, recently completed market transactions, and estimates based upon interest rates, maturities, and credit.
Receivables, Net
Receivables consist primarily of vendor, reinsurance, credit card incentive, third-party pharmacy and other receivables. Vendor receivables include
discounts and volume rebates. Balances are generally presented on a gross basis, separate from any related payable due. In certain circumstances,
these  receivables  may  be  settled  against  the  related  payable  to  that  vendor,  in  which  case  the  receivables  are  presented  on  a  net  basis.
Reinsurance receivables are held by the Company’s wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and primarily represent amounts ceded through
reinsurance arrangements gross of the amounts assumed under reinsurance, which are presented within other current liabilities in the consolidated
balance sheets. Credit card incentive receivables primarily represent amounts earned under the co-branded credit card arrangement in the U.S.
Third-party pharmacy receivables generally relate to amounts due from members’ insurers. Other receivables primarily consist of amounts due from
governmental entities, mostly tax-related items.
Receivables are recorded net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance is based on historical experience and application of the specific
identification method. Write-offs of receivables were immaterial in 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories consist of the following:
2020
2019
United States
$
8,871 
$
8,415 
Canada
1,310 
1,123 
Other International
2,061 
1,857 
Merchandise inventories
$
12,242 
$
11,395 
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. U.S. merchandise inventories are valued by the cost method of accounting, using
the last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis. The Company believes the LIFO method more fairly presents the results of operations by more closely matching
current costs with current revenues. The Company records an adjustment each quarter, if necessary, for the projected annual effect of inflation or
deflation, and these estimates are adjusted to actual results determined at year-end, after actual inflation or deflation rates and inventory levels have
been  determined.  As  of  August  30,  2020,  and  September  1,  2019,  U.S.  merchandise  inventories  valued  at  LIFO  approximated  first-in,  first-out
(FIFO) after considering the lower of cost or market principle. Canadian and Other International merchandise inventories are predominantly valued
using the cost and retail inventory methods, respectively, using the FIFO basis.
The Company provides for estimated inventory losses between physical inventory counts using estimates based on experience. The provision is
adjusted  periodically  to  reflect  physical  inventory  counts,  which  generally  occur  in  the  second  and  fourth  fiscal  quarters.  Inventory  cost,  where
appropriate, is reduced by estimates of vendor rebates when earned or as the Company progresses towards earning those rebates, provided that
they are probable and reasonably estimable.
42

Table of Contents
Property and Equipment, Net
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  cost.  Depreciation  and  amortization  expense  is  computed  primarily  using  the  straight-line  method  over
estimated useful lives. Leasehold improvements made after the beginning of the initial lease term are depreciated over the shorter of the estimated
useful life of the asset or the remaining term of the initial lease plus any renewals that are reasonably certain at the date the leasehold improvements
are made.
The Company capitalizes certain computer software and costs incurred in developing or obtaining software for internal use. During development,
these costs are included in construction in progress. When the assets are ready for their intended use, these costs are included in equipment and
fixtures and amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives.
Repair and maintenance costs are expensed when incurred. Expenditures for remodels, refurbishments and improvements that add to or change the
way an asset functions or that extend the useful life are capitalized. Assets removed during the remodel, refurbishment or improvement are retired.
Assets  classified  as  held-for-sale  at  the  end  of  2020  and  2019  were  immaterial.  The  following  table  summarizes  the  Company's  property  and
equipment balances at the end of 2020 and 2019:
Estimated Useful Lives
2020
2019
Land
N/A
$
6,696 
$
6,417 
Buildings and improvements
5-50 years
17,982 
17,136 
Equipment and fixtures
3-20 years
8,749 
7,801 
Construction in progress
N/A
1,276 
1,272 
34,703 
32,626 
Accumulated depreciation and amortization
(12,896)
(11,736)
Property and equipment, net
$
21,807 
$
20,890 
The Company evaluates long-lived assets for impairment on an annual basis, when relocating or closing a facility, or when events or changes in
circumstances may indicate the carrying amount of the asset group, generally an individual warehouse, may not be fully recoverable. For asset
groups held and used, including warehouses to be relocated, the carrying value of the asset group is considered recoverable when the estimated
future undiscounted cash flows generated from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group exceed the respective carrying value. In the
event that the carrying value is not considered recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized for the asset group to be held and used equal to the
excess of the carrying value above the estimated fair value of the asset group. For asset groups classified as held-for-sale (disposal group), the
carrying value is compared to the disposal group’s fair value less costs to sell. The Company estimates fair value by obtaining market appraisals
from third party brokers or using other valuation techniques. There were no impairment charges recognized in 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Leases
The Company leases land and/or buildings at warehouses and certain other office and distribution facilities. Leases generally contain one or more of
the following options, which the Company can exercise at the end of the initial term: (a) renew the lease for a defined number of years at the then-
fair market rental rate or rate stipulated in the lease agreement; (b) purchase the property at the then-fair market value; or (c) a right of first refusal in
the event of a third-party offer.
43

Table of Contents
Some leases include free-rent periods and step-rent provisions, which are recognized on a straight-line basis over the original term of the lease and
any extension options that the Company is reasonably certain to exercise from the date the Company has control of the property. Certain leases
provide for periodic rent increases based on price indices or the greater of minimum guaranteed amounts or sales volume. Our leases do not contain
any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants.
The Company determines at inception whether a contract is or contains a lease. The Company initially records right-of-use (ROU) assets and lease
obligations for its finance and operating leases based on the discounted future minimum lease payments over the term. As the rate implicit in the
Company's leases is not easily determinable, the present value of the sum of the lease payments is calculated using the Company's incremental
borrowing rate. The rate is determined using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest the Company would pay to borrow an amount equal
to the lease payments on a collateralized basis over a similar term. The Company uses quoted interest rates from financial institutions to derive the
incremental borrowing rate. The lease term is defined as the noncancelable period of the lease plus any options to extend when it is reasonably
certain  that  the  Company  will  exercise  the  option.  Impairment  of  ROU  assets  is  evaluated  in  a  similar  manner  as  described  in  Property  and
Equipment, Net above.
The Company's asset retirement obligations (ARO) primarily relate to leasehold improvements that at the end of a lease must be removed. These
obligations are generally recorded as a discounted liability, with an offsetting asset at the inception of the lease term based upon the estimated fair
value of the costs to remove the improvements. These liabilities are accreted over time to the projected future value of the obligation. The ARO
assets  are  depreciated  using  the  same  depreciation  method  as  the  leasehold  improvement  assets  and  are  included  with  buildings  and
improvements.  Estimated ARO liabilities associated with these leases are included in other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance
sheet.
Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost over the fair value of the net assets acquired and is not subject to amortization. The Company
reviews  goodwill  annually  in  the  fourth  quarter  for  impairment  or  when  circumstances  indicate  carrying  value  may  exceed  the  fair  value.  This
evaluation is performed at the reporting unit level. If a qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than
carrying value, a quantitative analysis is completed using either the income or market approach, or a combination of both. The income approach
estimates  fair  value  based  on  expected  discounted  future  cash  flows,  while  the  market  approach  uses  comparable  public  companies  and
transactions to develop metrics to be applied to historical and expected future operating results.
Goodwill is included in other long-term assets in the consolidated balance sheets. The following table summarizes goodwill by reportable segment:
United States
Operations
Canadian
Operations
Other International
Operations
Total
Balance at September 1, 2019
$
13 
$
27 
$
13 
$
53 
Changes in currency translation
— 
— 
1 
1 
Acquisition
934 
— 
— 
934 
Balance at August 30, 2020
$
947 
$
27 
$
14 
$
988 
Definite-lived intangible assets, which are not material, are included in other long-term assets on the consolidated balance sheets and are amortized
on a straight-line basis over their estimated lives, which approximates the pattern of expected economic benefit.
44

Table of Contents
Insurance/Self-insurance Liabilities
Claims for employee health care benefits, workers’ compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability,
inventory loss, and other exposures are funded predominantly through self-insurance. Insurance coverage is maintained in certain instances to limit
exposures arising from very large losses. It uses different risk management mechanisms, including a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary (the
captive) and participates in a reinsurance program. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained by the Company are not discounted and are
estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors, and other actuarial assumptions. The estimated
accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends. At the
end of 2020 and 2019, these insurance liabilities were $1,188 and $1,222 in the aggregate, respectively, and were included in accrued salaries and
benefits and other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets, classified based on their nature.
The captive receives direct premiums, which are netted against the Company’s premium costs in selling, general and administrative expenses, in the
consolidated statements of income. The captive participates in a reinsurance program that includes other third-party participants. The reinsurance
agreement is one year in duration, and new agreements are entered into by each participant at their discretion at the commencement of the next
calendar year. The participant agreements and practices of the reinsurance program limit a participating members’ individual risk. Income statement
adjustments related to the reinsurance program and related impacts to the consolidated balance sheets are recognized as information becomes
known. In the event the Company leaves the reinsurance program, the Company retains its primary obligation to the policyholders for prior activity.
Derivatives
The Company is exposed to foreign-currency exchange-rate fluctuations in the normal course of business. It manages these fluctuations, in part,
through the use of forward foreign-exchange contracts, seeking to economically hedge the impact of fluctuations of foreign exchange on known
future  expenditures  denominated  in  a  non-functional  foreign-currency.  The  contracts  relate  primarily  to  U.S.  dollar  merchandise  inventory
expenditures made by the Company’s international subsidiaries with functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Currently, these contracts do
not qualify for derivative hedge accounting. The Company seeks to mitigate risk with the use of these contracts and does not intend to engage in
speculative transactions. Some of these contracts  contain credit-risk-related contingent features that  require settlement of  outstanding contracts
upon certain triggering events. The aggregate fair value amounts of derivative instruments in a net liability position and the amount needed to settle
the instruments immediately if the credit-risk-related contingent features were triggered were immaterial at the end of 2020 and 2019. The aggregate
notional amounts of open, unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts were $1,036 and $704 at the end of 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note
4 for information on the fair value of unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts at the end of 2020 and 2019.
The unrealized gains or losses recognized in interest income and other, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of income relating to the
net changes in the fair value of unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts were immaterial in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
The Company is exposed to fluctuations in prices for energy, particularly electricity and natural gas, and other commodity products used in retail and
manufacturing operations, which it seeks to partially mitigate through the use of fixed-price contracts for certain of its warehouses and other facilities,
primarily in the U.S. and Canada. The Company also enters into variable-priced contracts for some purchases of natural gas, in addition to fuel for
its gas stations, on an index basis. These contracts meet the characteristics of derivative instruments, but generally qualify for the “normal purchases
and normal sales” exception under authoritative guidance and require no mark-to-market adjustment.
45

Table of Contents
Foreign Currency
The functional currencies of the Company’s international subsidiaries are the local currency of the country in which the subsidiary is located. Assets
and liabilities recorded in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate on the balance sheet date. Translation adjustments are recorded in
accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss.  Revenues  and  expenses  of  the  Company’s  consolidated  foreign  operations  are  translated  at  average
exchange rates prevailing during the year.
The Company recognizes foreign-currency transaction gains and losses related to revaluing or settling monetary assets and liabilities denominated
in currencies other than the functional currency in interest income and other, net in the consolidated statements of income. Generally, these include
the  U.S.  dollar  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  the  U.S.  dollar  payables  of  consolidated  subsidiaries  revalued  to  their  functional  currency.  Also
included are realized foreign-currency gains or losses from settlements of forward foreign-exchange contracts. These items were immaterial in 2020,
2019, and 2018.
Revenue Recognition
The  Company  adopted  Accounting  Standards  Update  (ASU)  2014-09  in  2019,  which  provided  for  changes  in  the  recognition  of  revenue  from
contracts with customers. The Company recognizes sales for the amount of consideration collected from the member, which includes gross shipping
fees where applicable, and is net of sales taxes collected and remitted to government agencies and member returns. The Company reserves for
estimated returns based on historical trends in merchandise returns and reduces sales and merchandise costs accordingly. The Company records,
on a gross basis, a refund liability and an asset for recovery, which are included in other current liabilities and other current assets, respectively, in
the consolidated balance sheets.
The  Company  offers  merchandise  in  the  following  core  merchandise  categories:  food  and  sundries,  hardlines,  softlines,  and  fresh  foods.  The
Company  also  provides  expanded  products  and  services  through  warehouse  ancillary  and  other  businesses.  The  majority  of  revenue  from
merchandise  sales  is  recognized  at  the  point  of  sale.  Revenue  generated  through  e-commerce  or  special  orders  is  generally  recognized  upon
shipment to the member. For merchandise shipped directly to the member, shipping and handling costs are expensed as incurred as fulfillment costs
and included in merchandise costs in the consolidated statements of income. In certain ancillary businesses, revenue is deferred until the member
picks up merchandise at the warehouse. Deferred sales are included in other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company is the principal for the majority of its transactions and recognizes revenue on a gross basis. The Company is the principal when it has
control of the merchandise or service before it is transferred to the member, which generally is established when Costco is primarily responsible for
merchandising  decisions,  maintains  the  relationship  with  the  member,  including  assurance  of  member  service  and  satisfaction,  and  has  pricing
discretion.
The Company accounts for membership fee revenue, net of refunds, on a deferred basis, ratably over the one-year membership period. Deferred
membership fees at the end of 2020 and 2019 were $1,851 and $1,711, respectively.
In most countries, the Company's Executive members qualify for a 2% reward on qualified purchases (up to a maximum of approximately $1,000 per
year), which does not expire and can be redeemed only at Costco warehouses. The Company accounts for this reward as a reduction in sales, net
of the estimated impact of non-redemptions (breakage), with the corresponding liability classified as accrued member rewards in the consolidated
balance  sheets.  Estimated  breakage  is  computed  based  on  redemption  data.  For  2020,  2019  and  2018,  the  net  reduction  in  sales
was $1,707, $1,537, and $1,394 respectively.
46

Table of Contents
The  Company  sells  and  otherwise  provides  proprietary  shop  cards  that  do  not  expire  and  are  redeemable  at  the  warehouse  or  online  for
merchandise  or  membership.  Revenue  from  shop  cards  is  recognized  upon  redemption,  and  estimated  breakage  is  recognized  based  on
redemption data. The Company accounts for outstanding shop card balances as a shop card liability, net of estimated breakage.
Citibank, N.A. (“Citi”) became the exclusive issuer of co-branded credit cards to U.S. members in June 2016. The Company receives various forms
of consideration, including a royalty on purchases made on the card outside of Costco, a portion of which, after giving rise to estimated breakage, is
used to fund the rebate that cardholders receive. The rebates are issued in February and expire on December 31. Breakage is estimated based on
redemption data.
Merchandise Costs
Merchandise costs consist of the purchase price or manufacturing costs of inventory sold, inbound and outbound shipping charges and all costs
related to the Company’s depot, fulfillment and manufacturing operations, including freight from depots to selling warehouses, and are reduced by
vendor consideration. Merchandise costs also include salaries, benefits, depreciation, and utilities in fresh foods and certain ancillary departments.
Vendor Consideration
The Company has agreements to receive funds from vendors for discounts and a variety of other programs. These programs are evidenced by
signed agreements that are reflected in the carrying value of the inventory when earned or as the Company progresses towards earning the rebate
or discount, and as a component of merchandise costs as the merchandise is sold. Other vendor consideration is generally recorded as a reduction
of merchandise costs upon completion of contractual milestones, terms of the related agreement, or by another systematic approach.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses  consist  primarily  of  salaries,  benefits  and  workers’  compensation  costs  for  warehouse  employees
(other than fresh foods departments and certain ancillary businesses which are reflected in merchandise costs) as well as all regional and home
office employees, including buying personnel. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include substantially all building and equipment
depreciation,  stock  compensation  expense,  credit  and  debit  card  processing  fees,  utilities,  as  well  as  other  operating  costs  incurred  to  support
warehouse and e-commerce website operations.
Retirement Plans
The Company's 401(k) retirement plan is available to all U.S. employees over the age of 18 who have completed 90 days of employment. The plan
allows participants to make wage deferral contributions, a portion of which the Company matches. In addition, the Company provides each eligible
participant  an  annual  discretionary  contribution.  The  Company  also  has  a  defined  contribution  plan  for  Canadian  employees  and  contributes  a
percentage  of  each  employee's  wages.  Certain  subsidiaries  in  the  Company's  Other  International  operations  have  defined  benefit  and  defined
contribution plans that are not material. Amounts expensed under all plans were $676, $614, and $578 for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and
are predominantly included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of income.
Stock-Based Compensation
RSUs granted to employees generally vest over five years and allow for quarterly vesting of the pro-rata number of stock-based awards that would
vest on the next anniversary of the grant date in the event of retirement or voluntary termination. Actual forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
47

Table of Contents
Compensation expense for stock-based awards is predominantly recognized using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for the
entire award. Awards for employees and non-employee directors  provide for accelerated vesting based on cumulative years of service with the
Company. Compensation expense for the accelerated shares is recognized upon achievement of the long-service term. The cumulative amount of
compensation cost recognized at any point in time equals at least the portion of the grant-date fair value of the award that is vested at that date. The
fair value of RSUs is calculated as the market value of the common stock on the measurement date less the present value of the expected dividends
forgone during the vesting period.
Stock-based compensation expense is predominantly included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of
income. Certain stock-based compensation costs are capitalized or included in the cost of merchandise. See Note 8 for additional information on the
Company’s stock-based compensation plans.
Preopening Expenses
Preopening expenses include costs for startup operations related to new warehouses and relocations, developments in new international markets,
new manufacturing and distribution facilities, and expansions at existing warehouses and are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax
consequences attributed to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax
bases and tax credits and loss carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable
income in the years in which those temporary differences and carry-forwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax
assets  and  liabilities  of  a change  in  tax  rates  is  recognized  in  income  in the  period  that  includes  the  enactment  date.  A  valuation  allowance  is
established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to amounts that are more likely than not expected to be realized.
The timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items and the probability of sustaining uncertain tax positions requires significant judgment. The
benefits of uncertain tax positions are recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial statements only after determining a more-likely-than-not
probability  that  the  uncertain  tax  positions  will  withstand  challenge  from  tax  authorities.  When  facts  and  circumstances  change,  the  Company
reassesses these probabilities and records any changes as appropriate.
Net Income per Common Share Attributable to Costco
The  computation  of  basic  net  income  per  share  uses  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares  that  were  outstanding  during  the  period.  The
computation of diluted net income per share uses the weighted average number of shares in the basic net income per share calculation plus the
number of common shares that would be issued assuming vesting of all potentially dilutive common shares outstanding using the treasury stock
method for shares subject to RSUs.
Stock Repurchase Programs
Repurchased shares of common stock are retired, in accordance with the Washington Business Corporation Act. The par value of repurchased
shares is deducted from common stock and the excess repurchase price over par value is deducted by allocation to additional paid-in capital and
retained earnings. The amount allocated to additional paid-in capital is the current value of additional paid-in capital per share outstanding and is
applied to the number of shares repurchased. Any remaining amount is allocated to retained earnings. See Note 7 for additional information.
48

Table of Contents
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2016-02 - Leases (ASC 842), which required recognition on the
balance  sheet  for  the  rights  and  obligations  created  by  leases  with  terms  greater  than  12  months.  The  Company  adopted  ASC  842,  using  the
modified  retrospective  transition  method  and used September  2,  2019, as the  date of  initial application.  Consequently,  the  comparative  periods
presented continue to be in accordance with ASC 840, Leases, previously in effect.
The  Company  elected  the  package  of  practical  expedients  permitted  under  the  transition  guidance,  allowing  the  Company  to  carry  forward
conclusions related to: (a) whether expired or existing contracts contain leases; (b) lease classification; and (c) initial direct costs for existing leases.
The Company has elected not to record operating lease right-of-use assets or lease liabilities associated with leases with durations of 12 months or
less. The Company elected the practical expedient allowing aggregation of non-lease components with related lease components when evaluating
the accounting treatment for all classes of underlying assets.
Adoption of the new standard resulted in an initial increase to assets and liabilities of $2,632, related to recognition of operating lease right-of-use
assets and operating lease obligations as of September 2, 2019. Other impacts in the Company's consolidated balance sheet were not material. The
standard  did  not  materially  impact  the  consolidated  statements  of  income  and  cash  flows.  For  more  information  on  the  Company's  lease
arrangements refer to Note 6.
Note 2—Acquisition of Innovel
On March 17, 2020, the Company acquired Innovel Solutions for $998, using existing cash and cash equivalents. Cash paid excludes the final
settlement of certain holdbacks and provisional amounts, discussed below. As part of the acquisition, in the fourth quarter of 2020, a payment of $25
was  made  relating  to  certain  holdbacks.  Innovel  provides  final-mile  delivery,  installation  and  white-glove  capabilities  for  big  and  bulky  products
across the United States and Puerto Rico. Its financial results have been included in the Company's consolidated financial statements from the date
of acquisition. Innovel's results of operations were not material to the Company's consolidated results during 2020. Pro forma results are thus not
considered meaningful.
As of August 30, 2020, the initial accounting for the acquisition was incomplete, pending determination of the final purchase price, working capital
adjustments, the fair value of operating lease right-of-use assets, operating lease liabilities, and other assumed obligations. The net purchase price
of  $998  was  allocated  to  tangible  and  intangible  assets  of  $283  and  liabilities  assumed  of  $219,  based  on  their  preliminary  fair  values  on  the
acquisition date. The remaining unallocated net purchase price of $934 was recorded as goodwill. Goodwill represents the acquisition's benefits to
the Company, which include the ability to serve more members and improve delivery times, enabling growth in certain segments of our U.S. e-
commerce operations. The Company assigned this goodwill, which is deductible for tax purposes, to reporting units within the U.S. segment. The
changes  to  the  purchase  price  allocation  originally  recorded  in  the  third  quarter  of  2020  were  not  material.  As  additional  information  becomes
available, the provisional fair value estimates will be refined.
49

Table of Contents
Note 3—Investments
The Company’s investments were as follows:
2020:
Cost 
Basis
Unrealized 
Gains, Net
Recorded 
Basis
Available-for-sale:
Government and agency securities
$
436 
$
12 
$
448 
Held-to-maturity:
Certificates of deposit
580 
— 
580 
Total short-term investments
$
1,016 
$
12 
$
1,028 
2019:
Cost 
Basis
Unrealized 
Gains, Net
Recorded 
Basis
Available-for-sale:
Government and agency securities
$
716 
$
6 
$
722 
Held-to-maturity:
Certificates of deposit
338 
— 
338 
Total short-term investments
$
1,054 
$
6 
$
1,060 
Gross  unrecognized  holding  gains  and  losses  on  available-for-sale  securities  were  not  material  for  the  years  ended  August  30,  2020,  and
September 1, 2019. At the end of 2020, there were no available-for-sale securities in a continuous unrealized-loss position. At the end of 2019,
available-for-sale securities that were in a continuous unrealized-loss position were not material. There were no sales of available-for-sale securities
during 2020 or 2019.
The maturities of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities at the end of 2020 are as follows:
 
Available-For-Sale
Held-To-Maturity
 
Cost Basis
Fair Value
Due in one year or less
$
172 
$
173 
$
580 
Due after one year through five years
264 
275 
— 
       Total
$
436 
$
448 
$
580 
50

Table of Contents
Note 4—Fair Value Measurement
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The table below presents information regarding the Company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis and indicate the level within the hierarchy reflecting the valuation techniques utilized to determine such fair value.
Level 2
2020
2019
Investment in government and agency securities(1)
$
508 
$
766 
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in asset position(2)
1 
15 
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in (liability) position(2)
(21)
(4)
Total
$
488 
$
777 
 
____________
(1)
At August 30, 2020, $60 cash and cash equivalents and $448 short-term investments are included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. At September 1,
2019, $44 cash and cash equivalents and $722 short-term investments are included in the consolidated balance sheets.
(2)
The asset and the liability values are included in other current assets and other current liabilities, respectively, in the consolidated balance sheets.
At August 30, 2020, and September 1, 2019, the Company did not hold any Level 1 or 3 financial assets or liabilities that were measured at fair
value on a recurring basis. There were no transfers between levels during 2020 or 2019.
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis
Assets and liabilities recognized and disclosed at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include items such as financial assets measured at amortized
cost and long-lived nonfinancial assets. These assets are measured at fair value if determined to be impaired. There were no fair value adjustments
to these items during 2020 or 2019.
Note 5—Debt
Short-Term Borrowings
The  Company  maintains  various  short-term  bank  credit  facilities,  with  a  borrowing  capacity  of  $967  and  $865,  in  2020  and  2019,  respectively.
Borrowings on these short-term facilities were immaterial during 2020 and 2019, and there were no outstanding borrowings at the end of 2020 and
2019.
Long-Term Debt
The Company's long-term debt consists primarily of Senior Notes, described below. The Company at its option may redeem the Senior Notes at any
time, in whole or in part, at a redemption price plus accrued interest. The redemption price is equal to the greater of 100% of the principal amount or
the sum of the present value of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest to maturity. Additionally, upon certain events, the holder
has the right to require the Company to purchase this security at a price of 101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest to the
date of the event. Interest on all outstanding long-term debt is payable semi-annually. The estimated fair value of Senior Notes is valued using Level
2 inputs.
51

Table of Contents
In April 2020, the Company issued $4,000 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes as follows: $1,250 of 1.375% due June 2027; $1,750 of
1.600% due April 2030; and $1,000 of 1.750% due April 2032. In May 2020, a portion of the proceeds from the issuance were used to repay, prior to
maturity,  the  outstanding  $1,000  and  $500  principal  balances  and  interest  on  the  2.150%  and  2.250%  Senior  Notes,  respectively.  The  early
redemption resulted in a $36 charge which was recorded in interest income and other, net in 2020. The remaining funds are intended for general
corporate purposes.
In December 2019, the Company paid the outstanding $1,200 principal balance and interest on the 1.700% Senior Notes, with existing sources of
cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. In February 2020, the Company paid the outstanding $500 principal balance and interest on
the 1.750% Senior Notes, with existing sources of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Other long-term debt consists of Guaranteed Senior Notes issued by the Company's Japanese subsidiary, valued using Level 3 inputs. In August
2019, the Company's Japanese subsidiary issued approximately $200 and $100 of Guaranteed Senior Notes at fixed interest rates of 0.28% and
0.42%, respectively. Interest is payable semi-annually, and principal is due in August 2029 and August 2034, respectively.
At the end of 2020 and 2019, the fair value of the Company's long-term debt, including the current portion, was approximately $7,987 and $6,997,
respectively. The carrying value of long-term debt consisted of the following:
 
2020
2019
1.700% Senior Notes due December 2019
$
— 
$
1,200 
1.750% Senior Notes due February 2020
— 
500 
2.150% Senior Notes due May 2021
— 
1,000 
2.250% Senior Notes due February 2022
— 
500 
2.300% Senior Notes due May 2022
800 
800 
2.750% Senior Notes due May 2024
1,000 
1,000 
3.000% Senior Notes due May 2027
1,000 
1,000 
1.375% Senior Notes due June 2027
1,250 
— 
1.600% Senior Notes due April 2030
1,750 
— 
1.750% Senior Notes due April 2032
1,000 
— 
Other long-term debt
857 
852 
Total long-term debt
7,657 
6,852 
Less unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs
48 
29 
Less current portion(1)
95 
1,699 
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
$
7,514 
$
5,124 
_______________
(1)
Net of unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs.
Maturities of long-term debt during the next five fiscal years and thereafter are as follows: 
2021
$
95 
2022
800 
2023
95 
2024
1,114 
2025
142 
Thereafter
5,411 
Total
$
7,657 
52

Table of Contents
Note 6—Leases
The tables below present information regarding the Company's lease assets and liabilities.
2020
Assets
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$
2,788 
Finance lease assets(1)
592 
Total lease assets
$
3,380 
Liabilities
Current
Operating lease liabilities(2)
$
231 
Finance lease liabilities(2)
31 
Long-term
Operating lease liabilities
2,558 
Finance lease liabilities(3)
657 
Total lease liabilities
$
3,477 
 _______________
(1)
Included in other long-term assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
(2)
Included in other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
(3)
Included in other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
2020
Weighted-average remaining lease term (years)
Operating leases
21
Finance leases
20
Weighted-average discount rate
Operating leases
2.23 %
Finance leases
6.34 %
The components of lease expense, excluding short-term lease costs and sublease income (which were not material), were as follows:
2020
Operating lease costs(1)
$
252 
Finance lease costs:
Amortization of lease assets(1)
31 
Interest on lease liabilities(2)
33 
Variable lease costs(3)
87 
Total lease costs
$
403 
 _______________
(1)
Included in selling, general and administrative expenses and merchandise costs in the consolidated statements of income.
(2)
Included in interest expense in the consolidated statements of income.
(3)
Included in selling, general and administrative expenses and merchandise costs in the consolidated statements of income. Amount excludes property taxes, which were
immaterial.
53

Table of Contents
Supplemental cash flow information related to leases was as follows:
2020
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows — operating leases
$
258 
Operating cash flows — finance leases
33 
Financing cash flows — finance leases
49 
Leased assets obtained in exchange for operating lease liabilities
354 
Leased assets obtained in exchange for finance lease liabilities
317 
As of August 30, 2020, future minimum payments during the next five fiscal years and thereafter are as follows:
Operating Leases(1)
Finance Leases
2021
$
273 
$
61 
2022
253 
62 
2023
246 
66 
2024
212 
63 
2025
176 
134 
Thereafter
2,410 
742 
Total(2)
3,570 
1,128 
Less amount representing interest
781 
440 
Present value of lease liabilities
$
2,789 
$
688 
 _______________
(1)
Operating lease payments have not been reduced by future sublease income of $101.
(2)
Excludes $280 of lease payments for leases that have been signed but not commenced.
As of September 1, 2019, future minimum payments, net of sub-lease income of $105, under noncancelable operating leases with terms of at least
one year and capital leases reported under ASC 840 were as follows:
Operating Leases
Capital Leases
2020
$
239 
$
51 
2021
229 
53 
2022
202 
38 
2023
193 
39 
2024
181 
39 
Thereafter
2,206 
544 
Total
$
3,250 
764 
Less amount representing interest
343 
Net present value of minimum lease payments
$
421 
54

Table of Contents
Note 7—Stockholders’ Equity
Dividends
Cash dividends declared in 2020 totaled $2.70 per share, as compared to $2.44 per share in 2019. The Company's current quarterly dividend rate is
$0.70 per share.
Stock Repurchase Programs
The Company's stock repurchase program is conducted under a $4,000 authorization by the Board of Directors, which expires in April 2023. As of
the  end  of  2020,  the  remaining  amount  available  under  the  approved  plan  was  $3,745.  The  following  table  summarizes  the  Company’s  stock
repurchase activity:
Shares 
Repurchased 
(000’s)
Average 
Price per 
Share
Total Cost
2020
643 
$
308.45 
$
198 
2019
1,097 
225.16 
247 
2018
1,756 
183.13 
322 
These  amounts  may  differ  from  repurchases  of  common  stock  in  the  consolidated  statements  of  cash  flows  due  to  changes  in  unsettled  stock
repurchases at the end of each fiscal year. Purchases are made from time to time, as conditions warrant, in the open market or in block purchases
and pursuant to plans under SEC Rule 10b5-1.
Note 8—Stock-Based Compensation Plans
The  Company  grants  stock-based  compensation,  primarily  to  employees  and  non-employee  directors.  Grants  to  all  executive  officers  are
performance-based. Through a series of shareholder approvals, there have been amended and restated plans and new provisions implemented by
the Company. RSUs are subject to quarterly vesting upon retirement or voluntary termination. Employees who attain at least 25 years of service with
the Company receive shares under accelerated vesting provisions on the annual vesting date. The 2019 Incentive Plan authorized the issuance
of 17,500,000 shares (10,000,000 RSUs) of common stock for future grants, plus the remaining shares that were available for grant and the future
forfeited shares from grants under the previous plan, up to a maximum aggregate of 27,800,000 shares (15,885,000 RSUs). The Company issues
new shares of common stock upon vesting of RSUs. Shares for vested RSUs are generally delivered to participants annually, net of shares withheld
for taxes.
Summary of Restricted Stock Unit Activity
RSUs granted to employees and to non-employee directors generally vest over five and three years, respectively. Additionally, the terms of the
RSUs, including performance-based awards, provide for accelerated vesting for employees and non-employee directors who have attained 25 or
more and five or more years of service with the Company, respectively. Recipients are not entitled to vote or receive dividends on unvested and
undelivered shares. At the end of 2020, 13,624,000 shares were available to be granted as RSUs under the 2019 Incentive Plan.
55

Table of Contents
The following awards were outstanding at the end of 2020:
•
5,021,000 time-based RSUs that vest upon continued employment over specified periods of time;
•
153,000 performance-based RSUs, of which 123,000 were granted to executive officers subject to the determination of the attainment of
performance targets for 2020. This determination occurred in September 2020, at which time at least 33% of the units vested, as a result of
the long service of all executive officers. The remaining awards vest upon continued employment over specified periods of time.
The following table summarizes RSU transactions during 2020:
Number of 
Units 
(in 000’s)
Weighted-Average 
Grant Date Fair 
Value
Outstanding at the end of 2019
6,496 
$
167.55 
Granted
2,252 
294.08 
Vested and delivered
(3,374)
188.92 
Forfeited
(200)
197.45 
Outstanding at the end of 2020
5,174 
$
207.55 
The  weighted-average  grant  date  fair  value  of  RSUs  granted  was  $294.08,  $224.00,  and  $156.19  in  2020,  2019,  and  2018,  respectively.  The
remaining unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs at the end of 2020 was $697 and the weighted-average period of time over
which this cost will be recognized is 1.6 years. Included in the outstanding balance at the end of 2020 were approximately 1,733,000 RSUs vested
but not yet delivered.
Summary of Stock-Based Compensation
The following table summarizes stock-based compensation expense and the related tax benefits under the Company’s plans:
2020
2019
2018
Stock-based compensation expense
$
619 
$
595 
$
544 
Less recognized income tax benefit
128 
128 
116 
Stock-based compensation expense, net
$
491 
$
467 
$
428 
Note 9— Taxes
Income Taxes
Income before income taxes is comprised of the following:
2020
2019
2018
Domestic
$
4,204 
$
3,591 
$
3,182 
Foreign
1,163 
1,174 
1,260 
Total
$
5,367 
$
4,765 
$
4,442 
56

Table of Contents
The provisions for income taxes are as follows:
2020
2019
2018
Federal:
Current
$
616 
$
328 
$
636 
Deferred
77 
222 
(35)
Total federal
693 
550 
601 
State:
Current
230 
178 
190 
Deferred
8 
26 
22 
Total state
238 
204 
212 
Foreign:
Current
372 
405 
487 
Deferred
5 
(98)
(37)
Total foreign
377 
307 
450 
Total provision for income taxes
$
1,308 
$
1,061 
$
1,263 
Except  for  certain  provisions,  the  Tax  Cuts  and  Jobs  Act  (2017  Tax  Act)  is  effective  for  tax  years  beginning  on  or  after  January  1,  2018.  The
Company is a fiscal-year taxpayer, so most provisions became effective for fiscal 2019, including limitations on the Company’s ability to claim foreign
tax credits, repeal of the domestic manufacturing deduction, and limitations on certain business deductions. Provisions with significant impacts that
were effective starting in the second quarter of fiscal 2018 and throughout fiscal 2019 included: a decrease in the U.S. federal income tax rate,
remeasurement of certain net deferred tax liabilities, and a transition tax on deemed repatriation of certain foreign earnings. The decrease in the
U.S. federal statutory income tax rate to 21.0% was effective for all of 2020 and 2019 and resulted in a blended rate for the Company of 25.6% for
2018.
The reconciliation between the statutory tax rate and the effective rate for 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows:
 
2020
2019
2018
Federal taxes at statutory rate
$
1,127 
21.0 %
$
1,001 
21.0 %
$
1,136 
25.6 %
State taxes, net
190 
3.6 
171 
3.6 
154 
3.4 
Foreign taxes, net
92 
1.7 
(1)
— 
32 
0.7 
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP)
(24)
(0.5)
(18)
(0.4)
(14)
(0.3)
2017 Tax Act
— 
— 
(123)
(2.6)
19 
0.4 
Other
(77)
(1.4)
31 
0.7 
(64)
(1.4)
Total
$
1,308 
24.4 %
$
1,061 
22.3 %
$
1,263 
28.4 %
During 2019, the Company recognized net tax benefits of $123 related to the 2017 Tax Act. This benefit primarily included $105 related to U.S.
taxation of deemed foreign dividends, partially offset by losses of current year foreign tax credits. During 2018, the Company recognized a net tax
expense  of  $19  related  to  the  2017  Tax  Act.  This  expense  included  $142  for  the  estimated  tax  on  deemed  repatriation  of  foreign  earnings,
and $43 for the reduction in foreign tax credits and other immaterial items, largely offset by a tax benefit of $166 for the remeasurement of certain
deferred tax liabilities.
57

Table of Contents
The Company recognized total net tax benefits of $81, $221 and $57 in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These amounts include a benefit of $77,
$59 and $33, respectively, related to the stock-based compensation accounting standard adopted in 2018 in addition to the impacts of the 2017 Tax
Act noted above.
The components of the deferred tax assets (liabilities) are as follows:
2020
2019
Deferred tax assets:
Equity compensation
$
80 $
74 
Deferred income/membership fees
144 
180 
Foreign tax credit carry forward
101 
65 
Operating lease liabilities
832 
— 
Accrued liabilities and reserves
639 
566 
Total deferred tax assets
1,796 
885 
Valuation allowance
(105)
(76)
Total net deferred tax assets
1,691 
809 
Deferred tax liabilities:
Property and equipment
(800)
(677)
Merchandise inventories
(228)
(187)
Operating lease right-of-use assets
(801)
— 
Foreign branch deferreds
(81)
(69)
Other
(40)
(21)
Total deferred tax liabilities
$
(1,950) $
(954)
       Net deferred tax liabilities
$
(259) $
(145)
The deferred tax accounts at the end of 2020 and 2019 include deferred income tax assets of $406 and $398, respectively, included in other long-
term assets; and deferred income tax liabilities of $665 and $543, respectively, included in other long-term liabilities.
In  2020  and  2019,  the  Company  recorded  valuation  allowances  of  $105  and  $76,  respectively,  primarily  related  to  foreign  tax  credits  that  the
Company believes will not be realized due to limitations on the ability to claim the credits during the carry forward period. The foreign tax credit carry
forwards are set to expire beginning in fiscal 2030.
The  Company  no  longer  considers  fiscal  year  earnings  of  non-U.S.  consolidated  subsidiaries  after  2017  to  be  indefinitely  reinvested  and  has
recorded the estimated incremental foreign withholding (net of available foreign tax credits) on fiscal year earnings and state income taxes payable
assuming  a  hypothetical  repatriation  to  the  U.S.  The  Company  continues  to  consider  undistributed  earnings  of  certain  non-U.S.  consolidated
subsidiaries prior to 2018, which totaled $2,955, to be indefinitely reinvested and has not provided for withholding or state taxes.
58

Table of Contents
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits for 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
2020
2019
Gross unrecognized tax benefit at beginning of year
$
27 
$
36 
Gross increases—current year tax positions
1 
5 
Gross increases—tax positions in prior years
8 
2 
Gross decreases—tax positions in prior years
(3)
— 
Settlements
— 
(4)
Lapse of statute of limitations
(3)
(12)
Gross unrecognized tax benefit at end of year
$
30 
$
27 
The gross unrecognized tax benefit includes tax positions for which the ultimate deductibility is highly certain but there is uncertainty about the timing
of such deductibility. At the end of 2020 and 2019, these amounts were immaterial. Because of the impact of deferred tax accounting, other than
interest and penalties, the disallowance of these tax positions would not affect the annual effective tax rate but would accelerate the payment of cash
to the taxing authority. The total amount of such unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would favorably affect the effective income tax rate in
future periods is $28 and $24 at the end of 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Accrued interest and penalties related to income tax matters are classified as a component of income tax expense. Accrued interest and penalties
recognized during 2020 and 2019 and accrued at the end of each respective period were not material.
The Company is currently under audit by several jurisdictions in the United States and in several foreign countries. Some audits may conclude in the
next 12 months and the unrecognized tax benefits recorded in relation to the audits may differ from actual settlement amounts. It is not practical to
estimate the effect, if any, of any amount of such change during the next 12 months to previously recorded uncertain tax positions in connection with
the audits. The Company does not anticipate that there will be a material increase or decrease in the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits in the
next 12 months.
The Company files income tax returns in the United States, various state and local jurisdictions, in Canada, and in several other foreign jurisdictions.
With few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state or local examination for years before fiscal 2017. The Company is
currently subject to examination in California for fiscal years 2013 to present.
Other Taxes
The  Company  is  subject  to  multiple  examinations  for  value  added,  sales-based,  payroll,  product,  import  or  other  non-income  taxes  in  various
jurisdictions. In certain cases, the Company has received assessments from the authorities. Subsequent to the end of 2019, the Company received
an assessment related to a product tax audit covering multiple years. The Company recorded a charge of $123 in 2019. In the fourth quarter of
2020, the Company reached an agreement with the tax authority on this matter, resulting in a benefit of $84. Other possible losses or range of
possible losses associated with these matters are either immaterial or an estimate of the possible loss or range of loss cannot be made at this time.
If certain matters or a group of matters were to be decided adversely to the Company, it could result in a charge that might be material to the results
of an individual fiscal quarter or year.
59

Table of Contents
Note 10—Net Income per Common and Common Equivalent Share
The  following  table  shows  the  amounts  used  in  computing  net  income  per  share  and  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares  of  basic  and  of
potentially dilutive common shares outstanding (shares in 000’s): 
2020
2019
2018
Net income attributable to Costco
$
4,002 
$
3,659 
$
3,134 
Weighted average basic shares
442,297 
439,755 
438,515 
RSUs
1,604 
3,168 
3,319 
Weighted average diluted shares
443,901 
442,923 
441,834 
Note 11—Commitments and Contingencies
Legal Proceedings
The Company is involved in a number of claims, proceedings and litigation arising from its business and property ownership. In accordance with
applicable accounting guidance, the Company establishes an accrual for legal proceedings if and when those matters reach a stage where they
present loss contingencies that are both probable and reasonably estimable. There may be exposure to loss in excess of any amounts accrued. The
Company monitors those matters for developments that would affect the likelihood of a loss (taking into account where applicable indemnification
arrangements concerning suppliers and insurers) and the accrued amount, if any, thereof, and adjusts the amount as appropriate. As of the date of
this Report, the Company has recorded immaterial accruals with respect to certain matters described below, in addition to other immaterial accruals
for matters not described below. If the loss contingency at issue is not both probable and reasonably estimable, the Company does not establish an
accrual, but will continue to monitor the matter for developments that will make the loss contingency both probable and reasonably estimable. In
each case, there is a reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred, including a loss in excess of the applicable accrual. For matters where no
accrual  has  been  recorded,  the  possible  loss  or  range  of  loss  (including  any  loss  in  excess  of  the  accrual)  cannot,  in  the  Company's  view,  be
reasonably estimated because, among other things: (i) the remedies or penalties sought are indeterminate or unspecified; (ii) the legal and/or factual
theories are not well developed; and/or (iii) the matters involve complex or novel legal theories or a large number of parties.
The Company is a defendant in an action under the California Labor Code Private Attorneys General Act (PAGA) alleging violation of California
Wage Order 7-2001 for failing to provide seating to member service assistants who act as greeters in the Company’s California warehouses. Canela
v. Costco Wholesale Corp., et al. (Case No. 5:13-CV-03598; N.D. Cal.; filed July 1, 2013). The complaint seeks relief under the California Labor
Code, including civil penalties and attorneys’ fees. The Company filed an answer denying the material allegations of the complaint. The action has
been remanded to state court.
In  January  2019,  an  employee  brought  similar  claims  for  relief  concerning  Costco  employees  engaged  at  member  services  counters  in
California. Rodriguez v. Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No. RG19001310; Alameda Superior Court). The Company filed an answer denying the
material allegations of the complaint. In December 2018, a depot employee raised similar claims, alleging that depot employees in California did not
receive suitable seating or appropriate workplace temperature conditions. Lane v. Costco Wholesale Corp. (Dec. 6, 2018 Notice to California Labor
and Workforce Development Agency). The Company filed an answer denying the material allegations of the complaint. In October 2019, the parties
reached an agreement to settle the seating claims on a representative basis, which received court approval in February 2020.
60

Table of Contents
In January 2019, a former seasonal employee filed a class action, alleging failure to provide California seasonal employees meal and rest breaks,
proper wage statements, and appropriate wages. Jadan v. Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No. 19-CV-340438; Santa Clara Superior Court). The
complaint  seeks  relief  under  the  California  Labor  Code,  including  civil  penalties  and  attorneys’  fees.  In  October  2019,  the  parties  reached  an
agreement on a class settlement, which received preliminary court approval in July 2020.
In March 2019, employees filed a class action against the Company alleging claims under California law for failure to pay overtime, to provide meal
and rest periods and itemized wage statements, to timely pay wages due to terminating employees, to pay minimum wages, and for unfair business
practices. Relief is sought under the California Labor Code, including civil penalties and attorneys' fees. Nevarez v. Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case
No. 2:19-cv-03454; C.D. Cal.). The Company filed an answer denying the material allegations of the complaint. In December 2019, the court issued
an order denying class certification. In January 2020, the plaintiffs dismissed their Labor Code claims without prejudice, and the court remanded the
action to state court. The remand is being appealed.
In May 2019, an employee filed a class action against the Company alleging claims under California law for failure to pay overtime,  to provide
itemized wage statements, to timely pay wages due to terminating employees, to pay minimum wages, and for unfair business practices. Rough v.
Costco  Wholesale  Corp.  (Case  No.  2:19-cv-01340;  E.D.  Cal.).  Relief  is  sought  under  the  California  Labor  Code,  including  civil  penalties  and
attorneys' fees. In August 2019, Rough filed a companion case in state court seeking penalties under PAGA. Rough v. Costco Wholesale Corp.
(Case No. FCS053454; Sonoma County Superior Court). Relief is sought under the California Labor Code, including civil penalties and attorneys'
fees. The state court action has been stayed pending resolution of the federal action.
In June 2019, an employee filed a class action against the Company alleging claims under California law for failure to pay overtime, to provide meal
and rest periods, itemized wage statements, to timely pay wages due to terminating employees, to pay minimum wages, and for unfair business
practices. Martinez v. Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No. 3:19-cv-05624; N.D. Cal.). The Company filed an answer denying the material allegations
of the complaint.
In April 2020, an employee, alleging underpayment of sick pay, filed a class and representative action against the Company, alleging claims under
California law for failure to pay all wages at termination and for Labor Code penalties under PAGA. Kristy v. Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No.
20CV366341; Santa Clara County Superior Court). A motion to dismiss was filed as to plaintiff's amended complaint, the case has been stayed due
to the plaintiff's bankruptcy.
In July 2020, an employee filed an action under PAGA on behalf of all California non-exempt employees alleging violations of California Labor Code
provisions regarding meal and rest periods, minimum wage, overtime, wage statements, reimbursement of expenses, and payment of wages at
termination. Schwab v. Costco Wholesale Corporation (Case No. 37-2020-00023551-CU-OE-CTL; San Diego County Superior Court). In August
2020, the Company filed a motion to strike portions of the complaint.
In December 2017, the United States Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation consolidated numerous cases concerning the impacts of opioid abuses
filed  against  various  defendants  by  counties,  cities,  hospitals,  Native  American  tribes,  third-party  payors,  and  others. In re National Prescription
Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) (N.D. Ohio). Included are federal cases that name the Company, including actions filed by counties and cities in
Michigan, New Jersey, Oregon, Virginia and South Carolina, a third-party payor in Ohio, and class actions filed on behalf of infants born with opioid-
related medical conditions in 40 states, and class actions and individual actions filed on behalf of individuals seeking to recover alleged increased
insurance costs associated with opioid abuse in 43 states and American Samoa. In 2019, similar actions were commenced against the Company in
state court in Utah. Claims against the Company in state courts in New Jersey, Oklahoma, and Arizona have been dismissed. The Company is
defending all of these matters.
61

Table of Contents
The Company and its CEO and CFO are defendants  in putative  class actions  brought on behalf of shareholders  who acquired Company stock
between June 6 and October 25, 2018. Johnson v. Costco Wholesale Corp., et al. (W.D. Wash.; filed Nov. 5, 2018); Chen v. Costco Wholesale
Corp.,  et  al.  (W.D.  Wash.;  filed  Dec.  11,  2018).  The  complaints  allege  violations  of  the  federal  securities  laws  stemming  from  the  Company’s
disclosures concerning internal control over financial reporting. They seek unspecified damages, equitable relief, interest, and costs and attorneys’
fees. On January 30, 2019, an order was entered consolidating the actions, and a consolidated amended complaint was filed on April 16, 2019. On
November 26, 2019, the court entered an order dismissing the consolidated amended complaint and granting the plaintiffs leave to file a further
amended complaint. A further amended complaint was filed on March 9, which the court dismissed with prejudice on August 19, 2020. Plaintiffs filed
a notice of appeal in September 2020.
Members of the Board of Directors, one other individual, and the Company are defendants in a shareholder derivative action related to the internal
controls  and  related  disclosures  identified  in  the  putative  class  actions,  alleging  that  the  individual  defendants  breached  their  fiduciary
duties. Wedekind  v.  Hamilton  James,  Susan  Decker,  Kenneth  Denman,  Richard  Galanti,  Craig  Jelinek,  Richard  Libenson,  John  Meisenbach,
Charles  Munger,  Jeffrey  Raikes,  John  Stanton,  Mary  Agnes  Wilderotter,  and  Costco  Wholesale  Corp.  (W.D.  Wash.;  filed  Dec.  11,  2018).  The
complaint seeks unspecified damages, disgorgement of compensation, corporate governance changes, and costs and attorneys' fees. Because the
complaint is derivative in nature, it does not seek monetary damages from the Company, which is a nominal defendant. By agreement among the
parties the action has been stayed pending further proceedings in the class action. Similar actions were filed in King County Superior Court on
February 20, 2019, Elliott v. Hamilton James, Susan Decker, Kenneth Denman, Richard Galanti, Craig Jelinek, Richard Libenson, John Meisenbach,
Charles Munger, Jeffrey Raikes, John Stanton, Mary Agnes Wilderotter, and Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No. 19-2-04824-7), April 16, 2019, Brad
Shuman, et ano. v. Hamilton James, Susan Decker, Kenneth Denman, Richard Galanti, Craig Jelinek, John Meisenbach, Charles Munger, Jeffrey
Raikes, John Stanton, Mary Agnes Wilderotter, and Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No. 19-2-10460-1), and June 12, 2019, Rahul Modi v. Hamilton
James, Susan Decker, Kenneth Denman, Richard Galanti, Craig Jelinek, John Meisenbach, Charles Munger, Jeffrey Raikes, John Stanton, Mary
Agnes Wilderotter, and Costco Wholesale Corp. (Case No. 19-2-15514-1). These actions have also been stayed.
On June 23, 2020, a putative class action was filed against the Company, the "Board of Directors," the "Costco Benefits Committee" and others
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin. Dustin S. Soulek v.
Costco Wholesale, et al., Case No. 20-cv-937. The class is alleged to be beneficiaries of the Costco 401(k) plan from June 23, 2014, and the claims
are that the defendants breached their fiduciary duties in the operation and oversight of the plan. The complaint seeks injunctive relief, damages,
interest, costs, and attorneys' fees. On September 11, the defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint, and on September 21 the plaintiffs
filed an amended complaint.
The Company does not believe that any pending claim, proceeding or litigation, either alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows; however, it is possible that an unfavorable outcome of some or all of the
matters, however unlikely, could result in a charge that might be material to the results of an individual fiscal quarter or year.
62

Table of Contents
Note 12—Segment Reporting
The Company and its subsidiaries are principally engaged in the operation of membership warehouses in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, U.K., Japan,
Korea, Australia, Spain, Iceland, France, and China and through a majority-owned subsidiary in Taiwan. Reportable segments are largely based on
management’s  organization  of  the  operating  segments  for  operational  decisions  and  assessments  of  financial  performance,  which  considers
geographic locations. The material accounting policies of the segments are as described in Note 1. Inter-segment net sales and expenses have
been eliminated in computing total revenue and operating income. Certain operating expenses, predominantly stock-based compensation, incurred
on behalf of the Company's Canadian and Other International operations, are included in the U.S. operations because those costs generally come
under the responsibility of U.S. management.
The following table provides information for the Company's reportable segments:
United States 
Operations
Canadian 
Operations
Other 
International 
Operations
Total
2020
Total revenue
$
122,142 
$
22,434 
$
22,185 
$
166,761 
Operating income
3,633 
860 
942 
5,435 
Depreciation and amortization
1,248 
155 
242 
1,645 
Additions to property and equipment
2,060 
258 
492 
2,810 
Property and equipment, net
14,916 
2,172 
4,719 
21,807 
Total assets
38,366 
5,270 
11,920 
55,556 
2019
Total revenue
$
111,751 
$
21,366 
$
19,586 
$
152,703 
Operating income
3,063 
924 
750 
4,737 
Depreciation and amortization
1,126 
143 
223 
1,492 
Additions to property and equipment
2,186 
303 
509 
2,998 
Property and equipment, net
14,367 
2,044 
4,479 
20,890 
Total assets
32,162 
4,369 
8,869 
45,400 
2018
Total revenue
$
102,286 
$
20,689 
$
18,601 
$
141,576 
Operating income
2,787 
939 
754 
4,480 
Depreciation and amortization
1,078 
135 
224 
1,437 
Additions to property and equipment
2,046 
268 
655 
2,969 
Property and equipment, net
13,353 
1,900 
4,428 
19,681 
Total assets
28,207 
4,303 
8,320 
40,830 
Disaggregated Revenue
The following table summarizes net sales by merchandise category; sales from business centers and e-commerce websites have been allocated to
their respective categories:
2020
2019
2018
Food and sundries
$
68,659 
$
59,672 
$
56,073 
Hardlines
27,729 
24,570 
22,620 
Fresh foods
23,204 
19,948 
18,879 
Softlines
17,078 
16,590 
15,387 
Ancillary and other
26,550 
28,571 
25,475 
     Total net sales
$
163,220 
$
149,351 
$
138,434 
63

Table of Contents
Note 13—Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
The two tables that follow reflect the unaudited quarterly results of operations for 2020 and 2019.
 
52 Weeks Ended August 30, 2020
 
First 
Quarter 
(12 Weeks)
Second 
Quarter 
(12 Weeks)
Third 
Quarter 
(12 Weeks)
Fourth 
Quarter 
(16 Weeks)
Total 
(52 Weeks)
REVENUE
Net sales
$
36,236 
$
38,256 
$
36,451 
$
52,277 
$
163,220 
Membership fees
804 
816 
815 
1,106 
3,541 
Total revenue
37,040 
39,072 
37,266 
53,383 
166,761 
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs (1)
32,233 
34,056 
32,249 
46,401 
144,939 
Selling, general and administrative (2)
3,732 
3,743 
3,830 
5,027 
(3)
16,332 
Preopening expenses
14 
7 
8 
26 
55 
Operating income
1,061 
1,266 
1,179 
1,929 
5,435 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(38)
(34)
(37)
(51)
(160)
Interest income and other, net
35 
45 
21 
(9)
92 
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
1,058 
1,277 
1,163 
1,869 
5,367 
Provision for income taxes
202 
330 
311 
465 
1,308 
Net income including noncontrolling interests
856 
947 
852 
1,404 
4,059 
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(12)
(16)
(14)
(15)
(57)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
844 
$
931 
$
838 
$
1,389 
$
4,002 
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
1.91 
$
2.10 
$
1.90 
$
3.14 
$
9.05 
Diluted
$
1.90 
$
2.10 
$
1.89 
$
3.13 
$
9.02 
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
441,818 
442,021 
442,322 
442,843 
442,297 
Diluted
443,680 
443,727 
443,855 
444,231 
443,901 
 _______________
(1)
Includes $108 of incremental wage and sanitation costs as a result of COVID-19 of which $44 and $64 were recorded in the third and fourth quarters, respectively.
(2)
Includes $456 of incremental wage and sanitation costs as a result of COVID-19 of which $239 and $217 were recorded in the third and fourth quarters, respectively.
(3)
Includes a $84 benefit due to a partial reversal of an accrual for a product tax assessment in 2019.
64

Table of Contents
 
52 Weeks Ended September 1, 2019
 
First 
Quarter 
(12 Weeks)
Second 
Quarter 
(12 Weeks)
Third 
Quarter 
(12 Weeks)
Fourth 
Quarter 
(16 Weeks)
Total 
(52 Weeks)
REVENUE
Net sales
$
34,311 
$
34,628 
$
33,964 
$
46,448 
$
149,351 
Membership fees
758 
768 
776 
1,050 
3,352 
Total revenue
35,069 
35,396 
34,740 
47,498 
152,703 
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
30,623 
30,720 
30,233 
41,310 
132,886 
Selling, general and administrative
3,475 
3,464 
3,371 
4,684 (1)
14,994 
Preopening expenses
22 
9 
14 
41 
86 
Operating income
949 
1,203 
1,122 
1,463 
4,737 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(36)
(34)
(35)
(45)
(150)
Interest income and other, net
22 
46 
36 
74 
178 
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
935 
1,215 
1,123 
1,492 
4,765 
Provision for income taxes
158 
314 
207 
382 
1,061 
Net income including noncontrolling interests
777 
901 
916 
1,110 
3,704 
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(10)
(12)
(10)
(13)
(45)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
767 
$
889 
$
906 
$
1,097 
$
3,659 
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
1.75 
$
2.02 
$
2.06 
$
2.49 
$
8.32 
Diluted
$
1.73 
$
2.01 
$
2.05 
$
2.47 
$
8.26 
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
439,157 
440,284 
439,859 
439,727 
439,755 
Diluted
442,749 
442,337 
442,642 
443,400 
442,923 
 _______________
(1)
Includes a $123 charge for a product tax assessment.
65

Table of Contents
Item 9—Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A—Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) or 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) are
designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed,
summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the rules and forms of the SEC and to ensure that information required to be disclosed
is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  management,  including  our  principal  executive  and  financial  officers,  to  allow  timely  decisions  regarding
disclosure. The Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, with assistance from other members of management, have reviewed the
effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as of August 30, 2020 and, based on their evaluation, have concluded that the disclosure
controls and procedures were effective as of such date.
Management's Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under
the  Exchange  Act.  Our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  is  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  U.S.  GAAP  and  includes  those  policies  and
procedures that: (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions and the dispositions
of our assets; (2) provide reasonable assurance that our transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  and  that  our  receipts  and  expenditures  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with
appropriate  authorizations;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use  or
disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on our financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness for future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Under the supervision of and with the participation of our management, we assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as  of  August  30,  2020,  using  the  criteria  set  forth  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission  in  Internal
Control—Integrated Framework (2013).
Based on its assessment, management has concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of August 30, 2020. The
attestation of KPMG LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting is
included with the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.
66

Table of Contents
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) or 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act) that
occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control
over financial reporting.
/s/    W. CRAIG JELINEK
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
/s/    RICHARD A. GALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and
Director
Item 9B—Other Information
None.
PART III
Item 10—Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Information relating to the availability of our code of ethics for senior financial officers and a list of our executive officers appear in Part I, Item 1 of
this Report. The information required by this Item concerning our directors and nominees for director is incorporated herein by reference to the
sections entitled “Proposal 1: Election of Directors,”  “Directors”  and “Committees  of the Board” in Costco’s Proxy Statement for its 2021 annual
meeting of shareholders, which will be filed with the SEC within 120 days of the end of our fiscal year (“Proxy Statement”).
Item 11—Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  this  Item  is  incorporated  herein  by  reference  to  the  sections  entitled  “Compensation  of  Directors,”  “Executive
Compensation,” and “Compensation Discussion and Analysis” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 12—Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the section entitled “Principal Shareholders” and “Equity Compensation
Plan Information” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 13—Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the sections entitled “Proposal 1: Election of Directors,” “Directors,”
“Committees  of the Board,” “Shareholder Communications to the Board,” “Meeting Attendance,”  “Report of the Compensation Committee  of the
Board of Directors,” “Certain Relationships and Transactions” and “Report of the Audit Committee” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 14—Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the sections entitled “Independent Public Accountants” in Costco’s Proxy
Statement.
67

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15—Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a)
Documents filed as part of this report are as follows:
1.
Financial Statements:
See the listing of Financial Statements included as a part of this Form 10-K in Item 8 of Part II.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules:
All schedules have been omitted because the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require
submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements, including the
notes thereto.
(b)
Exhibits: The required exhibits are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K or are incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed 
Herewith
Form
Period Ended
Filing Date
3.1
Articles of Incorporation as amended of Costco
Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
2/16/2020
3/12/2020
3.2
Bylaws as amended of Costco Wholesale
Corporation
8-K
1/29/2020
3.2.1
Amendments to Sections 3.3, 3.4, and 3.6 of
the Bylaws of Costco Wholesale Corporation
(to be effective and first apply with respect to
the Company's 2022 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders)
8-K
9/16/2020
4.1
First Supplemental Indenture between Costco
Wholesale Corporation and U.S. Bank National
Association, as Trustee, dated as of March 20,
2002 (incorporated by reference to Exhibits 4.1
and 4.2 to the Company's Current Report on
the Form 8-K filed on March 25, 2002)
8-K
3/25/2002
4.2
Form of 1.375% Senior Notes due June 20,
2027
8-K
4/17/2020
4.3
Form of 1.600% Senior Notes due April 20,
2030
8-K
4/17/2020
4.4
Form of 1.750% Senior Notes due April 20,
2032
8-K
4/17/2020
4.5
Form of 2.300% Senior Notes due May 18,
2022
8-K
5/16/2017
4.6
Form of 2.750% Senior Notes due May 18,
2024
8-K
5/16/2017
68

Table of Contents
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed 
Herewith
Form
Period Ended
Filing Date
4.7
Form of 3.000% Senior Notes due May 18,
2027
8-K
5/16/2017
4.8
Description of Common Stock
x
10.1*
Costco Wholesale Executive Health Plan
10-K
9/2/2012
10/19/2012
10.2*
2019 Incentive Plan
DEF 14
12/17/2019
10.3*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
DEF 14A
12/19/2014
10.3.1*
2019 Stock Incentive Plan Restricted Stock
Unit Award Agreement-Employee
10-Q
11/24/2019
12/23/2019
10.3.2*
2019 Stock Incentive Plan Restricted Stock
Unit Award Agreement - Non-U.S. Employee
10-Q
11/24/2019
12/23/2019
10.3.3*
2019 Stock Incentive Plan Restricted Stock
Unit Award Agreement-Non-Executive
Director
10-Q
11/24/2019
12/23/2019
10.3.4*
2019 Stock Incentive Plan Letter Agreement
for 2020 Performance-Based Restricted Stock
Units-Executive
10-Q
11/24/2019
12/23/2019
10.4*
Fiscal 2020 Executive Bonus Plan
8-K
10/21/2019
10.5*
Executive Employment Agreement, effective
January 1, 2017, between W. Craig Jelinek
and Costco Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
11/20/2016
12/16/2016
10.5.1*
Extension of the Term of the Executive
Employment Agreement, effective January 1,
2019, between W. Craig Jelinek and Costco
Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
11/25/2018
12/20/2018
10.5.2*
Extension of the Term of the Executive
Employment Agreement, effective January 1,
2020, between W. Craig Jelinek and Costco
Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
11/24/2019
12/23/2019
10.6
Form of Indemnification Agreement
14A
12/13/1999
10.7*
Deferred Compensation Plan
10-K
9/1/2013
10/16/2013
10.8**
Citibank, N.A. Co-Branded Credit Card
Agreement
10-Q/A
5/10/2015
8/31/2015
10.8.1**
First Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
69

Table of Contents
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed 
Herewith
Form
Period Ended
Filing Date
10.8.2**
Second Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
2/14/2016
3/9/2016
10.8.3**
Third Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-K
8/28/2016
10/12/2016
10.8.4**
Fourth Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
2/18/2018
3/15/2018
10.8.5**
Fifth Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
2/17/2019
3/13/2019
10.8.6**
Sixth Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-K
9/1/2019
10/11/2019
21.1
Subsidiaries of the Company
x
23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm
x
31.1
Rule 13a – 14(a) Certifications
x
32.1
Section 1350 Certifications
x
101.INS
Inline XBRL Instance Document
x
101.SCH
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema
Document
x
101.CAL
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation
Linkbase Document
x
101.DEF
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition
Linkbase Document
x
101.LAB
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label
Linkbase Document
x
101.PRE
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension
Presentation Linkbase Document
x
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted
as inline XBRL and contained in Exhibit 101)
x
 _____________________
* Management contract, compensatory plan or arrangement.
** Portions of this exhibit have been omitted under a confidential treatment order issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(c)
Financial Statement Schedules—None.
Item 16—Form 10-K Summary
None.
70

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
October 6, 2020
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
(Registrant)
By
/s/ RICHARD A. GALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
October 6, 2020
By
 
/s/ W. CRAIG JELINEK
 
By
 
/s/ HAMILTON E. JAMES
 
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
 
Hamilton E. James 
Chairman of the Board
By
 
/s/ RICHARD A. GALANTI
 
By
 
/s/ DANIEL M. HINES
 
Richard A. Galanti 
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director 
(Principal Financial Officer)
 
 
Daniel M. Hines 
Senior Vice President and Corporate Controller 
(Principal Accounting Officer)
By
 
/s/ SUSAN L. DECKER
By
/s/ KENNETH D. DENMAN
 
Susan L. Decker 
Director
Kenneth D. Denman 
Director
By
 
/s/ SALLY JEWELL
By
 
/s/ CHARLES T. MUNGER
 
Sally Jewell 
Director
 
Charles T. Munger 
Director
By
 
/s/ JEFFREY S. RAIKES
 
By
 
/s/ JOHN W. STANTON
 
Jeffrey S. Raikes 
Director
 
 
John W. Stanton 
Director
By
/s/ MARY (MAGGIE) A. WILDEROTTER
Mary (Maggie) A. Wilderotter 
Director
71

Exhibit 4.8
DESCRIPTION OF THE REGISTRANT’S SECURITIES
REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12 OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
The following description of the Company’s common stock is based upon the Company’s Articles of Incorporation, as amended (“Articles”),  the
Company’s Bylaws, as amended (“Bylaws”),  and applicable provisions of law. We have summarized certain portions of our Articles and Bylaws
below. This summary is not complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by express reference to, the provisions of our Articles and
Bylaws, each of which is filed as an exhibit to the Annual Report on Form 10-K of which this Exhibit 4.8 is a part.
Our authorized capital stock consists of 900,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.01 par value per share, and 100,000,000 shares of undesignated
preferred stock, $0.01 par value per share.
Common Stock
Dividend Rights. Subject to the prior or preferential rights of holders of our preferred stock outstanding at the time, holders of our common stock
are entitled to receive dividends, if any, as may be declared from time to time by our Board of Directors out of legally available funds.
Voting Rights. Each share of our common stock entitles its holder to one vote on all matters voted on by the shareholders, including the election of
directors. We have not provided for cumulative voting for the election of directors in our Articles.
Right to Receive Liquidation Distributions. Subject to the prior or preferential rights of holders of our preferred stock outstanding at the time, in
the event of our liquidation, dissolution, or winding up, holders of our common stock will be entitled to share ratably in the net assets legally available
for distribution to shareholders.
Rights and Preferences. Holders of our common stock have no preemptive or conversion rights, and there are no redemption or sinking fund
provisions applicable to our common stock.
Preferred Stock
Our Board of Directors has the authority, without further action by our shareholders, to issue up to 100,000,000 shares of preferred stock in one or
more series and to fix the rights, preferences, privileges, and restrictions thereof. These rights, preferences, and privileges could include dividend
rights, conversion rights, voting rights, terms of redemption, liquidation preferences, sinking fund terms, and the number of shares constituting any
series or the designation of such series, any or all of which may be greater than the rights of common stock. The issuance of preferred stock by us
could  adversely  affect  the  voting  power  of  holders  of  common  stock  and  the  likelihood  that  such  holders  will  receive  dividend  payments  and
payments upon liquidation. In addition, the issuance of preferred stock by us could have the effect of delaying, deferring, or preventing a change in
control of our company or other corporate action. No shares of preferred stock are outstanding, and we have no present plan to issue any shares of
preferred stock.
 
29040-0271.0001/146637116.5

Anti-Takeover Provisions
Washington Anti-Takeover Law
Washington law imposes restrictions on some transactions between a corporation and significant shareholders. Chapter 23B.19 of the Washington
Business Corporation Act generally prohibits a target corporation from engaging in specified “significant business transactions” with an “acquiring
person.” This statute could prohibit or delay the accomplishment of mergers or other takeover or change in control attempts with respect to us and,
accordingly, may discourage unsolicited attempts to acquire us. An “acquiring person” is generally defined as a person or group of persons that
beneficially  owns  the  voting  shares  entitled  to  cast  votes  comprising  10%  or  more  of  the  voting  power  of  the  target  corporation.  The  target
corporation may not engage in “significant business transactions,”  as defined in Chapter 23B.19, for a period of five years after the date of the
transaction in which the person became an acquiring person, unless (1) the significant business transaction or the acquiring person’s purchase of
shares was approved by a majority of the members of the target corporation’s board of directors prior to the share acquisition causing the person to
become  an  “acquiring  person,”  or  (2)  the  significant  business  transaction  was  both  approved  by  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  target
corporation’s board and authorized at a shareholder meeting by at least two-thirds of the votes entitled to be cast by the outstanding voting shares
(excluding the acquiring person’s shares or shares over which the acquiring person has voting control) at or subsequent to the acquiring person’s
share acquisition. “Significant business transactions” include, among other things:
•
a merger or share exchange with, disposition of assets to, or issuance or redemption of stock to or from, the acquiring person;
•
a  termination  of  5%  or  more  of  the  employees  of  the  target  corporation  employed  in  the  State  of  Washington  as  a  result  of  the
acquiring person’s acquisition of 10% or more of the shares, whether at one time or over the five-year period following the share
acquisition;
•
a transaction in which the acquiring person is allowed to receive a disproportionate benefit as a shareholder; or
•
liquidating or dissolving the target corporation.
After the five-year period, a “significant business transaction” may occur, as long as it complies with “fair price” provisions specified in the statute or
is approved at a meeting of shareholders by a majority of the votes entitled to be counted within each voting group entitled to vote separately on the
transaction, not counting the votes of shares as to which the acquiring person has beneficial ownership or voting control. A corporation may not “opt
out” of this statute.
Articles of Incorporation, as Amended and Bylaws, as Amended
Our Articles and Bylaws include a number of provisions that may have the effect of deterring takeovers or delaying or preventing changes in control
or changes in our management that a shareholder might deem to be in the shareholder’s best interest. These provisions include the following:
•
our Board of Directors may issue up to 100,000,000 shares of preferred stock, with any rights or preferences as it may designate;
- 2 -
29040-0271.0001/146637116.5

•
our  Articles  and  Bylaws  provide  that  (1)  until  the  declassification  of  our  Board  of  Directors  implemented  by  amendments  to  our
Articles  and  Bylaws  that  became  effective  in  January  2019  is  fully  phased  in  beginning  with  our  2022  annual  meeting  of
shareholders, the current three-year terms of certain of our directors will remain in effect until their current terms expire, and (2) only
our Board of Directors may change the size of our Board of Directors, which provisions together generally make it more difficult for
shareholders to replace a majority of our Board of Directors;
•
Washington  law,  our  Articles  and  Bylaws  limit  the  ability  of  shareholders  from  acting  by  written  consent  by  requiring  unanimous
written consent for shareholder action to be effective;
•
our Articles and Bylaws limit who may call a special meeting of shareholders to only our Board of Directors, Chairman, President, any
Executive Vice President or the Secretary or shareholders owning an aggregate at least 10% of all votes entitled to be cast;
•
our Bylaws provide that shareholders seeking to present proposals before a meeting of shareholders or to nominate candidates for
election  as  directors  at  a  meeting  of  shareholders  must  provide  timely  advance  written  notice  to  us  in  writing,  and  specify
requirements as to the form and content of a shareholder’s notice, which may preclude shareholders from bringing matters before a
meeting of shareholders or from making nominations for directors at a meeting of shareholders; and
•
our Articles do not provide for cumulative voting for our directors, which may make it more difficult for shareholders owning less than
a majority of our capital stock to elect any members to our Board of Directors.
- 3 -

Exhibit 21.1
SUBSIDIARIES OF THE COMPANY
The following is a list of subsidiaries of the Company as of August 30, 2020, omitting subsidiaries which, considered in the aggregate, would not
constitute a significant subsidiary.
Subsidiaries
State or Other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization
Name under Which Subsidiary Does Business
Costco Wholesale Membership, Inc.
California
Costco Wholesale Membership, Inc.
Costco Wholesale Canada Ltd.
Canadian Federal
Costco Wholesale Canada, Ltd.
NW Re Ltd.
Arizona
NW Re Ltd.
Costco Insurance Agency, Inc.
Washington
Costco Insurance Agency, Inc.
PriceCostco International, Inc.
Nevada
PriceCostco International, Inc.
Costco Wholesale Korea, Ltd.
Korea
Costco Wholesale Korea, Ltd.
Costco Wholesale Japan, Ltd.
Japan
Costco Wholesale Japan, Ltd.
Costco De Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Mexico
Costco De Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Costco Wholesale United Kingdom Ltd.
United Kingdom
Costco Wholesale United Kingdom Ltd.
Costco President Taiwan, Inc.
Taiwan
Costco President Taiwan, Inc.
29040-0271.0001/146637116.5

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (Nos. 333-82782, 333-120523, 333-129172, 333-135052, 333-150014,
333-151748, 333-165550, 333-180163, 333-187418, 333-202673, 333-204739, 333-218397, and 333-230253) on Form S-8 and the registration
statement (No. 333-237699) on Form S-3 of Costco Wholesale Corporation of our reports dated October 6, 2020, with respect to the consolidated
balance sheets of Costco Wholesale Corporation as of August 30, 2020 and September 1, 2019, the related consolidated statements of income,
comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for the 52-week periods ended August 30, 2020, September 1, 2019 and September 2, 2018, and the
related notes (collectively the “consolidated financial statements”), and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of August 30,
2020, which reports appear in the August 30, 2020 annual report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation.
Our report dated October 6, 2020, on the consolidated financial statements, refers to a change in the method of accounting for leases.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 6, 2020

Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I, W. Craig Jelinek, certify that:
1)
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation (“the registrant”);
2)
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3)
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to
us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions
about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting.
October 6, 2020
 
/s/    W. CRAIG JELINEK
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director

CERTIFICATIONS
I, Richard A. Galanti, certify that:
1)
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation (“the registrant”);
2)
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3)
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to
us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions
about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting.
October 6, 2020
 
/s/    RICHARD A. GALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director

Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Costco Wholesale Corporation (the Company) on Form 10-K for the year ended August 30, 2020, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the Report), I, W. Craig Jelinek, President, Chief Executive Officer and Director of the Company,
certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company.
/s/ W. CRAIG JELINEK
 
Date: October 6, 2020
W. Craig Jelinek
 
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
A signed original of this written statement has been provided to and will be retained by Costco Wholesale Corporation and furnished to the Securities
and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.

CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Costco Wholesale Corporation (the Company) on Form 10-K for the year ended August 30, 2020, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the Report), I, Richard A. Galanti, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director of
the Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company.
/s/ RICHARD A. GALANTI
 
Date: October 6, 2020
Richard A. Galanti
 
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
 
A signed original of this written statement has been provided to and will be retained by Costco Wholesale Corporation and furnished to the Securities
and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.
