Table of Contents
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549  
FORM 10-K
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended September 3, 2017
or
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Commission file number 0-20355
Costco Wholesale Corporation
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Washington
 
91-1223280
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
999 Lake Drive, Issaquah, WA 98027
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (425) 313-8100
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
 
Name of each exchange on
which registered
Common Stock, $.01 Par Value
 
The NASDAQ Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None  
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. YES ☒   NO  ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. YES  ☐    NO ☒ 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during
the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. YES ☒   NO  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files). YES ☒   NO ☐
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not
be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any
amendment to this Form 10-K.  ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer ☒
  
Accelerated filer ☐
Non-accelerated filer ☐  (Do not check if a smaller company)
  
Smaller reporting company ☐
Emerging growth company ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). YES  ☐    NO  ☒
The aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of February 12, 2017 was $74,963,307,820 .
The number of shares outstanding of the registrant’s common stock as of October 10, 2017 was 436,989,606 .
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the Company’s Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be held on January 30, 2018, are incorporated by reference into Part III
of this Form 10-K.

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 3, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
Page
PART I
Item 1.
Business
3
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
8
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
15
Item 2.
Properties
16
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
16
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
16
PART II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
17
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
18
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
19
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
30
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
32
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
32
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
32
Item 9B.
Other Information
33
PART III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
33
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
33
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
34
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
34
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
34
PART IV
Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
34
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
36
Signatures
37
2

Table of Contents
INFORMATION RELATING TO FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Report constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. They include statements that address
activities, events, conditions or developments that we expect or anticipate may occur in the future and may relate to such matters as sales growth,
changes  in comparable  sales,  cannibalization  of  existing  locations  by  new  openings,  price  or  fee  changes,  earnings  performance,  earnings  per
share,  stock-based  compensation  expense,  warehouse  openings  and  closures,  capital  spending,  the  effect  of  adopting  certain  accounting
standards, future financial reporting, financing, margins, return on invested capital, strategic direction, expense controls, membership renewal rates,
shopping frequency, litigation, modernization of information systems, and the demand for our products and services. Forward-looking statements
may also be identified by the words “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” “strategy,” “future,” “opportunity,” “plan,” “may,”
“should,”  “will,”  “would,”  “will  be,”  “will  continue,”  “will  likely  result,”  and  similar  expressions.  Such  forward-looking  statements  involve  risks  and
uncertainties that may cause actual events, results, or performance to differ materially from those indicated by such statements, including, without
limitation,  the  factors  set  forth  in  the  section  titled  “Item  1A-Risk  Factors”,  and  other  factors  noted  in  the  section  titled  “Item  7-Management's
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and in the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8
of this Report. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not undertake to update them, except as required by
law.
PART I
Item 1—Business
Costco Wholesale Corporation and its subsidiaries (Costco or the Company) began operations in 1983, in Seattle, Washington. We are principally
engaged in the operation of membership warehouses in the United States (U.S.) and Puerto Rico, Canada, United Kingdom (U.K.), Mexico, Japan,
Australia, Spain, France, Iceland and through majority-owned subsidiaries in Taiwan and Korea. Costco operated 741 , 715, and 686 warehouses
worldwide at September 3, 2017 , August 28, 2016 , and August 30, 2015 , respectively. Our common stock trades on the NASDAQ Global Select
Market, under the symbol “COST.”
We report on a 52/53-week fiscal year, consisting of thirteen, four-week periods and ending on the Sunday nearest the end of August. The first three
quarters consist of three periods each, and the fourth quarter consists of four periods (five weeks in the thirteenth period in a 53-week year). The
material seasonal impact in our operations is increased net sales and earnings during the winter holiday season. References to 2017 relate to the
53-week fiscal year ended September 3, 2017 . References to 2016 and 2015 relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended August 28, 2016 , and
August 30, 2015 , respectively.
General
We operate membership warehouses based on the concept that offering our members low prices on a limited selection of nationally branded and
private-label products in a wide range of merchandise categories will produce high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. When combined with
the  operating  efficiencies  achieved  by  volume  purchasing,  efficient  distribution  and  reduced  handling  of  merchandise  in  no-frills,  self-service
warehouse facilities, these volumes and turnover enable us to operate profitably at significantly lower gross margins (net sales less merchandise
costs) than most other retailers. We generally sell inventory before we are required to pay for it, even while taking advantage of early payment
discounts when available.
We  buy  most  of  our  merchandise  directly  from  manufacturers  and  route  it  to  cross-docking  consolidation  points  (depots)  or  directly  to  our
warehouses. Our depots receive large shipments from manufacturers and quickly ship these goods to individual warehouses. This process creates
freight volume and handling efficiencies, eliminating many costs associated with traditional multiple-step distribution channels.
3

Table of Contents
Item 1—Business (Continued)
Our average warehouse space is approximately 145,000 square feet, with newer units slightly larger. Floor plans are designed for economy and
efficiency in the use of selling space, the handling of merchandise, and the control of inventory. Because shoppers are attracted principally by the
quality of merchandise and low prices, our warehouses are not elaborate. By strictly controlling the entrances and exits of our warehouses and using
a membership format, we have inventory losses (shrinkage) well below those of typical retail operations.
Our warehouses on average operate on a seven-day, 70-hour week. Gasoline operations generally have extended hours. Because the hours of
operation are shorter than other retailers, and due to other efficiencies inherent in a warehouse-type operation, labor costs are lower relative to the
volume of sales. Merchandise is generally stored on racks above the sales floor and displayed on pallets containing large quantities, reducing labor
required. In general, with variations by country, our warehouses accept certain credit, including the Costco co-branded card, and debit cards, cash,
and checks.
Our strategy is to provide our members with a broad range of high-quality merchandise at prices we believe are consistently lower than elsewhere.
We seek to limit items to fast-selling models, sizes, and colors. We carry an average of approximately 3,800 active stock keeping units (SKUs) per
warehouse in our core warehouse business, significantly less than other broadline retailers. Many consumable products are offered for sale in case,
carton, or multiple-pack quantities only.
In keeping with our policy of member satisfaction, we generally accept returns of merchandise. On certain electronic items, we typically have a 90-
day return policy and provide, free of charge, technical support services, as well as an extended warranty. Additional third-party warranty coverage
is sold on certain electronic items.
We offer merchandise in the following categories:
•
Foods (including dry foods, packaged foods, and groceries)
•
Sundries (including snack foods, candy, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, and cleaning supplies)
•
Hardlines (including major appliances, electronics, health and beauty aids, hardware, and garden and patio)
•
Fresh Foods (including meat, produce, deli, and bakery)
•
Softlines (including apparel and small appliances)
•
Ancillary (including gas stations and pharmacy)
Ancillary businesses within or next to our warehouses provide expanded products and services, encouraging members to shop more frequently.
These  businesses  include  our  gas  stations,  pharmacy,  optical  dispensing  centers,  food  courts,  and  hearing-aid  centers.  We  sell  gasoline  in  all
countries except Korea and France, with the number of warehouses with gas stations varying significantly by country. We operated 536, 508, and
472 gas stations at the end of 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 , respectively.
Our online businesses, which include e-commerce, business delivery, and travel, vary by country. In the U.S. and Canada, we offer all of our online
businesses. We operate e-commerce websites in all countries except Japan, Australia, Spain, Iceland, and France. Online businesses provide our
members additional products and services, many not found in our warehouses. Net sales for our online business were approximately 4% of our total
net sales in 2017 and 2016 , respectively, and 3% in 2015 .
We  have  direct  buying  relationships  with  many  producers  of  national  brand-name  merchandise.  We  do  not  obtain  a  significant  portion  of
merchandise from any one supplier. We generally have not experienced difficulty in obtaining sufficient quantities of merchandise and believe that if
one or more of our current sources of supply became unavailable, we would be able to obtain alternative sources without substantial disruption of
our business. We also purchase private-label merchandise, as long as quality and member demand are comparable and the value to our members
is significant.
4

Table of Contents
Item 1—Business (Continued)
Certain financial information for our segments and geographic areas is included in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in
Item 8 of this Report.
Membership
Our members may utilize their memberships at any of our warehouses worldwide. Gold Star memberships are available to individuals; Business
memberships  are  limited  to  businesses,  including  individuals  with  a  business  license,  retail  sales  license  or  comparable  evidence.  Business
members have the ability to add additional cardholders (add-ons). Add-ons are not available for Gold Star members. Effective June 1, 2017, we
increased our annual membership fees in the U.S. and Canada for Gold Star (individual), Business and Business add-on by $5 to $60 per year. The
Executive membership fee increased from $110 to $120 (annual membership fee of $60, plus Executive upgrade of $60), and the maximum annual
2% reward, which is earned on qualified purchases and can be redeemed only at Costco warehouses, increased from $750 to $1,000. Our annual
membership fees in our Other International operations vary by country. All paid memberships include a free household card.
Our member renewal rate was 90% in the U.S. and Canada and 87% on a worldwide basis in 2017 . The majority of members renew within six
months following their renewal date. Therefore, our renewal rate is a trailing calculation that captures renewals during the period seven to eighteen
months prior to the reporting date.
Our membership was made up of the following (in thousands):
2017
2016
2015
Gold Star
38,600
36,800
34,000
Business, including add-ons
10,800
10,800
10,600
     Total paid members
49,400
47,600
44,600
Household cards
40,900
39,100
36,700
Total cardholders
90,300
86,700
81,300
Paid cardholders (except Business add-ons) are eligible to upgrade to an Executive membership in the U.S., Canada, Mexico and the U.K. for an
additional  annual  fee,  which  varies  by  country.  Executive  members  have  access  to  additional  savings  and  benefits  on  various  business  and
consumer services (except in Mexico), such as auto and home insurance, the Costco auto purchase program and check printing services. The
services are generally provided by third-parties and vary by state and country. Executive members represented 38% of paid members at the end of
2017 . Executive members generally spend more than other members, and the percentage of our net sales attributable to these members continues
to increase.
Labor
Our employee count was as follows:
2017
2016
2015
Full-time employees
133,000
126,000
117,000
Part-time employees
98,000
92,000
88,000
Total employees
231,000
218,000
205,000
Approximately 15,600 employees are union employees. We consider our employee relations to be very good.
5

Table of Contents
Item 1—Business (Continued)
Competition
Our industry is highly competitive, based on factors such as price, merchandise quality and selection, location, convenience, distribution strategy,
and  customer  service.  We  compete  on  a  worldwide  basis  with  global,  national,  and  regional  wholesalers  and  retailers,  including  supermarkets,
supercenters,  internet  retailers,  gasoline  stations,  hard  discounters,  department  and  specialty  stores,  and  operators  selling  a  single  category  or
narrow range of merchandise. Wal-Mart, Target, Kroger, and Amazon.com are among our significant general merchandise retail competitors. We
also compete with warehouse club operations (primarily Wal-Mart’s, Sam’s Club and BJ’s Wholesale Club), and nearly every major U.S. and Mexico
metropolitan area has multiple club operations.
Intellectual Property
We believe that, to varying degrees, our trademarks, trade names, copyrights, proprietary processes, trade secrets, patents, trade dress, domain
names and similar intellectual property add significant value to our business and are important to our success. We have invested significantly in the
development  and  protection  of  our  well-recognized  brands,  including  the  Costco  Wholesale ® trademarks  and  our  private-label  brand,  Kirkland
Signature ® . We believe that Kirkland Signature products are high quality products, offered to our members at prices that are generally lower than
those for similar national brand products and that they help lower costs, differentiate our merchandise offerings from other retailers, and generally
earn higher margins. We expect to continue to increase the sales penetration of our private label items.
We rely on trademark and copyright laws, trade-secret protection, and confidentiality, license and other agreements with our suppliers, employees
and others to protect our intellectual property rights. The availability and duration of trademark registrations vary by country; however, trademarks
are generally valid and may be renewed indefinitely as long as they are in use and their registrations are properly maintained.
Available Information
Our U.S. internet website is www.costco.com. We make available through the Investor Relations section of that site, free of charge, our Annual
Reports  on  Form  10-K,  Quarterly  Reports  on  Form  10-Q,  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K,  Proxy  Statements  and  Forms  3,  4  and  5,  and  any
amendments to those reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after filing such materials with, or furnishing such documents to, the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC). The information found on our website is not part of this or any other report filed with or furnished to the SEC. In
addition, the public may read and copy any materials we file with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington,
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC also
maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers, such as the Company,
that file electronically with the SEC at www.sec.gov.
We have adopted a code of ethics for senior financial officers pursuant to Section 406 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Copies of the code are available
free  of  charge  by  writing  to  Secretary,  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation,  999  Lake  Drive,  Issaquah,  WA  98027.  If  the  Company  makes  any
amendments to this code (other than technical, administrative, or non-substantive amendments) or grants any waivers, including implicit waivers,
from this code to the CEO, chief financial officer or principal accounting officer and controller, we will disclose (on our website or in a Form 8-K
report filed with the SEC) the nature of the amendment or waiver, its effective date, and to whom it applies.
6

Table of Contents
Item 1—Business (Continued)
Executive Officers of the Registrant
The executive officers of Costco, their position, and ages are listed below. All executive officers have 25 or more years of service with the Company.
Name
Position
Executive
Officer
Since
Age
W. Craig Jelinek
President and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Jelinek has been President and
Chief  Executive  Officer  since  January  2012  and  a  director  since  February
2010. He was President and Chief Operating Officer from February 2010 to
December  2011.  Prior  to  that  he  was  Executive  Vice  President,  Chief
Operating Officer, Merchandising since 2004.
1995
65
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Galanti has been a
director since January 1995.
1993
61
Franz E. Lazarus
Executive  Vice  President,  Administration.  Mr.  Lazarus  was  Senior  Vice
President, Administration-Global Operations from 2006 to September 2012.
2012
70
John D. McKay
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Northern  Division.  Mr.
McKay was Senior Vice President, General Manager, Northwest Region from
2000 to March 2010.
2010
60
Paul G. Moulton
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Information  Officer.  Mr.  Moulton  was
Executive Vice President, Real Estate Development from 2001 until March
2010.
2001
66
James P. Murphy
Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, International. Mr. Murphy
was Senior Vice President, International, from 2004 to October 2010.
2011
64
Joseph P. Portera
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Eastern  and  Canadian
Divisions. Mr. Portera has held these positions since 1994, and has been the
Chief Diversity Officer since 2010.
1994
65
Timothy L. Rose
Executive  Vice  President,  Ancillary  Businesses,  Manufacturing,  and
Business  Centers.  Mr.  Rose  was  Senior  Vice  President,  Merchandising,
Food and Sundries and Private Label from 1995 to December 2012.
2013
65
Ron M. Vachris
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Merchandising.  Mr.
Vachris was Senior Vice President, Real Estate Development, from August
2015 to June 2016, and Senior Vice President, General Manager, Northwest
Region from 2010 to July 2015.
2016
52
Dennis R. Zook
Executive  Vice  President,  Chief  Operating  Officer,  Southwest  Division  and
Mexico.
1993
68
7

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors
The  risks  described  below  could  materially  and  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.  We  could  also  be
affected by additional risks that apply to all companies operating in the U.S. and globally, as well as other risks that are not presently known to us or
that we currently consider to be immaterial. These Risk Factors should be carefully reviewed in conjunction with Management ' s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Item   7 and our consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item   8 of this
Report.
Business and Operating Risks
We are highly dependent on the financial performance of our U.S. and Canadian operations.
Our financial and operational performance is highly dependent on our U.S. and Canadian operations, which comprised 87% and 85% of net sales
and operating income in 2017 , respectively. Within the U.S., we are highly dependent on our California operations, which comprised 30% of U.S.
net sales in 2017 . Our California market, in general, has a larger percentage of higher volume warehouses as compared to our other domestic
markets.  Any  substantial  slowing  or  sustained  decline  in  these  operations  could  materially  adversely  affect  our  business  and  financial  results.
Declines  in  financial  performance  of  our  U.S.  operations,  particularly  in  California,  and  our  Canadian  operations  could  arise  from,  among  other
things: slow growth or declines in comparable warehouse sales (comparable sales); negative trends in operating expenses, including increased
labor, healthcare and energy costs; failing to meet targets for warehouse openings; cannibalizing existing locations with new warehouses; shifts in
sales  mix  toward  lower  gross  margin  products;  changes  or  uncertainties  in  economic  conditions  in  our  markets,  including  higher  levels  of
unemployment  and  depressed  home  values;  and  failing  to  consistently  provide  high  quality  and  innovative  new  products  to  retain  our  existing
member base and attract new members.
We may be unsuccessful implementing our growth  strategy, including expanding our business in existing markets and new markets,
which could have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Our growth is dependent, in part, on our ability to acquire property and build or lease new warehouses and regional depots. We compete with other
retailers and businesses for suitable locations. Local land use and other regulations restricting the construction and operation of our warehouses
and depots, as well as local community actions opposed to the location of our warehouses or depots at specific sites and the adoption of local laws
restricting  our  operations  and  environmental  regulations,  may  impact  our  ability  to  find  suitable  locations,  and  increase  the  cost  of  sites  and  of
constructing,  leasing  and  operating  our  warehouses  and  depots.  We  also  may  have  difficulty  negotiating  leases  or  purchase  agreements  on
acceptable terms. In addition, certain jurisdictions have enacted or proposed laws and regulations that would prevent or restrict the operation or
expansion plans of certain large retailers and warehouse clubs, including us, within their jurisdictions. Failure to effectively manage these and other
similar factors may affect our ability to timely build or lease and operate new warehouses and depots, which could have a material adverse effect on
our future growth and profitability.
We seek to expand in existing markets to attain a greater overall market share. A new warehouse may draw members away from our existing
warehouses and adversely affect their comparable sales performance and member traffic.
We intend to continue to open warehouses in new markets. Associated risks include difficulties in attracting members due to a lack of familiarity with
us, attracting members of other wholesale club operators, our lack of familiarity with local member preferences, and seasonal differences in the
market. Entry into new markets may bring us into competition with new competitors or with existing competitors with a large, established market
presence. We cannot ensure that new warehouses and new websites will be profitably deployed and, as a result, future profitability could be delayed
or otherwise materially adversely affected.
8

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
Our failure to maintain membership loyalty and brand recognition could adversely affect our results of operations.
Membership loyalty and growth are essential to our business model. The extent to which we achieve growth in our membership base, increase the
penetration of our Executive members, and sustain high renewal rates materially influences our profitability. Damage to our brands or reputation
may negatively impact comparable sales, diminish member trust, and reduce member renewal rates and, accordingly, net sales and membership
fee revenue, negatively impacting our results of operations.
We sell many products  under our  Kirkland Signature  brand.  Maintaining  consistent  product  quality,  competitive  pricing,  and availability  of these
products  is  essential  to  developing  and  maintaining  member  loyalty.  These  products  also  generally  carry  higher  margins  than  national  brand
products  carried in our warehouses and represent  a growing portion of our overall sales.  If  the Kirkland Signature brand experiences  a loss of
member acceptance or confidence, our sales and gross margin results could be adversely affected.
Disruptions in our merchandise distribution could adversely affect sales and member satisfaction.
We depend on the orderly operation of the merchandise receiving and distribution process, primarily through our depots. Although we believe that
our receiving and distribution process is efficient, unforeseen disruptions in operations due to fires, tornadoes and hurricanes, earthquakes or other
catastrophic events, labor issues or other shipping problems may result in delays in the delivery of merchandise to our warehouses, which could
adversely affect sales and the satisfaction of our members.
We  rely  extensively  on  information  technology  to  process  transactions,  compile  results,  and  manage  our  businesses.  Failure  or
disruption  of  our  primary  and  back-up  systems  could  adversely  affect  our  businesses.  A  failure  to  adequately  update  our  existing
systems and implement new systems could harm our businesses and adversely affect our results of operations.
Given the very high volume of transactions we process each year it is important that we maintain uninterrupted operation of our business-critical
computer  systems.  Our  systems,  including  our  back-up  systems,  are  subject  to  damage  or  interruption  from  power  outages,  computer  and
telecommunications failures, computer viruses, internal or external security breaches, catastrophic events such as fires, earthquakes, tornadoes and
hurricanes, and errors by our employees. If our systems are damaged or cease to function properly, we may have to make significant investments to
fix or replace them, and we may suffer interruptions in our operations in the interim. Any material interruption in these systems could have a material
adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
We  are  currently  making,  and  will  continue  to  make,  significant  technology  investments  to  improve  or  replace  critical  information  systems  and
processing capabilities. Failure to monitor and choose the right investments and implement them at the right pace would be harmful. The risk of
system disruption is increased when significant system changes are undertaken, although we believe that our change management process will
mitigate  this  risk.  Excessive  technological  change  could  impact  the  effectiveness  of  adoption,  and  could  make  it  more  difficult  for  us  to  realize
benefits. Targeting the wrong opportunities, failing to make the best investments, or making an investment commitment significantly above or below
our needs could result in the loss of our competitive position and adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations. Additionally, the
potential problems and interruptions associated with implementing technology initiatives could disrupt or reduce the efficiency of our operations.
These initiatives might not provide the anticipated benefits or may provide them on a delayed schedule or at a higher cost.
If we do not maintain the privacy and security of member-related and other business information, we could damage our reputation with
members, incur substantial additional costs, and become subject to litigation.
We receive, retain, and transmit personal information about our members and entrust that information to third-party business associates, including
cloud service providers that perform activities for us. Our
9

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
warehouse  and  online  businesses  depend  upon  the  secure  transmission  of  encrypted  confidential  information  over  public  networks,  including
information permitting cashless payments. A compromise of our security systems or those of our business associates, that results in our members '
information being obtained by unauthorized persons, could adversely affect our reputation with our members and others, as well as our operations,
results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and could result in litigation against us or the imposition of penalties. In addition, a breach
could require that we expend significant additional resources related to the security of information systems and could disrupt our operations.
The use of data by our business and our business associates is regulated at the national and state or local level in all of our operating countries.  
Privacy and information-security laws and regulations change, and compliance with them may result in cost increases due to necessary systems
changes and the development of new processes. If we or those with whom we share information fail to comply with these laws and regulations, our
reputation  could  be  damaged,  possibly  resulting  in  lost  future  business,  and  we  could  be  subjected  to  additional  legal  risk  as  a  result  of  non-
compliance.
Our security measures may be undermined due to the actions of outside parties, employee error, internal or external malfeasance, or otherwise,
and, as a result an unauthorized party may obtain access to our data systems and misappropriate business and personal information. Because the
techniques  used  to  obtain  unauthorized  access,  disable  or  degrade  service,  or  sabotage  systems  change  frequently  and  may  not  immediately
produce signs of intrusion, we may be unable to anticipate these techniques, timely discover or counter them, or implement adequate preventative
measures. Any such breach or unauthorized access could result in significant legal and financial exposure, damage to our reputation, and potentially
have an adverse effect on our business.
We are subject to payment-related risks.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash and checks, a select variety of credit and debit cards, and our proprietary cash card.
As we offer new payment options to our members, we may be subject to additional rules, regulations, compliance requirements, and higher fraud
losses. For certain payment methods, we pay interchange and other related card acceptance fees, along with additional transaction processing fees.
We rely on third parties to provide payment transaction processing services, including the processing of credit and debit cards, and our proprietary
cash card, and it could disrupt our business if these companies become unwilling or unable to provide these services to us. We are also subject to
payment card association and network operating rules, including data security rules, certification requirements and rules governing electronic funds
transfers,  which  could  change  over  time.  For  example,  we  are  subject  to  Payment  Card  Industry  Data  Security  Standards  (“PCI  DSS”),  which
contain  compliance  guidelines  and  standards  with  regard  to  our  security  surrounding  the  physical  and  electronic  storage,  processing  and
transmission of individual cardholder data. In addition, if our internal systems are breached or compromised, we may be liable for card re-issuance
costs, subject to fines and higher transaction fees and lose our ability to accept credit and/or debit card payments from our members,  and our
business and operating results could be adversely affected.
We might sell products that cause unexpected illness or injury to our members, harm to our reputation, and expose us to litigation.
If our merchandise offerings,  such as food and prepared food products for human consumption, drugs, children ' s products, pet products, and
durable goods, do not meet or are perceived not to meet applicable safety standards or our members ' expectations regarding safety, we could
experience lost sales, increased costs, litigation or reputational harm. The sale of these items involves the risk of health-related illness or injury to
our members. Such illnesses or injuries could result from tampering by unauthorized third parties, product contamination or spoilage, including the
presence of foreign objects, substances, chemicals, other agents, or residues introduced during the growing, manufacturing, storage, handling and
transportation phases, or faulty design. Our vendors are generally contractually required to comply with product safety laws, and we are dependent
on them to ensure that the products we buy comply with all safety standards. While we are subject to governmental inspection and regulations and
work to comply in all material respects
10

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
with applicable laws and regulations, we cannot be sure that consumption or use of our products will not cause a health-related illness or injury in
the future or that we will not be subject to claims, lawsuits, or government investigations relating to such matters resulting in costly product recalls
and other liabilities that could adversely affect our business and results of operations. Even if a product liability claim is unsuccessful or is not fully
pursued, negative publicity could adversely affect our reputation with existing and potential members and our corporate and brand image, and these
effects could be long term.
We may not timely identify or effectively respond to consumer trends, which could negatively affect our relationship with our members,
the demand for our products and services, and our market share.
It is difficult to consistently and successfully predict the products and services that our members will desire. Our success depends, in part, on our
ability to identify and respond to trends in demographics and consumer preferences. Failure to identify timely or effectively respond to changing
consumer  tastes,  preferences  (including  those  relating  to  sustainability  of  product  sources  and  animal  welfare)  and  spending  patterns  could
negatively affect our relationship with our members, the demand for our products and services and our market share. If we are not successful at
predicting our sales trends and adjusting our purchases accordingly, we may have excess inventory, which could result in additional markdowns and
reduce our operating performance. This could have an adverse effect on net sales, gross margin and operating income.
If we do not successfully develop and maintain a relevant multichannel experience for our members, our results of operations could be
adversely impacted.
Multichannel retailing is rapidly evolving and we must keep pace with changing member expectations and new developments by our competitors.
Our members are increasingly using mobile phones, tablets, computers, and other devices to shop and to interact with us through social media. We
are making technology investments in our websites and mobile applications. If we are unable to make, improve, or develop relevant member-facing
technology in a timely manner, our ability to compete and our results of operations could be adversely affected.
Inability to attract, train and retain highly qualified employees could adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
Our  success  depends  on  the  continued  contributions  of  members  of  our  senior  management  and  other  key  operations,  merchandising  and
administrative personnel. Failure to identify and implement a succession plan for key senior management could negatively impact the business.
We must attract, train and retain a large and growing number of qualified employees, while controlling related labor costs and maintaining our core
values. Our ability to control labor and benefit costs is subject to numerous internal and external factors, including regulatory changes, prevailing
wage rates, and healthcare and other insurance costs. We compete with other retail and non-retail businesses for these employees and invest
significant resources in training and motivating them. There is no assurance that we will be able to attract or retain highly qualified employees in the
future, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We may incur property, casualty or other losses not covered by our insurance.
We  are  predominantly  self-insured,  with  insurance  coverage  for  certain  catastrophic  risks,  for  employee  health  care  benefits,  workers’
compensation,  general  liability,  property  damage,  directors’  and  officers’  liability,  vehicle  liability  and  inventory  loss.  The  types  and  amounts  of
insurance  may  vary  from  time  to  time  based  on  our  decisions  with  respect  to  risk  retention  and  regulatory  requirements.  The  occurrence  of
significant claims, a substantial rise in costs to maintain our insurance or the failure to maintain adequate insurance coverage could have an adverse
impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
11

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
We are primarily self-insured as it relates to property damage, due to the substantial premiums required for insurance coverage over physical losses
caused by certain natural disasters, as well as the limitations on available coverage for such losses. Although we maintain specific coverages for
losses from physical damages in excess of certain amounts to guard against catastrophic losses, we still bear the risk of losses incurred as a result
of any physical damage to, or the destruction of, any warehouses, depots, manufacturing or home office facilities, loss or spoilage of inventory, and
business interruption caused by any such events to the extent they are below catastrophic levels of coverage, as well as any losses to the extent
they exceed our aggregate limits of applicable coverages. Such losses could materially impact our cash flow and results of operations.
Market and Other External Risks
We  face  strong  competition  from  other  retailers  and  warehouse  club  operators,  which  could  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial
condition and results of operations.
The retail business is highly competitive. We compete for members, employees, sites, products and services and in other important respects with a
wide range of local, regional and national wholesalers and retailers, both in the United States and in foreign countries, including other warehouse
club  operators,  supermarkets,  supercenters,  internet  retailers,  gasoline  stations,  hard  discounters,  and  department  and  specialty  stores.  Such
retailers and warehouse club operators compete in a variety of ways, including merchandise pricing, selection and availability, services, location,
convenience, store hours, and the attractiveness and ease of use of websites and mobile applications. The evolution of retailing in online and mobile
channels has improved the ability of customers to comparison shop with digital devices, which has enhanced competition. Some competitors may
have greater financial resources, better access to merchandise and greater market penetration than we do. Our inability to respond effectively to
competitive pressures, changes in the retail markets and member expectations could result in lost market share and negatively affect our financial
results.
General  economic  factors,  domestically  and  internationally,  may  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition,  and  results  of
operations.
Higher  energy  and  gasoline  costs,  inflation,  levels  of  unemployment,  healthcare  costs,  consumer  debt  levels,  foreign-currency  exchange  rates,
unsettled financial markets, weaknesses in housing and real estate markets, reduced consumer confidence, changes and uncertainties related to
government fiscal and tax policies including increased duties, tariffs, or other restrictions, sovereign debt crises, and other economic factors could
adversely affect demand for our products and services, require a change in product mix, or impact the cost of or ability to purchase inventory. Prices
of  certain  commodity  products,  including  gasoline  and  other  food  products,  are  historically  volatile  and  are  subject  to  fluctuations  arising  from
changes in domestic and international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations, taxes and periodic
delays in delivery. Rapid and significant changes in commodity prices and our ability and desire to pass them through to our members may affect
our  sales  and  profit  margins.  These  factors  could  also  increase  our  merchandise  costs  and  selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses,  and
otherwise  adversely  affect  our  operations  and  financial  results.  General  economic  conditions  can  also  be  affected  by  significant  events  like  the
outbreak of war or acts of terrorism.
Vendors may be unable to supply us with quality merchandise at competitive prices in a timely manner or may fail to adhere to our high
standards, resulting in adverse effects on our business, merchandise inventories, sales, and profit margins.
We depend heavily on our ability to purchase quality merchandise in sufficient quantities at competitive prices. As the quantities we require continue
to grow, we have no assurances of continued supply, appropriate pricing or access to new products, and any vendor has the ability to change the
terms upon which they sell to us or discontinue selling to us. Member demands may lead to out-of-stock positions of our merchandise leading to loss
of sales and profits.
12

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
We buy from numerous domestic and foreign manufacturers and importers. Our inability to acquire suitable merchandise on acceptable terms or the
loss  of  key  vendors  could  negatively  affect  us.  We  may  not  be  able  to  develop  relationships  with  new  vendors,  and  products  from  alternative
sources, if any, may be of a lesser quality or more expensive than those from existing vendors. Because of our efforts to adhere to high quality
standards  for  which  available  supply  may  be  limited,  particularly  for  certain  food  items,  the  large  volume  we  demand  may  not  be  consistently
available.
Our suppliers (and those they depend upon for materials and services) are subject to risks, including labor disputes, union organizing activities,
financial liquidity, inclement weather, natural disasters, supply constraints, and general economic and political conditions that could limit their ability
to timely provide us with acceptable merchandise. For these or other reasons, one or more of our suppliers might not adhere to our quality control,
legal, regulatory, labor, environmental or animal welfare standards. These deficiencies may delay or preclude delivery of merchandise to us and
might not be identified before we sell such merchandise to our members. This failure could lead to recalls and litigation, and otherwise damage our
reputation and our brands, increase our costs, and otherwise adversely impact our business.
Fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may adversely affect our results of operations.
During 2017 , our international operations, including Canada, generated 27% and 36% of our net sales and operating income, respectively. Our
international operations have accounted for an increasing portion of our warehouses, and we plan to continue international growth. To prepare our
consolidated financial statements, we must translate the financial statements of our international operations from local currencies into U.S. dollars
using exchange rates for the current period. Future fluctuations in currency exchange rates over time that are unfavorable to us may adversely affect
the financial performance of our Canadian and Other International operations and have a corresponding adverse period-over-period effect on our
results of operations. As we continue to expand internationally, our exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates may increase.
We may pay for products we purchase for sale in our warehouses around the world with a currency other than the local currency of the country in
which  the  goods  will  be  sold.  Currency  fluctuations  may  increase  our  cost  of  goods  and  may  not  be  passed  on  to  members.  Consequently,
fluctuations in currency exchange rates may adversely affect our results of operations.
Natural disasters or other catastrophes could negatively affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Natural  disasters,  such  as  hurricanes,  typhoons  or  earthquakes,  particularly  in  California  or  Washington  state,  where  our  centralized  operating
systems and administrative personnel are located, could negatively affect our operations and financial performance. Such events could result in
physical  damage  to  one  or  more  of  our  properties,  the  temporary  closure  of  one  or  more  warehouses,  depots,  manufacturing  or  home  office
facilities, the temporary lack of an adequate work force in a market, the temporary or long-term disruption in the supply of products from some local
or overseas suppliers, the temporary disruption in the transport of goods to or from overseas, delays in the delivery of goods to our warehouses or
depots within the countries in which we operate, and the temporary reduction in the availability of products in our warehouses. Public health issues,
whether occurring in the U.S. or abroad, could disrupt our operations, disrupt the operations of suppliers or members, or have an adverse impact on
consumer spending and confidence levels. These events could also reduce demand for our products or make it difficult or impossible to procure
products. We may be required to suspend operations in some or all of our locations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition and results of operations.
Factors associated with climate change could adversely affect our business.
We use natural gas, diesel fuel, gasoline, and electricity in our distribution and warehouse operations. U.S. and foreign government regulations
limiting carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions may result in increased compliance costs and legislation or regulation affecting energy
inputs that could materially affect
13

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
our profitability. Climate change could affect our ability to procure needed commodities at costs and in quantities we currently experience. We also
sell a substantial amount of gasoline, the demand for which could be impacted by concerns about climate change and which could face increased
regulation. Climate change may be associated with extreme weather conditions, such as more intense hurricanes, thunderstorms, tornadoes, and
snow or ice storms, as well as rising sea levels.
Failure to meet market expectations for our financial performance could adversely affect the market price and volatility of our stock.
We believe that the price of our stock currently reflects high market expectations for our future operating results. Any failure to meet or delay in
meeting these expectations, including our warehouse and e-commerce comparable sales growth rates, membership renewal rates, new member
sign-ups, gross margin, earnings, earnings per share, new warehouse openings, or dividend or stock repurchase policies could cause the market
price of our stock to decline.
Legal and Regulatory Risks
Our international operations subject us to risks associated with the legislative, judicial, accounting, regulatory, political and economic
factors specific to the countries or regions in which we operate which could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results
of operations.
During 2017 , we operated 227 warehouses in 10 countries outside of the U.S., and we plan to continue expanding our international operations.
Future operating results internationally could be negatively affected by a variety of factors, many similar to those we face in the U.S., certain of
which are beyond our control. These factors include political and economic conditions, regulatory constraints, currency regulations, policy changes
such as the U.K.'s vote to withdraw from the European Union, commonly known as "Brexit", and other matters in any of the countries or regions in
which we operate, now or in the future. Other factors that may impact international operations include foreign trade, monetary and fiscal policies and
the laws and regulations of the U.S. and foreign governments, agencies and similar organizations, and risks associated with having major facilities
located in countries which have been historically less stable than the U.S. Risks inherent in international operations also include, among others, the
costs and difficulties of managing international operations, adverse tax consequences, and greater difficulty in enforcing intellectual property rights.
Changes in accounting standards and subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments by management related to complex accounting
matters could significantly affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Accounting principles and related pronouncements, implementation guidelines, and interpretations we apply to a wide range of matters that are
relevant to our business, including, but not limited to, revenue recognition, merchandise inventories, vendor rebates and other vendor consideration,
impairment of long-lived assets, self-insurance liabilities, and income taxes are highly complex and involve subjective assumptions, estimates and
judgments by our management. Changes in these rules or their interpretation or changes in underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments by our
management could significantly change our reported or expected financial performance.
Provisions  for  losses  related  to  self-insured  risks  are  generally  based  upon  independent  actuarially  determined  estimates.  The  assumptions
underlying  the  ultimate  costs  of  existing  claim  losses  can  be  highly  unpredictable,  which  can  affect  the  liability  recorded  for  such  claims.  For
example, variability in health care cost inflation rates inherent in these claims can affect the amounts recognized. Similarly, changes in legal trends
and interpretations, as well as changes in the nature and method of how claims are settled can impact ultimate costs. Although our estimates of
liabilities incurred do not anticipate significant changes in historical trends for these variables, any changes could have a considerable effect upon
future claim costs and currently recorded liabilities and could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.
14

Table of Contents
Item 1A—Risk Factors (Continued)
We could be subject to additional income tax liabilities.
We compute our income tax provision based on enacted tax rates in the countries in which we operate. As tax rates vary among countries, a change
in  earnings  attributable  to  the  various  jurisdictions  in  which  we  operate  could  result  in  an  unfavorable  change  in  our  overall  tax  provision.
Additionally,  changes  in  the  enacted  tax  rates,  adverse  outcomes  in  tax  audits,  including  transfer  pricing  disputes,  or  any  change  in  the
pronouncements relating to accounting for income taxes could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Significant changes in, or failure to comply with, federal, state, regional, local and international laws and regulations relating to the use,
storage, discharge and disposal of hazardous materials, hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and other environmental matters could
adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We are subject to a wide variety of federal, state, regional, local and international laws and regulations relating to the use, storage, discharge and
disposal of hazardous materials, hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and other environmental matters. Failure to comply with these laws could
result  in  harm  to  our  members,  employees  or  others,  significant  costs  to  satisfy  environmental  compliance,  remediation  or  compensatory
requirements, or the imposition of severe penalties or restrictions on operations by governmental agencies or courts that could adversely affect our
business, financial condition and results of operations.
We are involved in a number of legal proceedings and audits and some of these outcomes could adversely affect our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
Our  business  requires  compliance  with  many  laws  and  regulations.  Failure  to  achieve  compliance  could  subject  us  to  lawsuits  and  other
proceedings,  and  lead  to  damage  awards,  fines,  penalties,  and  remediation  costs.  We  are,  or  may  become  involved,  in  a  number  of  legal
proceedings  and  audits  including  grand  jury  investigations,  government  and  agency  investigations,  and  consumer,  employment,  tort,  unclaimed
property  laws,  and  other  litigation.  We  cannot  predict  with  certainty  the  outcomes  of  these  proceedings  and  other  contingencies,  including
environmental remediation and other proceedings commenced by governmental authorities. The outcome of some of these proceedings, audits,
unclaimed  property  laws,  and  other  contingencies  could  require  us  to  take,  or  refrain  from  taking,  actions  which  could  negatively  affect  our
operations  or  could  require  us  to  pay  substantial  amounts  of  money,  adversely  affecting  our  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.
Additionally,  defending  against  these  lawsuits  and  proceedings  may  involve  significant  expense  and  diversion  of  management '  s  attention  and
resources.
Item 1B—Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
15

Table of Contents
Item 2—Properties
Warehouse Properties
At September 3, 2017 we operated 741 membership warehouses:
Own Land
and Building
Lease Land
and/or
Building (1)
Total
United States and Puerto Rico
416
98
514
Canada
85
12
97
Mexico
37
—
37
United Kingdom
22
6
28
Japan
12
14
26
Korea
6
7
13
Taiwan
—
13
13
Australia
6
3
9
Spain
2
—
2
Iceland
—
1
1
France
1
—
1
Total
587
154
741
_______________
(1)
102 of the 154 leases are land-only leases, where Costco owns the building.
The following schedule shows warehouse openings, net of closings and relocations, and expected openings through December 31, 2017 :
United States
Canada
Other
International
Total
Total Warehouses
in Operation
2013 and prior
451
85
98
634
634
2014
17
3
9
29
663
2015
12
1
10
23
686
2016
21
2
6
29
715
2017
13
6
7
26
741
2018 (expected through 12/31/2017)
4
1
—
5
746
Total
518
98
130
746
At the end of fiscal 2017 , our warehouses contained approximately 107.3 million square feet of operating floor space: 75.4 million in the U.S.; 13.5
million in Canada; and 18.4 million in Other International. We operate depots for the consolidation and distribution of most merchandise shipments
to the warehouses, and various processing, packaging, and other facilities to support ancillary and other businesses, including our online business.
We operate 24 depots, consisting of approximately 11.0 million square feet. Our executive offices are located in Issaquah, Washington, and we
maintain 18 regional offices in the U.S., Canada and Other International locations.
Item 3—Legal Proceedings
See discussion of Legal Proceedings in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Item 4—Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
16

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5—Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Market Information and Dividend Policy
Our common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “COST.” On October 10, 2017 , we had 8,629 stockholders of
record. The following table shows the quarterly high and low closing prices of our common stock as reported by NASDAQ for each quarter during
the last two fiscal years and the quarterly cash dividend declared per share.
 
Price Range
Cash
Dividends
Declared
 
High
Low
2017:
Fourth Quarter
$
182.20
$
150.44
$
0.500
Third Quarter
182.45
164.55
7.500
(1)  
Second Quarter
172.00
150.11
0.450
First Quarter
163.98
142.24
0.450
2016:
Fourth Quarter
169.04
141.29
0.450
Third Quarter
158.25
146.44
0.450
Second Quarter
168.87
143.28
0.400
First Quarter
163.10
138.30
0.400
_______________
(1)
Includes a special cash dividend of $7.00 per share.
Payment of future dividends is subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. Factors considered in determining dividends include our profitability
and expected capital needs. Subject to these qualifications, we presently expect to continue to pay dividends on a quarterly basis.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following table sets forth information on our common stock repurchase program activity for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2017 (dollars in millions,
except per share data):
Period
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
Average Price Paid
per Share
Total Number of
Shares Purchased as
Part of Publicly
Announced Program
(1)
Maximum Dollar Value
of Shares that May Yet
be Purchased under the
Program
May 8—June 4, 2017
92,000
$171.87
92,000
$2,973
June 5—July 2, 2017
573,000
162.00
573,000
$2,881
July 3—July 30, 2017
451,000
155.06
451,000
$2,811
July 31—September 3, 2017
396,000
156.95
396,000
$2,749
     Total fourth quarter
1,512,000
$159.21
1,512,000
_______________
(1)
The repurchase program is conducted under a $4,000 authorization approved by our Board of Directors in April 2015, which expires in April 2019.
17

Table of Contents
Item 6—Selected Financial Data
The  following  table  sets  forth  information  concerning  our  consolidated  financial  condition,  operating  results,  and  key  operating  metrics.  This
information should be read in conjunction with Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, included in
Item 7 of this Report, and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, included in Item 8 of this Report.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
(dollars in millions, except per share data)
Sept. 3, 2017
Aug. 28, 2016
Aug. 30, 2015
Aug. 31, 2014
Sept. 1, 2013
As of and for the year ended
(53 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
(52 weeks)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net sales
$
126,172
$
116,073
$
113,666
$
110,212
$
102,870
Membership fees
2,853
2,646
2,533
2,428
2,286
Gross margin (1)  as a percentage of net sales
11.33%
11.35 %
11.09 %
10.66%
10.62%
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a
percentage of net sales
10.26%
10.40 %
10.07 %
9.89%
9.82%
Operating income
$
4,111
$
3,672
$
3,624
$
3,220
$
3,053
Net income attributable to Costco
2,679
2,350
2,377
2,058
2,039
Net income per diluted common share attributable to
Costco
6.08
5.33
5.37
4.65
4.63
Cash dividends declared per common share
8.90
1.70
6.51
1.33
8.17
Changes in comparable sales (2)
United States
4%
1 %
3 %
5%
6%
Canada
5%
(3)%
(5)%
2%
9%
Other International
2%
(3)%
(3)%
3%
1%
Total Company
4%
0 %
1 %
4%
6%
Increase in Total Company comparable sales excluding the
impact of changes in foreign currency and gasoline prices
4%
4 %
7 %
6%
6%
BALANCE SHEET DATA
Net property and equipment
$
18,161
$
17,043
$
15,401
$
14,830
$
13,881
Total assets
36,347
33,163
33,017
32,662
29,936
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
6,573
4,061
4,852
5,084
4,986
Costco stockholders’ equity
$
10,778
$
12,079
$
10,617
$
12,303
$
10,833
WAREHOUSE INFORMATION
Warehouses in Operation
Beginning of year
715
686
663
634
608
Opened
28
33
26
30
26
Closed due to relocation
(2)
(4)
(3)
(1)
0
End of year
741
715
686
663
634
MEMBERSHIP INFORMATION
Total paid members (000's)
49,400
47,600
44,600
42,000
39,000
_______________
(1)
Net sales less merchandise costs.
(2)
Includes net sales from warehouses and websites operating for more than one year. For fiscal 2017, the prior year includes the comparable 53 weeks.
18

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data)
OVERVIEW
We believe that the most important driver of our profitability is sales growth, particularly comparable sales growth. We define comparable sales as
sales from warehouses open for more than one year, including remodels, relocations and expansions, as well as online sales related to e-commerce
websites operating for more than one year. Comparable sales growth is achieved through increasing shopping frequency from new and existing
members and the amount they spend on each visit (average ticket). Sales comparisons can also be particularly influenced by certain factors that are
beyond our control: fluctuations in currency exchange rates (with respect to the consolidation of the results of our international operations); and
changes  in  the  cost  of  gasoline  and  associated  competitive  conditions  (primarily  impacting  our  U.S.  and  Canadian  operations).  The  higher  our
comparable sales exclusive of these items, the more we can leverage certain of our selling, general and administrative expenses, reducing them as
a percentage of sales and enhancing profitability. Generating comparable sales growth is foremost a question of making available to our members
the right merchandise at the right prices, a skill that we believe we have repeatedly demonstrated over the long term. Another substantial factor in
sales  growth  is  the  health  of  the  economies  in  which  we  do  business,  especially  the  United  States.  Sales  growth  and  gross  margins  are  also
impacted by our competition, which is vigorous and widespread, across a wide range of global, national and regional wholesalers and retailers.
While we cannot control or reliably predict general economic health or changes in competition, we believe that we have been successful historically
in  adapting  our  business  to  these  changes,  such  as  through  adjustments  to  our  pricing  and  to  our  merchandise  mix,  including  increasing  the
penetration of our private label items.
Our philosophy is to provide our members with quality goods and services at the most competitive prices. We do not focus in the short term on
maximizing  prices  charged,  but  instead  seek  to  maintain  what  we  believe  is  a  perception  among  our  members  of  our  “pricing  authority”  –
consistently  providing  the  most  competitive  values.  Our  investments  in  merchandise  pricing  can,  from  time  to  time,  include  reducing  prices  on
merchandise  to  drive  sales  or  meet  competition  and  holding  prices  steady  despite  cost  increases  instead  of  passing  the  increases  on  to  our
members, all negatively impacting near-term gross margin as a percentage of net sales (gross margin percentage). We believe that our gasoline
business  draws  members  but  it  generally  has  a  significantly  lower  gross  margin  percentage  relative  to  our  non-gasoline  business.  A  higher
penetration of gasoline sales will generally lower our gross margin percentage. Rapidly changing gasoline prices may significantly impact our near-
term net sales growth. Generally, rising gasoline prices benefit net sales growth which, given the higher sales base, negatively impacts our gross
margin percentage but decreases our selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses as a percentage of net sales. A decline in gasoline
prices has the inverse effect. We operate our lower-margin gasoline business in all countries except Korea and France.
We also achieve sales growth by opening new warehouses. As our warehouse base grows, available and desirable potential sites become more
difficult to secure, and square footage growth becomes a comparatively less substantial component of growth. The negative aspects of such growth,
however,  including  lower  initial  operating  profitability  relative  to  existing  warehouses  and  cannibalization  of  sales  at  existing  warehouses  when
openings occur in existing markets, are increasingly less significant relative to the results of our total operations. Our rate of square footage growth
is generally higher in foreign markets, due to the smaller base in those markets, and we expect that to continue. Our e-commerce business growth
both domestically and internationally has also increased our sales.
Our membership format is an integral part of our business model and has a significant effect on our profitability. This format is designed to reinforce
member loyalty and provide continuing fee revenue. The extent to which we achieve growth in our membership base, increase penetration of our
Executive members, and sustain high renewal rates, materially influences our profitability.
Our financial performance depends heavily on our ability to control costs. While we believe that we have achieved successes in this area historically,
some significant costs are partially outside our control, most
19

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
particularly health care and utility expenses. With respect to expenses relating to the compensation of our employees, our philosophy is not to seek
to minimize their wages and benefits. Rather, we believe that achieving our longer-term objectives of reducing employee turnover and enhancing
employee satisfaction requires maintaining compensation levels that are better than the industry average for much of our workforce. This may cause
us, for example, to absorb costs that other employers might seek to pass through to their workforces. Because our business is operated on very low
gross margins, modest changes in various items in the income statement, particularly merchandise costs and SG&A expenses, can have substantial
impacts on net income.
Our operating model is generally the same across our U.S., Canada, and Other International operating segments (see Note 11 to the consolidated
financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report). Certain countries in the Other International segment have relatively higher rates of square
footage growth, lower wages and benefit costs as a percentage of country sales, and/or less or no direct membership warehouse competition.
In discussions of our consolidated operating results, we refer to the impact of changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which are
references to the differences between the foreign-exchange rates we use to convert the financial results of our international operations from local
currencies into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. This impact of foreign-exchange rate changes is calculated based on the difference
between the current period's currency exchange rates and that of the comparable prior period. The impact of changes in gasoline prices on net
sales is calculated based on the difference between the current period's average price per gallon sold and that of the comparable prior period.
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday closest to August 31. Fiscal year 2017 was a 53-week fiscal year ending on September 3, 2017 , while 2016 and
2015 were 52-week fiscal years ending on August 28, 2016 , and August 30, 2015 , respectively. Certain percentages presented are calculated
using actual results prior to rounding. Unless otherwise noted, references to net income relate to net income attributable to Costco.
Highlights for fiscal year 2017 included:
•
We opened 26 net new warehouses in 2017 : 13 in the U.S., six in Canada, and seven in our Other International segment, compared to 29 net
new warehouses in 2016 ;
•
Net sales increased 9% to $126,172 , driven by a 4% increase in comparable sales, sales at new warehouses opened in 2016 and 2017 , and
the benefit of one additional week of sales in 2017;
•
Membership fee revenue increased 8% to $2,853 , primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses, an extra week of
membership fees in 2017 , the annual fee increase, and executive membership upgrades;
•
Gross margin percentage decreased two basis points;
•
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 14 basis points, driven by lower costs associated with the co-branded credit card
arrangement in the U.S.;
•
Net income increased 14% to $2,679 , or $6.08 per diluted share compared to $2,350 , or $5.33 per diluted share in 2016 . The 2017 results
were positively impacted by a $82 tax benefit, or $0.19 per diluted share, in connection with the special cash dividend paid to the Company's
401(k) Plan participants and other net benefits of approximately $51, or $0.07 per diluted share, for non-recurring net legal and other matters;
•
In 2017, we re-paid long-term debt totaling $2,200 representing the aggregate principal balances of the 5.5% and 1.125% Senior Notes; we
issued  $3,800  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  Senior  Notes  which  funded  a  special  cash  dividend  of  $7.00  per  share  paid  in  May  2017
(approximately $3,100); and
•
In April 2017, the Board of Directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend from $0.45 to $0.50 per share.
20

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
2017
2016
2015
Net Sales
$
126,172
$
116,073
 $
113,666
Changes in net sales:
U.S.
8%
3 %
5 %
Canada
10%
(2)%
(3)%
Other International
8%
4 %
2 %
Total Company
9%
2 %
3 %
Changes in comparable sales:
U.S.
4%
1 %
3 %
Canada
5%
(3)%
(5)%
Other International
2%
(3)%
(3)%
Total Company
4%
0 %
1 %
Increases in comparable sales excluding the impact of changes in foreign
currency and gasoline prices:
U.S.
4%
3 %
6 %
Canada
4%
8 %
8 %
Other International
4%
4 %
6 %
Total Company
4%
4 %
7 %
2017 vs. 2016
Net Sales
Net sales increased $10,099 or 9% during 2017 , primarily due to a 4% increase in comparable sales, new warehouses opened in 2016 and 2017 ,
and the benefit of one additional week of sales in 2017 . Changes in gasoline prices positively impacted net sales by approximately $785, or 68
basis  points,  due  to  an  8%  increase  in  the  average  sales  price  per  gallon.  Changes  in  foreign  currencies  relative  to  the  U.S.  dollar  negatively
impacted  net  sales  by  approximately  $295,  or  25  basis  points,  compared  to 2016 .  The  negative  impact  was  driven  by  Other  International
operations, partially offset by positive impacts attributable to our Canadian operations.
Comparable Sales
Comparable  sales  increased  4%  during 2017 and  were  positively  impacted  by  an  increase  in  shopping  frequency  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  an
increased average ticket. The average ticket and comparable sales results were positively impacted by an increase in gasoline prices, offset by
decreases in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Changes in comparable sales includes the negative impact of cannibalization (established
warehouses losing sales to our newly opened locations).
2016 vs. 2015
Net Sales
Net sales increased $2,407 or 2% during 2016. This was attributable to sales at new warehouses opened in 2015 and 2016. Comparable sales were
flat. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted net sales by approximately $2,690, or 237 basis points, compared
to 2015. The negative impact was primarily attributable to our Canadian operations and within certain of our Other International
21

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
operations. Changes in gasoline prices negatively impacted net sales by approximately $2,194, or 193 basis points, due to a 19% decrease in the
average sales price per gallon.
Comparable Sales
Comparable sales were flat during 2016, with an increase in shopping frequency offset by a decrease in the average ticket. The average ticket and
comparable sales results were negatively impacted by changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decrease in gasoline prices.
Changes in comparable sales includes the negative impact of cannibalization (established warehouses losing sales to our newly opened locations).
Membership Fees
2017
2016
2015
Membership fees
$
2,853
$
2,646
$
2,533
Membership fees increase
8%
4%
4%
Membership fees as a percentage of net sales
2.26%
2.28%
2.23%
2017 vs. 2016
The increase in membership fees was primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses, an extra week of membership fee
revenue, the annual fee increase (discussed below), and an increased number of upgrades to our higher-fee Executive Membership program. At the
end of 2017 , our member renewal rates were 90% in the U.S. and Canada and 87% worldwide.
In the first fiscal quarter of 2017, we increased our annual membership fees in certain of our Other International operations. Effective June 1, 2017,
we also increased our annual membership fees in the U.S. and Canada for Gold Star (individual), Business and Business add-on by $5 to $60 and
for Executive Membership from$110 to $120 (annual membership fee of $60, plus the Executive upgrade of $60); and the maximum 2% reward
associated  with Executive  Membership  increased from  $750 to  $1,000  annually. We  account  for membership  fee revenue  on a deferred  basis,
recognized ratably over the one-year membership period. These fee increases had a positive impact on membership fee revenues during 2017 of
approximately $23 and will positively impact the next several quarters. We expect these increases to positively impact membership fee revenue by
approximately $175 in fiscal 2018.
2016 vs. 2015
The increase in membership fees was primarily due to membership sign-ups at existing and new warehouses and increased upgrades to our higher-
fee  Executive  Membership  program.  These  increases  were  partially  offset  by  changes  in  foreign  currencies  relative  to  the  U.S.  dollar,  which
negatively impacted fees by approximately $52 in 2016.
22

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Gross Margin
2017
2016
2015
Net sales
$
126,172
$
116,073
$
113,666
Less merchandise costs
111,882
102,901
101,065
Gross margin
$
14,290
$
13,172
$
12,601
Gross margin percentage
11.33%
11.35%
11.09%
2017 vs. 2016
The gross margin of our core merchandise categories (food and sundries, hardlines, softlines and fresh foods), when expressed as a percentage of
core merchandise sales (rather than total net sales), increased eight basis points due to increases in these categories other than fresh foods. This
measure eliminates the impact of changes in sales penetration and gross margins from our warehouse ancillary and other businesses.
Total gross margin percentage decreased two basis points compared to 2016. Excluding the impact of gasoline price inflation on net sales, gross
margin as a percentage of adjusted net sales was 11.40%, an increase of five basis points. This increase was primarily due to amounts earned
under the co-branded credit card arrangement in the U.S. of 15 basis points and a benefit of three basis points from non-recurring legal settlements
and other matters. The improvement in terms in our current co-brand agreement as compared to the prior co-brand arrangement led to substantial
year over year benefits in fiscal 2017. Changes of comparable magnitude will not occur in subsequent years. These increases were partially offset
by a six basis point decrease in our core merchandise categories, primarily due to food and sundries as a result of a decrease in sales penetration.
The gross margin percentage was also negatively impacted by five basis points due to a LIFO benefit in 2016 and one basis point in warehouse
ancillary and other businesses. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an immaterial impact on gross margin in 2017.
Gross margin on a segment basis, when expressed as a percentage of the segment's own sales and excluding the impact of changes in gasoline
prices on net sales (segment gross margin percentage), increased in our U.S. operations, due to amounts earned under the co-branded credit card
arrangement and non-recurring legal settlements and other matters as discussed above. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in core
merchandise categories, predominantly food and sundries as a result of a decrease in sales penetration, and a LIFO benefit in 2016. The segment
gross margin percentage in our Canadian operations increased, primarily due to increases in warehouse ancillary and other businesses, primarily
our  pharmacy  business,  partially  offset  by  a  decrease  in  our  core  merchandise  categories,  largely  fresh  foods.  The  segment  gross  margin
percentage increased in our Other International operations due to increases across all core merchandise categories, except fresh foods.
2016 vs. 2015
The gross margin of our core merchandise categories, when expressed as a percentage of core merchandise sales, increased 13 basis points,
primarily due to increases in these categories other than fresh foods.
Total gross margin percentage increased 26 basis points compared to 2015. Excluding the impact of gasoline price deflation on net sales, gross
margin  as  a  percentage  of  adjusted  net  sales  was  11.14%,  an  increase  of  five  basis  points.  A  larger  LIFO  benefit  in  2016  compared  to  2015
positively  contributed  three  basis  points.  The  LIFO  benefit  resulted  largely  from  lower  costs  for  merchandise  inventories,  primarily  in  food  and
sundries and gasoline. Our core merchandise categories positively contributed one basis point, primarily due to an increase in hardlines, partially
offset by food and sundries due to a decrease in sales penetration. Warehouse ancillary and other business gross margin positively contributed one
basis point, primarily  due to hearing aids and e-commerce  businesses,  partially  offset  by our  gasoline business.  Changes in foreign  currencies
relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted gross margin by approximately $286 in 2016.
23

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Segment  gross  margin  percentage  increased  in  our  U.S.  operations  predominantly  due  to  a  positive  contribution  from  our  core  merchandise
categories,  primarily  hardlines  and  softlines,  and  the  LIFO  benefit  discussed  above.  The  segment  gross  margin  percentage  in  our  Canadian
operations decreased, primarily due to a decrease in all core merchandise categories, except hardlines, partially offset by increases in warehouse
ancillary  and  other  businesses,  primarily  pharmacy  and  e-commerce  businesses.  The  segment  gross  margin  percentage  in  Other  International
operations decreased in all merchandise categories, except fresh foods, which was higher.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
2017
2016
2015
SG&A expenses
$
12,950
$
12,068
$
11,445
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales
10.26%
10.40%
10.07%
2017 vs. 2016
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 14 basis points compared to 2016. Excluding the impact of gasoline price inflation on net
sales,  SG&A  expenses  as  a  percentage  of  adjusted  net  sales  was  10.33%,  a  decrease  of  seven  basis  points.  Operating  costs  related  to
warehouses, ancillary, and other businesses, which includes e-commerce and travel, were lower by nine basis points, primarily due to lower costs
associated with the co-branded credit card arrangement in the U.S. of 18 basis points. The improvement in terms in our current co-brand agreement
as compared to the prior co-brand arrangement led to substantial year over year benefits in fiscal 2017. Changes of comparable magnitude will not
occur  in  subsequent  years.  This  was  partially  offset  by  higher  payroll  and  employee  benefit  expenses  of  11  basis  points,  primarily  in  our  U.S.
operations.  Central  operating  costs  were  higher  by  one  basis  point,  primarily  due  to  increased  costs  associated  with  our  information  systems
modernization, including increased depreciation for projects placed in service, incurred by our U.S. operations. Stock compensation expense was
also higher by one basis point. Changes in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an immaterial impact in 2017.
2016 vs. 2015
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales increased 33 basis points compared to 2015. Excluding the negative impact of gasoline price deflation
on net sales, SG&A expenses as a percentage of adjusted net sales were 10.20%, an increase of 13 basis points. This was largely due to: higher
central operating costs of six basis points, predominantly due to costs associated with our information systems modernization, including increased
depreciation for projects placed in service, incurred by our U.S. operations; and higher stock compensation expense of four basis points, due to
appreciation in the trading price of our stock at the time of grant. Charges for non-recurring legal and regulatory matters during 2016 negatively
impacted SG&A expenses by two basis points. Operating costs related to warehouses, ancillary, and other businesses, which includes e-commerce
and travel, were higher by one basis point due to higher payroll and employee benefit costs, primarily health care, i n our U.S. operations. This
increase  was partially  offset  by lower payroll  expense  as a percentage  of  net  sales  in our Canadian operations.  Changes in foreign  currencies
relative to the U.S. dollar decreased our SG&A expenses by approximately $211 in 2016.
Preopening Expenses
2017
2016
2015
Preopening expenses
$
82
$
78
$
65
Warehouse openings, including relocations
United States
15
25
14
Canada
6
2
1
Other International
7
6
11
Total warehouse openings, including relocations
28
33
26
24

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Preopening  expenses  include  costs  for  startup  operations  related  to  new  warehouses,  including  relocations,  development  in  new  international
markets,  and  expansions  at  existing  warehouses.  In  2017,  we  entered  into  two  new  international  markets,  Iceland  and  France.  Preopening
expenses vary due to the number of warehouse openings, the timing of the opening relative to our year-end, whether the warehouse is owned or
leased, and whether the opening is in an existing, new, or international market.
Interest Expense
2017
2016
2015
Interest expense
$
134
$
133
$
124
Interest expense primarily relates to Senior Notes issued by the Company (described in further detail under the heading “Cash Flows from Financing
Activities” and in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report).
Interest Income and Other, Net
2017
2016
2015
Interest income
$
50
$
41
$
50
Foreign-currency transaction gains (losses), net
(5)
28
47
Other, net
17
11
7
Interest income and other, net
$
62
$
80
$
104
2017 vs. 2016
Foreign-currency  transaction  gains  (losses),  net  include  the  revaluation  or  settlement  of  monetary  assets  and  liabilities  and  mark-to-market
adjustments for forward foreign-exchange contracts  by our Canadian and Other International operations. See Derivatives and Foreign Currency
sections in Item 8, Note 1 of this Report.
2016 vs. 2015
The  decrease  in  interest  income  in  2016  is  attributable  to  lower  average  cash  and  investment  balances,  due  in  part  to  the  payment  of  the
outstanding principal balance and interest on the 0.65% Senior Notes in the second quarter of 2016.
Provision for Income Taxes
2017
2016
2015
Provision for income taxes
$
1,325
$
1,243
$
1,195
Effective tax rate
32.8%
34.3%
33.2%
In 2017 and 2015, our provision was favorably impacted by net tax benefits of $104 and $68, respectively, primarily due to tax benefits recorded in
connection with the May 2017 and February 2015 special cash dividends paid to employees through our 401(K) Retirement Plan of $82 and $57,
respectively. These dividends are deductible for U.S. income tax purposes.
25

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes our significant sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents:
2017
2016
2015
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
6,726
$
3,292
$
4,285
Net cash used in investing activities
(2,366)
(2,345)
(2,480)
Net cash used in financing activities
(3,218)
(2,419)
(2,324)
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from warehouse operations, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. Cash
and  cash  equivalents  and  short-term  investments  were $5,779 and $4,729 at  the  end  of 2017 and 2016 ,  respectively.  Of  these  balances,
approximately $1,255 and $1,071 represented unsettled credit and debit card receivables, respectively. These receivables generally settle within
four days. Cash and cash equivalents were positively impacted by changes in exchange rates of $25 and $50 in 2017 and 2016, respectfully, and
negatively impacted by $418 in 2015.
We  have  not  provided  for  U.S.  deferred  taxes  on  cumulative  undistributed  earnings  of  certain  non-U.S.  consolidated  subsidiaries,  including  the
remaining  undistributed  earnings  of  our  Canadian  operations,  because  our  subsidiaries  have  invested  or  will  invest  the  undistributed  earnings
indefinitely, or the earnings if repatriated would not result in an adverse tax consequence. Although we have historically asserted that certain non-
U.S. undistributed earnings will be permanently reinvested, we may repatriate such earnings to the extent we can do so without an adverse tax
consequence. If we determine that such earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested, deferred taxes, to the extent required and applicable, are
recorded  at  that  time.  During  2017,  we  changed  our  position  regarding  an  additional  portion  of  the  undistributed  earnings  of  our  Canadian
operations, as we determined such earnings could be repatriated without adverse tax consequences. Subsequent to the end of 2017, we repatriated
a portion of our undistributed earnings in our Canadian operations without adverse tax consequences.
Management  believes  that  our  cash  position  and  operating  cash  flows  will  be  sufficient  to  meet  our  liquidity  and  capital  requirements  for  the
foreseeable future. We believe that our U.S. current and projected asset position is sufficient to meet our U.S. liquidity requirements and have no
current plans to repatriate for use in the U.S. cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held by non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries
whose  earnings  are  considered  indefinitely  reinvested.  Cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  short-term  investments  held  at  these  subsidiaries  with
earnings considered to be indefinitely reinvested totaled $1,463 at September 3, 2017.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $6,726 in 2017 , compared to $3,292 in 2016 . Our cash flow provided by operations is primarily
derived from net sales and membership fees. Cash flow used in operations generally consists of payments to our merchandise vendors, warehouse
operating costs including payroll and employee benefits, utilities, and credit and debit card processing fees. Cash used in operations also includes
payments  for  income  taxes.  The  increase  in  net  cash  provided  by  operating  activities  for  2017  when  compared  to  2016  was  primarily  due  to
accelerated vendor payments of approximately $1,700 made in the last week of fiscal 2016, in advance of implementing our modernized accounting
system.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $2,366 in 2017 , compared to $2,345 in 2016 . Cash flow used in investing activities is primarily related
to  funding  warehouse  expansion  and  remodeling. Net  cash  flows  from  investing  activities  also  includes  purchases  and  maturities  of  short-term
investments.
26

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Capital Expenditure Plans
Our primary requirement for capital is acquiring land, buildings, and equipment for new and remodeled warehouses. To a lesser extent, capital is
required  for  initial  warehouse  operations,  our  information  systems,  and  working  capital. We  opened 26 new  warehous es  and  relocated  2
warehouses in 2017 and plan to open up to 24 new warehouses and relocate up to six warehouses in 2018 . In 2017 we spent $2,502 on capital
expenditures, and it is our current intention to spend approximately $2,500 to $2,700 during fiscal 2018 . These expenditures are expected to be
financed  with  cash  from  operations,  existing  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  and  short-term  investments.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  current
expectations will be realized and plans are subject to change upon further review of our capital expenditure needs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities  totaled $3,218 in 2017 , compared to $2,419 in 2016 .  The primary  uses  of cash  in 2017 were related  to
dividend payments, predominantly the special dividend paid in May 2017, and the repayments of debt totaling $2,200 representing the aggregate
principal balances of the 5.5% and 1.125% Senior Notes. Net cash used in financing activities in 2016 includes a $1,200 repayment of our 0.65%
Senior Notes in December 2015.
In May 2017, we issued $3,800 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes. The proceeds received were net of a discount and used to pay the
special cash dividend and a portion of the redemption of the 1.125% Senior Notes.
Stock Repurchase Programs
During 2017 and 2016 , we repurchased 2,998,000 and 3,184,000 shares of common stock, at average prices of $157.87 and $149.90 , totaling
approximately $473 and $477 , respectively. The remaining amount available to be purchased under our approved plan was $2,749 at the end of
2017 . These amounts may differ from the stock repurchase balances in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows due to changes in
unsettled stock repurchases at the end of each fiscal year. Purchases are made from time-to-time, as conditions warrant, in the open market or in
block purchases and pursuant to plans under SEC Rule 10b5-1. Repurchased shares are retired, in accordance with the Washington Business
Corporation Act.
Dividends
Cash dividends paid in 2017 totaled $8.90 per share, which included a special cash dividend of $7.00 per share, as compared to $1.70 per share in
2016 . In April 2017 , our Board of Directors increased our quarterly cash dividend from $0.45 to $0.50 per share.
Bank Credit Facilities and Commercial Paper Programs
We maintain bank credit facilities for working capital and general corporate purposes. At September 3, 2017, we had borrowing capacity under these
facilities of $833, including a $400 revolving line of credit entered into by our U.S. operations in June 2017 with an expiration date of one year. The
Company currently has no plans to draw upon the new revolving line of credit. Our international operations maintain $349 of the total borrowing
capacity under bank credit facilities, of which $166 is guaranteed by the Company. There were no outstanding short-term borrowings under the bank
credit facilities at the end of 2017 and 2016.
The Company has letter of credit facilities, for commercial and standby letters of credit, totaling $181. The outstanding standby letters of credit under
these facilities at the end of 2017 totaled $103 and expire within one year. The bank credit facilities have various expiration dates, all within one
year, and we generally intend to renew these facilities prior to their expiration. The amount of borrowings available at any time under our bank credit
facilities is reduced by the amount of standby and commercial letters of credit then outstanding.
27

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Contractual Obligations
At September 3, 2017 , our commitments to make future payments under contractual obligations were as follows:  
 
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
Contractual obligations
2018
2019 to 2020
2021 to 2022
2023 and thereafter
Total
Purchase obligations (merchandise) (1)
$
8,029
$
6
$
—
$
—
$
8,035
Long-term debt (2)
230
2,060
2,588
2,650
7,528
Operating leases (3)  
216
429
345
2,123
3,113
Construction and land obligations
584
80
4
—
668
Capital lease obligations (4)
32
65
66
582
745
Purchase obligations (equipment, services
and other) (5)
541
117
42
—
700
Other (6)
38
17
13
72
140
Total
$
9,670
$
2,774
$
3,058
$
5,427
$
20,929
_______________
(1)
Includes only open merchandise purchase orders.
(2)
Includes contractual interest payments and excludes deferred issuance costs.
(3)
Operating lease obligations exclude amounts for common area maintenance, taxes, and insurance and have been reduced by $112 to reflect sub-lease income.
(4)
Includes build-to-suit lease obligations and contractual interest payments.
(5)
The  amounts  exclude  certain  services  negotiated  at  the  individual  warehouse  or  regional  level  that  are  not  significant  and  generally  contain  clauses  allowing  for
cancellation without significant penalty.
(6)
Includes asset retirement obligations, deferred compensation obligations and current liabilities for unrecognized tax contingencies. The total amount excludes $35 of
non-current unrecognized tax contingencies and $29 of other obligations due to uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the opinion of management, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or
future effect on our financial condition or financial statements other than operating leases, included in the table above and discussed in Note 1 and
Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires
that we make estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, merchandise inventory valuation, impairment of long-lived
assets, insurance/self-insurance liabilities, and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to
be reasonable, and we continue to review and evaluate these estimates. For further information on significant accounting policies, see discussion in
Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.
28

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Revenue Recognition
We generally recognize sales, which includes gross shipping fees where applicable, net of returns, at the time the member takes possession of
merchandise or receives services. When we collect payment from members prior to the transfer of ownership of merchandise or the performance of
services, the amount is generally recorded as deferred sales in the consolidated balance sheets until the sale or service is completed. We provide
for estimated sales returns based on historical trends and reduce sales and merchandise costs accordingly. Our sales returns reserve is based on
an estimate of the net realizable value of merchandise inventories to be returned. Amounts collected from members for sales and value added taxes
are recorded on a net basis.
We evaluate whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of merchandise sales and related costs or a net amount. Generally, when we are
the primary obligor, subject to inventory risk, have latitude in establishing prices and selecting suppliers, influence product or service specifications,
or have several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded on a gross basis. If we are not the primary obligor and do not possess other
indicators of gross reporting as noted above, we record a net amount, which is reflected in net sales.
We account for membership fee revenue, net of refunds, on a deferred basis, whereby revenue is recognized ratably over one year. Our Executive
members qualify for a 2% reward on qualified purchases (up to a maximum reward of approximately $1,000 per year in the U.S. and Canada and
varies in our Other International operations), which can be redeemed only at Costco warehouses. We account for this reward as a reduction in
sales.  The  sales  reduction  and  corresponding  liability  are  computed  after  giving  effect  to  the  estimated  impact  of  non-redemptions,  based  on
historical data.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. U.S. merchandise inventories are valued by the cost method of accounting, using
the last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis. The Company believes the LIFO method more fairly presents the results of operations by more closely matching
current costs with current revenues. The Company records an adjustment each quarter, if necessary, for the projected annual effect of inflation or
deflation, and these estimates are adjusted to actual results determined at year-end, after actual inflation rates and inventory levels for the year have
been determined. Canadian and Other International merchandise inventories are predominantly valued using the cost and retail inventory methods,
respectively, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis.
We provide for estimated inventory shrinkage between physical inventory counts as a percentage of net sales. The provision is adjusted to reflect
results of the actual physical inventory counts, which generally occur in the second and fourth quarters.
Inventory  cost,  where  appropriate,  is  reduced  by  estimates  of  vendor  rebates  when  earned  or  as  we  progress  toward  earning  those  rebates,
provided  they  are  probable  and  reasonably  estimable.  Other  consideration  received  from  vendors  is  generally  recorded  as  a  reduction  of
merchandise costs upon completion of contractual milestones, terms of agreement, or using other systematic approaches.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We  evaluate  our  long-lived  assets  for  impairment  on  an  annual  basis,  when  relocating  or  closing  a  facility,  or  when  events  or  changes  in
circumstances  occur  that  may  indicate  the  carrying  amount  may  not  be  fully  recoverable.  Our  judgments  are  based  on  existing  market  and
operational conditions. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment factors exist, requiring a downward adjustment of these assets to
their then-current fair value.
29

Table of Contents
Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (amounts in millions, except per share,
share, membership fee, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Insurance/Self-Insurance Liabilities
We  are  predominantly  self-insured,  with  insurance  coverage  for  certain  catastrophic  risks,  for  employee  health  care  benefits,  workers’
compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and inventory loss. We use different mechanisms
including a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and participate in a reinsurance program. Liabilities associated with the risks that we retain
are not discounted and are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors, severity factors and other actuarial
assumptions.  The  estimated  accruals  for  these  liabilities  could  be  significantly  affected  if  future  occurrences  and  claims  differ  from  these
assumptions and historical trends.
Income Taxes
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of
complex tax laws. Significant judgment also is required in assessing the timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items and the probability of
sustaining uncertain tax positions. The benefits associated with uncertain tax positions are recorded only after determining a more-likely-than-not
probability that the positions will withstand challenge from tax authorities. When facts and circumstances change, we reassess these positions and
record any changes in the consolidated financial statements as appropriate. Our cumulative foreign undistributed earnings, except the additional
portion of earnings in Canada, were considered indefinitely reinvested as of September 3, 2017 . These earnings would be subject to U.S. income
tax  if  we  changed  our  position  and  could  result  in  a  U.S.  deferred  tax  liability.  Although  we  have  historically  asserted  that  certain  non-U.S.
undistributed  earnings  will  be  permanently  reinvested,  we  may  repatriate  such  earnings  to  the  extent  we  can  do  so  without  an  adverse  tax
consequence.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for a detailed description of recent accounting pronouncements.
Item 7A—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk (amounts in millions)
Our  exposure  to  financial  market  risk  results  from  fluctuations  in  interest  rates  and  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  We  do  not  engage  in
speculative or leveraged transactions or hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes.
Interest Rate Risk
Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to our investment holdings that are diversified among various instruments
considered to be cash equivalents as defined in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, as well as short-
term  investments  in  government  and  agency  securities,  and  asset  and  mortgage-backed  securities  with  effective  maturities  of  generally  three
months to five years at the date of purchase. The primary objective of our investment activities is to preserve principal and secondarily to generate
yields. The majority of our short-term investments are in fixed interest rate securities. These securities are subject to changes in fair value due to
interest rate fluctuations.
Our policy limits investments in the U.S. to direct U.S. government and government agency obligations, repurchase agreements collateralized by
U.S.  government  and  government  agency  obligations,  and  U.S.  government  and  government  agency  money  market  funds.  Our  wholly-owned
captive insurance subsidiary invests in U.S. government and government agency obligations and U.S. government and government agency money
market funds. Our Canadian and Other International subsidiaries’ investments are primarily in money market funds, bankers’ acceptances, and bank
certificates of deposit, generally denominated in local currencies.
A  100  basis-point  change  in  interest  rates  as  of  the  end  of 2017 would  have  an  incremental  change  in  fair  market  value  of  $20.  For  those
investments that are classified as available-for-sale, the unrealized gains or
30

Table of Contents
Item 7A—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk (amounts in millions) (Continued)
losses related to fluctuations in market volatility and interest rates are reflected within stockholders’ equity in accumulated other comprehensive
income.
The nature and amount of our long-term debt may vary as a result of business requirements, market conditions, and other factors. As of the end of
2017 , the majority of our long-term debt has fixed interest rates and is carried at $6,632 . Fluctuations in interest rates may affect the fair value of
the fixed-rate debt. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for more information on our long-term debt.
Foreign Currency-Exchange Risk
Our foreign subsidiaries conduct certain transactions in their non-functional currencies, which exposes us to fluctuations in exchange rates. We
manage  these  fluctuations,  in  part,  through  the  use  of  forward  foreign-exchange  contracts,  seeking  to  economically  hedge  the  impact  of  these
fluctuations on known future expenditures denominated in a non-functional foreign-currency. The contracts are intended primarily to economically
hedge exposure to U.S. dollar merchandise inventory expenditures made by our international subsidiaries whose functional currency is other than
the U.S. dollar. Currently, these contracts do not qualify for derivative hedge accounting. We seek to mitigate risk with the use of these contracts and
do not intend to engage in speculative transactions. These contracts do not contain any credit-risk-related contingent features.
We seek to manage counterparty risk associated with these contracts by limiting transactions to counterparties with which we have established
banking relationships. There can be no assurance that this practice is effective. These contracts are limited to less than one year. See Note 1 and
Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for additional information on the fair value of unsettled forward
foreign-exchange  contracts  at  the  end  of 2017 and 2016 .  A  hypothetical  10%  strengthening  of  the  functional  currency  compared  to  the  non-
functional currency exchange rates at September 3, 2017 would have decreased the fair value of the contracts by $69 and resulted in an unrealized
loss in the consolidated statements of income for the same amount.
Commodity Price Risk
We are exposed to fluctuations in prices for energy that we consume, particularly electricity and natural gas, which we seek to partially mitigate
through fixed-price contracts for certain of our warehouses and other facilities, predominantly in the U.S. and Canada. We also enter into variable-
priced contracts for some purchases of electricity and natural gas, in addition to fuel for our gas stations, on an index basis. These contracts meet
the characteristics of derivative instruments, but generally qualify for the “normal purchases or normal sales” exception under authoritative guidance
and require no mark-to-market adjustment.
31

Table of Contents
Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following documents are filed as part of Item 8 of this Report on the pages listed below:
 
Page
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
39
Consolidated Balance Sheets, as of September 3, 2017 and August 28, 2016
41
Consolidated Statements of Income, for the 53 weeks ended September 3, 2017 and 52 weeks ended August 28, 2016 and August
30, 2015
42
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income, for the 53 weeks ended September 3, 2017 and 52 weeks ended August 28,
2016 and August 30, 2015
43
Consolidated Statements of Equity, for the 53 weeks ended September 3, 2017 and 52 weeks ended August 28, 2016 and August
30, 2015
44
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, for the 53 weeks ended September 3, 2017 and 52 weeks ended August 28, 2016 and
August 30, 2015
45
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
46
Management’s Report on the Consolidated Financial Statements
Costco’s management is responsible for the preparation, integrity and objectivity of the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the
related  financial  information.  The  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting
principles (U.S. GAAP) and necessarily include certain amounts that are based on estimates and informed judgments. The Company’s management
is  also  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  the  related  financial  information  included  in  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  and  its  accuracy  and
consistency with the consolidated financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements have been audited by KPMG LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, who conducted their
audit  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States).  The  independent  registered  public
accounting firm’s responsibility is to express an opinion as to the fairness with which such consolidated financial statements present our financial
position, results of operations and cash flows in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Item 9—Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A—Controls and Procedures
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As  of  the  end  of  the  period  covered  by  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  we  performed  an  evaluation  under  the  supervision  and  with  the
participation of management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in  Rules  13a-15(e)  or  15d-15(e)  under  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Act  of  1934  (the  Exchange  Act)).  Based  upon  that  evaluation,  our  Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report, our disclosure controls and
procedures are effective.
There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) or 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act) during our
fiscal quarter ended September 3, 2017 , that has materially affected or is reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial
reporting.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under
the Exchange Act. Our internal control over financial reporting
32

Table of Contents
Item 9A—Controls and Procedures (Continued)
is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes  in  accordance  with  U.S.  GAAP  and  includes  those  policies  and  procedures  that:  (1)  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that  in
reasonable  detail  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  our  transactions  and  the  dispositions  of  our  assets;  (2)  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  our
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
and that our receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with appropriate authorizations; and (3) provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on our financial
statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Therefore, even those systems
determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation and presentation.
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, we assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as
of September 3, 2017 , using the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal
Control—Integrated Framework (2013). Based on its assessment, management has concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was
effective as of September 3, 2017 . The attestation of KPMG LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, on the effectiveness of our
internal control over financial reporting is included with the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.
/s/    W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
/s/    R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and
Director
Item 9B—Other Information
None.
PART III
Item 10—Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Information relating to the availability of our code of ethics for senior financial officers and a list of our executive officers appear in Part I, Item 1 of
this Report. The information required by this Item concerning our directors and nominees for director is incorporated herein by reference to the
sections  entitled  “Proposal  1:  Election  of  Directors,”  “Directors,”  “Committees  of  the  Board”  and  “Section  16(a)  Beneficial  Ownership  Reporting
Compliance” in Costco’s Proxy Statement for its 2018 annual meeting of stockholders, which will be filed with the SEC within 120 days of the end of
our fiscal year (“Proxy Statement”).
Item 11—Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  this  Item  is  incorporated  herein  by  reference  to  the  sections  entitled  “Compensation  of  Directors,”  “Executive
Compensation,” and “Compensation Discussion and Analysis” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
33

Table of Contents
Item 12—Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the section entitled “Principal Shareholders” and “Equity Compensation
Plan Information” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 13—Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the sections entitled “Proposal 1: Election of Directors,” “Directors,”
“Committees of the Board,” “Shareholder Communications to the Board,” “Meeting Attendance,” “Report of the Compensation Committee of the
Board of Directors,” “Certain Relationships and Transactions” and “Report of the Audit Committee” in Costco’s Proxy Statement.
Item 14—Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the sections entitled “Independent Public Accountants” in Costco’s Proxy
Statement.
PART IV
Item 15—Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a)
Documents filed as part of this report are as follows:
1.
Financial Statements:
See the listing of Financial Statements included as a part of this Form 10-K in Item 8 of Part II.
2. 
Financial Statement Schedules:
All schedules have been omitted because the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require
submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements, including the
notes thereto.
(b)
Exhibits: The required exhibits are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K or are incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed
Herewith
Form
Period Ending
Filing Date
3.1
Articles of Incorporation as amended of Costco
Wholesale  Corporation
10-Q
2/15/2015
3/11/2015
3.2
Bylaws as amended of Costco Wholesale
Corporation
8-K
9/30/2016
4.1
Form of 2.150% Senior Notes due May 18, 2021
8-K
5/16/2017
4.2
Form of 2.300% Senior Notes due May 18, 2022
8-K
5/16/2017
4.3
Form of 2.750% Senior Notes due May 18, 2024
8-K
5/16/2017
4.4
Form of 3.000% Senior Notes due May 18, 2027
8-K
5/16/2017
34

Table of Contents
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed
Herewith
Form
Period Ending
Filing Date
10.1*
Costco Wholesale Executive Health Plan
10-K
9/2/2012
10/19/2012
10.1.2*
Fifth Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
10-Q
2/14/2010
3/17/2010
10.1.3*
Sixth Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
8-K
1/31/2012
10.1.4*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
DEF 14A
12/19/2014
10.1.5*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement-U.S.
Employee
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.1.6*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement-Non-U.S.
Employee
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.1.7*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement-Non-
Executive Director
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.1.8*
Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan
Letter Agreement for 2016 Performance-Based
Restricted Stock Units-Executive
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
10.1.9*
Amendment to Executive Employment
Agreement, dated July 21, 2016, between W.
Craig Jelinek and Costco Wholesale Corporation
10-K
8/28/2016
10/12/2016
10.1.10*
Executive Employment Agreement, dated August
31, 2015, between Costco Wholesale Corporation
and W. Craig Jelinek
10-K
8/30/2015
10/14/2015
10.1.11*
Executive Employment Agreement, effective
January 1, 2017, between W. Craig Jelinek and
Costco Wholesale Corporation
10-Q
11/20/2016
12/16/2016
10.2*
Form of Indemnification Agreement
14A
12/13/1999
10.4*
Deferred Compensation Plan
10-K
9/1/2013
10/16/2013
10.5**
Citibank, N.A. Co-Branded Credit Card
Agreement
10-Q/A
5/10/2015
8/31/2015
10.5.1**
First Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded Credit
Card Agreement
10-Q
11/22/2015
12/17/2015
35

Table of Contents
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Filed
Herewith
Form
Period Ending
Filing Date
10.5.2**
Second Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded
Credit Card Agreement
10-Q
2/14/2016
3/9/2016
10.5.3**
Third Amendment to Citi, N.A. Co-Branded Credit
Card Agreement
10-K
8/28/2016
10/12/2016
10.7*
Fiscal 2017 Executive Bonus Plan
8-K
11/3/2016
21.1
Subsidiaries of the Company
x
23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public
Accounting Firm
x
31.1
Rule 13a – 14(a) Certifications
x
32.1
Section 1350 Certifications
x
101.INS
XBRL Instance Document
x
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
x
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase
Document
x
101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase
Document
x
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase
Document
x
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation
Linkbase Document
x
 _____________________
* Management contract, compensatory plan or arrangement.
** Portions of this exhibit have been omitted under a confidential treatment order issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(c)
Financial Statement Schedules—None.
Item 16—Form 10-K Summary
None.
36

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
October 17, 2017
C OSTCO  W HOLESALE  C ORPORATION
(Registrant)
By
/s/ R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
By
 
/s/ W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
 
By
 
/s/ H AMILTON  E. J AMES
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Hamilton E. James
Chairman of the Board
 
 
By
 
/s/ R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and
Director ( Principal Financial Officer )
 
 
By
 
/s/ D ANIEL  M. H INES
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Daniel M. Hines
Senior Vice President and Corporate Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
 
By
 
/s/ S USAN  L. D ECKER
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Susan L. Decker
Director
 
 
By
/s/ K ENNETH D . D ENMAN
October 17, 2017
Kenneth D. Denman 
Director
By
 
/s/ D ANIEL  J. E VANS
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Daniel J. Evans
Director
 
 
37

Table of Contents
By
 
/s/ J OHN  W. M EISENBACH
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
John W. Meisenbach
Director
 
 
By
 
/s/ C HARLES  T. M UNGER
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Charles T. Munger
Director
 
 
By
 
/S/ J EFFREY  S. R AIKES
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
Jeffrey S. Raikes
Director
 
 
By
 
/S/ J AMES  D. S INGEGAL
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
James D. Sinegal
Director
 
 
By
 
/S/ J OHN  W. S TANTON
 
 
October 17, 2017
 
John W. Stanton
Director
 
 
By
/S/ M AGGIE  W ILDEROTTER
October 17, 2017
Maggie Wilderotter 
Director
38

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Costco Wholesale Corporation as of September 3, 2017 and August 28, 2016 ,
and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  income,  comprehensive  income,  equity,  and  cash  flows  for  each  of  the  53-week  period  ended
September  3,  2017 and  the  52-week  periods  ended August  28,  2016 and August  30,  2015 .  These  consolidated  financial  statements  are  the
responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our
audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes
assessing  the  accounting  principles  used  and significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  financial  statement
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of  Costco
Wholesale Corporation and subsidiaries as of September 3, 2017 and August 28, 2016 , and the results of their operations and their cash flows for
the  53-week  period  ended September  3,  2017 ,  and  the  52-week  periods  ended August  28,  2016 and August  30,  2015 ,  in  conformity  with
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), Costco Wholesale
Corporation’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of September  3,  2017 ,  based  on  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  —  Integrated
Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), and our report dated October 17,
2017 expressed an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 17, 2017
39

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
We  have  audited  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation’s  (the  Company)  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of September  3,  2017 ,  based  on
criteria  established  in Internal  Control  —  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission  (COSO).  The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal
Control over Financial Reporting included in Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards
require  that  we plan and perform  the audit to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about whether  effective  internal  control  over financial  reporting  was
maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that
a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our
audit  also  included  performing  such  other  procedures  as  we  considered  necessary  in  the  circumstances.  We  believe  that  our  audit  provides  a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of September 3, 2017 , based
on  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  —  Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission (2013).
We  also  have  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States),  the  consolidated
balance sheets of the Company as of September 3, 2017 and August 28, 2016 , and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive
income, equity, and cash flows for the 53-week period ended September 3, 2017 , and the 52-week periods ended August 28, 2016 and August 30,
2015 , and our report dated October 17, 2017 expressed an unqualified opinion on those consolidated financial statements.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 17, 2017
40

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(amounts in millions, except par value and share data)
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
$
4,546
$
3,379
Short-term investments
1,233
1,350
Receivables, net
1,432
1,252
Merchandise inventories
9,834
8,969
Other current assets
272
268
Total current assets
17,317
15,218
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Land
5,690
5,395
Buildings and improvements
15,127
13,994
Equipment and fixtures
6,681
6,077
Construction in progress
843
701
28,341
26,167
Less accumulated depreciation and amortization
(10,180)
(9,124)
Net property and equipment
18,161
17,043
OTHER ASSETS
869
902
TOTAL ASSETS
$
36,347
$
33,163
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
$
9,608
$
7,612
Current portion of long-term debt
86
1,100
Accrued salaries and benefits
2,703
2,629
Accrued member rewards
961
869
Deferred membership fees
1,498
1,362
Other current liabilities
2,639
2,003
Total current liabilities
17,495
15,575
LONG-TERM DEBT, excluding current portion
6,573
4,061
OTHER LIABILITIES
1,200
1,195
Total liabilities
25,268
20,831
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
EQUITY
Preferred stock $.01 par value; 100,000,000 shares authorized; no shares issued and outstanding
0
0
Common stock $.01 par value; 900,000,000 shares authorized; 437,204,000 and 437,524,000 shares
issued and outstanding
4
2
Additional paid-in capital
5,800
5,490
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(1,014)
(1,099)
Retained earnings
5,988
7,686
Total Costco stockholders’ equity
10,778
12,079
Noncontrolling interests
301
253
Total equity
11,079
12,332
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
$
36,347
$
33,163
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
41

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(amounts in millions, except per share data)
 
53 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
August 30, 
2015
REVENUE
Net sales
$
126,172
$
116,073
$
113,666
Membership fees
2,853
2,646
2,533
Total revenue
129,025
118,719
116,199
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
111,882
102,901
101,065
Selling, general and administrative
12,950
12,068
11,445
Preopening expenses
82
78
65
Operating income
4,111
3,672
3,624
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(134)
(133)
(124)
Interest income and other, net
62
80
104
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
4,039
3,619
3,604
Provision for income taxes
1,325
1,243
1,195
Net income including noncontrolling interests
2,714
2,376
2,409
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(35)
(26)
(32)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
2,679
$
2,350
$
2,377
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE ATTRIBUTABLE TO
COSTCO:
Basic
$
6.11
$
5.36
$
5.41
Diluted
$
6.08
$
5.33
$
5.37
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
438,437
438,585
439,455
Diluted
440,937
441,263
442,716
CASH DIVIDENDS DECLARED PER COMMON SHARE
$
8.90
$
1.70
$
6.51
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
42

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(amounts in millions)
 
53 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
 
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
August 30, 
2015
NET INCOME INCLUDING NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS
$
2,714
$
2,376
$
2,409
Foreign-currency translation adjustment and other, net
98
26
(1,063)
Comprehensive income
2,812
2,402
1,346
Less: Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests
48
30
14
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
2,764
$
2,372
$
1,332
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
43

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
(amounts in millions)
 
Common Stock
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
Retained
Earnings
Total Costco
Stockholders’
Equity
Noncontrolling
Interests
Total
Equity
 
Shares
(000’s)
Amount
BALANCE AT AUGUST 31,
2014
437,683
$
2
$
4,919
$
(76)
$
7,458
$
12,303
$
212
$12,515
Net income
—
—
—
—
2,377
2,377
32
2,409
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
—
—
—
(1,045)
—
(1,045)
(18)
(1,063)
Stock-based compensation
—
—
394
—
—
394
—
394
Stock options exercised,
including tax effects
989
—
69
—
—
69
—
69
Release of vested restricted
stock units (RSUs),
including tax effects
2,736
—
(122)
—
—
(122)
—
(122)
Repurchases of common
stock
(3,456)
—
(42)
—
(452)
(494)
—
(494)
Cash dividends declared
and other
—
—
—
—
(2,865)
(2,865)
—
(2,865)
BALANCE AT AUGUST 30,
2015
437,952
2
5,218
(1,121)
6,518
10,617
226
10,843
Net income
—
—
—
—
2,350
2,350
26
2,376
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
—
—
—
22
—
22
4
26
Stock-based compensation
—
—
459
—
—
459
—
459
Stock options exercised,
including tax effects
4
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Release of vested RSUs,
including tax effects
2,749
—
(146)
—
—
(146)
—
(146)
Conversion of convertible
notes
3
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Repurchases of common
stock
(3,184)
—
(41)
—
(436)
(477)
—
(477)
Cash dividends declared
and other
—
—
—
—
(746)
(746)
(3)
(749)
BALANCE AT AUGUST 28,
2016
437,524
2
5,490
(1,099)
7,686
12,079
253
12,332
Net income
—
—
—
—
2,679
2,679
35
2,714
Foreign-currency translation
adjustment and other, net
—
—
—
85
—
85
13
98
Stock-based compensation
—
—
518
—
—
518
—
518
Release of vested RSUs,
including tax effects
2,673
—
(165)
—
—
(165)
—
(165)
Conversion of convertible
notes
5
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Repurchases of common
stock
(2,998)
—
(41)
—
(432)
(473)
—
(473)
Cash dividends declared
and other
—
2
(2)
—
(3,945)
(3,945)
—
(3,945)
BALANCE AT
SEPTEMBER 3, 2017
437,204
$
4
$
5,800
$
(1,014)
$
5,988
$
10,778
$
301
$11,079
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
44

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(amounts in millions)
53 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
52 Weeks Ended
September 3, 
2017
August 28, 
2016
August 30, 
2015
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net income including noncontrolling interests
$
2,714
$
2,376
$
2,409
Adjustments to reconcile net income including noncontrolling interests to net cash provided by
operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
1,370
1,255
1,127
Stock-based compensation
514
459
394
Excess tax benefits on stock-based awards
(38)
(74)
(86)
Other non-cash operating activities, net
24
17
(5)
Deferred income taxes
(29)
269
(101)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Merchandise inventories
(894)
(25)
(890)
Accounts payable
2,258
(1,532)
880
Other operating assets and liabilities, net
807
547
557
Net cash provided by operating activities
6,726
3,292
4,285
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Purchases of short-term investments
(1,279)
(1,432)
(1,501)
Maturities and sales of short-term investments
1,385
1,709
1,434
Additions to property and equipment
(2,502)
(2,649)
(2,393)
Other investing activities, net
30
27
(20)
Net cash used in investing activities
(2,366)
(2,345)
(2,480)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Change in bank checks outstanding
(236)
81
(45)
Repayments of short-term borrowings
0
(106)
(51)
Proceeds from short-term borrowings
0
106
51
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
3,782
185
1,125
Repayments of long-term debt
(2,200)
(1,288)
(1)
Minimum tax withholdings on stock-based awards
(202)
(220)
(178)
Excess tax benefits on stock-based awards
38
74
86
Repurchases of common stock
(469)
(486)
(481)
Cash dividend payments
(3,904)
(746)
(2,865)
Other financing activities, net
(27)
(19)
35
Net cash used in financing activities
(3,218)
(2,419)
(2,324)
EFFECT OF EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES ON CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
25
50
(418)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
1,167
(1,422)
(937)
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS BEGINNING OF YEAR
3,379
4,801
5,738
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS END OF YEAR
$
4,546
$
3,379
$
4,801
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION:
Cash paid during the year for:
Interest (reduced by $16, $19, and $14, interest capitalized in 2017, 2016, and 2015,
respectively)
$
131
$
123
$
117
Income taxes, net
$
1,185
$
953
$
1,186
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE OF NON-CASH INVESTING AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES:
Property acquired under build-to-suit and capital leases
$
17
$
15
$
109
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
45


Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business
Costco Wholesale Corporation (Costco or the Company), a Washington corporation, and its subsidiaries operate membership warehouses based on
the concept that offering members low prices on a limited selection of nationally-branded and private-label products in a wide range of merchandise
categories will produce high sales volumes and rapid inventory turnover. At September 3, 2017 , Costco operated 741 warehouses worldwide: 514
United States (U.S.) locations (in 44 U.S. states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico), 97 Canada locations, 37 Mexico locations, 28 United Kingdom
(U.K.) locations, 26 Japan locations, 13 Korea locations, 13 Taiwan locations, nine Australia locations, two Spain locations, one Iceland location, and
one France location. The Company operates its e-commerce websites in all countries except Japan, Australia, Spain, Iceland, and France.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements  include the accounts of Costco Wholesale Corporation, its wholly-owned subsidiaries, and subsidiaries in
which it has a controlling interest. The Company reports noncontrolling interests in consolidated entities as a component of equity separate from the
Company’s  equity.  All  material  inter-company  transactions  between  and  among  the  Company  and  its  consolidated  subsidiaries  have  been
eliminated  in  consolidation.  The  Company’s  net  income  excludes  income  attributable  to  noncontrolling  interests  in  its  operations  in  Taiwan  and
Korea. Unless otherwise noted, references to net income relate to net income attributable to Costco.
Fiscal Year End
The Company operates on a 52/53 week fiscal year basis with the fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to August 31. References to 2017 relate
to the 53 -week fiscal year ended September 3, 2017 . References to 2016 and 2015 relate to the 52-week fiscal years ended August 28, 2016 , and
August 30, 2015 , respectively.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those
estimates and assumptions.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers as cash and cash equivalents all cash on deposit, highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at the
date  of  purchase,  and  proceeds  due  from  credit  and  debit  card  transactions  with  settlement  terms  of  up  to  four  days.  Credit  and  debit  card
receivables were $ 1,255 and $ 1,071 at the end of 2017 and 2016 , respectively.
The Company provides for the daily replenishment of major bank accounts as checks are presented. Included in accounts payable at the end of
2017 and 2016 are $ 383 and $ 619 , respectively, representing the excess of outstanding checks over cash on deposit at the banks on which the
checks  were  drawn.  The  Company  accelerated  vendor  payments  of  approximately  $ 1,700 in  the  last  week  of  fiscal  2016  in  advance  of
implementing its modernized accounting system in fiscal 2017.
46

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Short-Term Investments
In general, short-term investments have a maturity at the date of purchase of three months to five years. Investments with maturities beyond five
years may be classified, based on the Company’s determination, as short-term based on their highly liquid nature and because they represent the
investment of cash that is available for current operations. Short-term investments classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value using the
specific  identification  method  with  the  unrealized  gains  and  losses  reflected  in  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (loss)  until  realized.
Realized gains and losses from the sale of available-for-sale securities, if any, are determined on a specific identification basis and are recorded in
interest  income  and  other,  net  in  the  consolidated  statements  of  income.  Short-term  investments  classified  as  held-to-maturity  are  financial
instruments that the Company has the intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported net of any related amortization and are not remeasured
to fair value on a recurring basis.
The Company periodically evaluates unrealized losses in its investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment, using both qualitative and
quantitative criteria. In the event a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, the Company recognizes the loss in interest income
and other, net in the consolidated statements of income.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company accounts for certain assets and liabilities at fair value. The carrying value of the Company’s financial instruments, including cash and
cash equivalents, receivables and accounts payable, approximate fair value due to their short-term nature or variable interest rates. See Notes 2, 3,
and 4 for the carrying value and fair value of the Company’s investments, derivative instruments, and fixed-rate debt, respectively.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market
participants at the measurement date. Fair value is estimated by applying a fair value hierarchy, which requires maximizing the use of observable
inputs when measuring fair value. The three levels of inputs are:
Level 1: Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market
data.
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data.
The Company’s valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of money market mutual funds are based on quoted market prices, such as
quoted net asset values published by the fund as supported in an active market. Valuation methodologies used to measure the fair value of all other
non-derivative  financial  instruments  are  based  on  independent  external  valuation  information.  The  pricing  process  uses  data  from  a  variety  of
independent external valuation information providers, including trades, bid price or spread, two-sided markets, quotes, benchmark curves including
but not limited to treasury benchmarks and Libor and swap curves, discount rates, and market data feeds. All are observable in the market or can be
derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data. The Company reports transfers in and out of Levels 1, 2, and 3, as applicable,
using the fair value of the individual securities as of the beginning of the reporting period in which the transfer(s) occurred.
Current financial liabilities have fair values that approximate their carrying values. Long-term financial liabilities include the Company's long-term
debt, which are recorded on the balance sheet at issuance price and adjusted for unamortized discounts or premiums and debt issuance costs,
which are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the loan. The estimated fair value of the Company's long-term debt is based primarily
on reported market values, recently completed market transactions, and estimates based upon interest rates, maturities, and credit.
47

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Receivables, Net
Receivables consist primarily of vendor, reinsurance, credit card incentive, third-party pharmacy and other receivables. Vendor receivables include
coupons, volume rebates or other purchase discounts. Balances are generally presented on a gross basis, separate from any related payable due.
In certain circumstances, these receivables may be settled against the related payable to that vendor, in which case the receivables are presented
on a net basis. Reinsurance receivables are held by the Company’s wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary and primarily represent amounts
ceded through reinsurance arrangements gross of the amounts assumed under reinsurance, which are presented within other current liabilities in
the  consolidated  balance  sheets.  Credit  card  incentive  receivables  primarily  represent  amounts  earned  under  the  co-branded  credit  card
arrangement in the U.S. Third-party pharmacy receivables generally relate to amounts due from members’ insurance companies. Other receivables
primarily consist of amounts due from governmental entities, mostly tax-related items.
Receivables are recorded net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance is based on historical experience and application of the specific
identification method. Write-offs of receivables were immaterial for fiscal years 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 .
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories consist of the following at the end of 2017 and 2016 :
2017
2016
United States
$
7,091
$
6,422
Canada
1,040
1,015
Other International
1,703
1,532
Merchandise inventories
$
9,834
$
8,969
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. U.S. merchandise inventories are valued by the cost method of accounting, using
the last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis. The Company believes the LIFO method more fairly presents the results of operations by more closely matching
current costs with current revenues. The Company records an adjustment each quarter, if necessary, for the projected annual effect of inflation or
deflation, and these estimates are adjusted to actual results determined at year-end, after actual inflation or deflation rates and inventory levels for
the  year  have  been  determined.  Canadian  and  Other  International  merchandise  inventories  are  predominantly  valued  using  the  cost  and  retail
inventory methods, respectively, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis.
As of September 3, 2017, U.S. merchandise inventories valued at LIFO approximated FIFO after considering the lower of cost or market principle.
Due to net deflation, a benefit of $64 and $27 was recorded to merchandise costs in 2016 , and 2015 , respectively. At the end of 2017 and 2016,
the cumulative impact of the LIFO valuation on merchandise inventories was zero and immaterial, respectively.
The Company provides for estimated inventory losses between physical inventory counts as a percentage of net sales, using estimates based on
the Company’s experience. The provision is adjusted periodically to reflect actual physical inventory counts, which generally occur in the second and
fourth fiscal quarters. Inventory cost, where appropriate, is reduced by estimates of vendor rebates when earned or as the Company progresses
towards earning those rebates, provided that they are probable and reasonably estimable.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost. In general, new building additions are classified into components, each with its own estimated useful life,
generally five to fifty years for buildings and improvements and three to twenty years for equipment and fixtures. Depreciation and amortization
expense is computed using the
48

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
straight-line method over estimated useful lives or the lease term, if shorter. Leasehold improvements made after the beginning of the initial lease
term are depreciated over the shorter of the estimated useful life of the asset or the remaining term of the initial lease plus any renewals that are
reasonably assured at the date the leasehold improvements are made.
The Company capitalizes  certain  computer  software  and software  development  costs  incurred  in developing or obtaining  computer  software  for
internal  use.  These  costs  are  included  in  equipment  and  fixtures  and  amortized  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  estimated  useful  lives  of  the
software, generally three to seven years.
Repair and maintenance costs are expensed when incurred. Expenditures for remodels, refurbishments and improvements that add to or change
the  way  an  asset  functions  or  that  extend  the  useful  life  are  capitalized.  Assets  that  were  removed  during  the  remodel,  refurbishment  or
improvement are retired. Assets classified as held-for-sale at the end of 2017 and 2016 were immaterial.
The Company evaluates long-lived assets for impairment on an annual basis, when relocating or closing a facility, or when events or changes in
circumstances may indicate the carrying amount of the asset group, generally an individual warehouse, may not be fully recoverable. For asset
groups held and used, including warehouses to be relocated, the carrying value of the asset group is considered recoverable when the estimated
future undiscounted cash flows generated from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group exceed the respective carrying value. In the
event that the carrying value is not considered recoverable, an impairment loss would be recognized for the asset group to be held and used equal
to the excess of the carrying value above the estimated fair value of the asset group. For asset groups classified as held-for-sale (disposal group),
the carrying value is compared to the disposal group’s fair value less costs to sell. The Company estimates fair value by obtaining market appraisals
from third party brokers or using other valuation techniques. There were no impairment charges recognized in 2017 and 2016 , and charges were
immaterial in 2015 and included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of income.
Insurance/Self-Insurance Liabilities
The  Company  is  predominantly  self-insured,  with  insurance  coverage  for  certain  catastrophic  risks,  for  employee  health  care  benefits,  workers’
compensation, general liability, property damage, directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and inventory loss. We use different mechanisms
including a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary (the captive) and participate in a reinsurance program. Liabilities associated with the risks
that are retained by the Company are not discounted and are estimated, in part, by considering historical claims experience, demographic factors,
severity factors, and other actuarial assumptions. The estimated accruals for these liabilities could be significantly affected if future occurrences and
claims differ from these assumptions and historical trends. At the end of 2017 and 2016 , these insurance liabilities were $ 1,059 and $ 1,021 in the
aggregate, respectively, and were included in accrued salaries and benefits and other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets, classified
based on their nature.
The captive receives direct premiums, which are netted against the Company’s premium costs in selling, general and administrative expenses, in
the  consolidated  statements  of  income.  The  captive  participates  in  a  reinsurance  program  that  includes  other  third-party  participants.  The
reinsurance agreement is one year in duration, and new agreements are entered into by each participant at their discretion at the commencement of
the next calendar year. The participant agreements and practices of the reinsurance program limit a participating members’ individual risk. Income
statement adjustments related to the reinsurance program and related impacts to the consolidated balance sheets are recognized as information
becomes  known.  In  the  event  the  Company  leaves  the  reinsurance  program,  the  Company  is  not  relieved  of  its  primary  obligation  to  the
policyholders for activity prior to the termination of the annual agreement.
49

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Derivatives
The Company is exposed to foreign-currency exchange-rate fluctuations in the normal course of business. It manages these fluctuations, in part,
through the use of forward foreign-exchange contracts, seeking to economically hedge the impact of fluctuations of foreign exchange on known
future  expenditures  denominated  in  a  non-functional  foreign-currency.  The  contracts  relate  primarily  to  U.S.  dollar  merchandise  inventory
expenditures made by the Company’s international subsidiaries with functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Currently, these contracts do
not qualify for derivative hedge accounting. The Company seeks to mitigate risk with the use of these contracts and does not intend to engage in
speculative  transactions.  These  contracts  do  not  contain  any  credit-risk-related  contingent  features.  The  aggregate  notional  amounts  of  open,
unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts were $ 637 and $ 572 at the end of 2017 and 2016 , respectively. The Company seeks to manage
counterparty risk associated with these contracts by limiting transactions to counterparties with which the Company has an established banking
relationship. There can be no assurance that this practice is effective. The contracts are limited to less than one year in duration. See Note 3 for
information on the fair value of unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts at the end of 2017 and 2016 .
The unrealized gains or losses recognized in interest income and other, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of income relating to the
net changes in the fair value of unsettled forward foreign-exchange contracts were immaterial in 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 .
The Company is exposed to fluctuations  in prices  for  the energy it consumes,  particularly  electricity  and natural gas, which it seeks to partially
mitigate through the use of fixed-price contracts for certain of its warehouses and other facilities, primarily in the U.S. and Canada. The Company
also  enters  into  variable-priced  contracts  for  some  purchases  of  natural  gas,  in  addition  to  fuel  for  its  gas  stations,  on  an  index  basis.  These
contracts  meet  the  characteristics  of  derivative  instruments,  but  generally  qualify  for  the  “normal  purchases  or  normal  sales”  exception  under
authoritative guidance and require no mark-to-market adjustment.
Foreign Currency
The functional currencies of the Company’s international subsidiaries are the local currency of the country in which the subsidiary is located. Assets
and liabilities recorded in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate on the balance sheet date. Translation adjustments are recorded in
accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss.  Revenues  and  expenses  of  the  Company’s  consolidated  foreign  operations  are  translated  at  average
exchange rates prevailing during the year.
The Company recognizes foreign-currency transaction gains and losses related to revaluing or settling monetary assets and liabilities denominated
in currencies other than the functional currency in interest income and other, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. Generally,
these  include  the  U.S.  dollar  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  the  U.S.  dollar  payables  of  consolidated  subsidiaries  revalued  to  their  functional
currency. Also included are realized foreign-currency gains or losses from settlements of forward foreign-exchange contracts. These items were
immaterial for 2017 and resulted in net gains of $38 , and $35 for 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Revenue Recognition
The  Company  generally  recognizes  sales,  which  include  gross  shipping  fees  where  applicable,  net  of  returns,  at  the  time  the  member  takes
possession  of  merchandise  or  receives  services.  When  the  Company  collects  payments  from  members  prior  to  the  transfer  of  ownership  of
merchandise or the performance of services, the amounts received are generally recorded as deferred sales, included in other current liabilities in
the  consolidated  balance  sheets,  until  the  sale  or  service  is  completed.  The  Company  reserves  for  estimated  sales  returns  based  on  historical
trends in merchandise returns and reduces sales and merchandise costs accordingly. The sales returns reserve is based on an estimate of the net
realizable value of merchandise
50

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
inventories excepted to be returned. Amounts collected from members for sales or value added taxes are recorded on a net basis.
Generally, when Costco is the primary obligor, is subject to inventory risk, has latitude in establishing prices and selecting suppliers, can influence
product or service specifications, or has several but not all of these indicators, revenue is recorded on a gross basis. If the Company is not the
primary obligor and does not possess other indicators of gross reporting as noted above, it records the net amounts earned, which is reflected in net
sales.
The  Company  accounts  for  membership  fee  revenue,  net  of  refunds,  on  a  deferred  basis,  ratably  over  the  one-year  membership  period.  The
Company's Executive members qualify for a 2% reward on qualified purchases (up to a maximum reward of approximately $ 1,000 per year), which
can  be  redeemed  only  at  Costco  warehouses.  The  Company  accounts  for  this  reward  as  a  reduction  in  sales.  The  sales  reduction  and
corresponding liability (classified as accrued member rewards in the consolidated balance sheets) are computed after giving effect to the estimated
impact of non-redemptions, based on historical data. The net reduction in sales was $ 1,281 , $ 1,172 , and $ 1,128 in 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 ,
respectively.
Merchandise Costs
Merchandise costs consist of the purchase price of inventory sold, inbound and outbound shipping charges and all costs related to the Company’s
depot operations, including freight from depots to selling warehouses, and are reduced by vendor consideration. Merchandise costs also include
salaries, benefits, depreciation, and utilities in fresh foods and certain ancillary departments.
Vendor Consideration
The Company has agreements  to receive funds from vendors for coupons and a variety of other programs.  These programs are evidenced by
signed agreements that are reflected in the carrying value of the inventory when earned or as the Company progresses towards earning the rebate
or discount, and as a component of merchandise costs as the merchandise is sold. Other vendor consideration is generally recorded as a reduction
of merchandise costs upon completion of contractual milestones, terms of the related agreement, or by another systematic approach.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses  consist  primarily  of  salaries,  benefits  and  workers’  compensation  costs  for  warehouse  employees
(other than fresh foods departments and certain ancillary businesses) as well as all regional and home office employees, including buying personnel.
Selling, general and administrative expenses also include substantially all building and equipment depreciation, credit and debit card processing
fees, utilities, and stock-based compensation expense, as well as other operating costs incurred to support warehouse operations.
Retirement Plans
The Company's 401(k) Retirement Plan is available to all U.S. employees who have completed 90 days of employment. The plan allows pre-tax
deferrals, a portion of which the Company matches. In addition, the Company provides each eligible participant an annual discretionary contribution.
The  Company  also  has  a  defined  contribution  plan  for  Canadian  employees  and  contributes  a  percentage  of  each  employee's  salary.  Certain
subsidiaries in the Company's Other International operations have defined benefit and defined contribution plans that are not material. Amounts
expensed  under  all  plans  were $543 , $489 ,  and $454 for 2017 , 2016 ,  and 2015 ,  respectively,  and  are  included  in  selling,  general  and
administrative expenses and merchandise costs in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
51

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Stock-Based Compensation
Restricted stock units (RSUs) granted to employees generally vest over five years and allow for quarterly vesting of the pro-rata number of stock-
based awards that would vest on the next anniversary of the grant date in the event of retirement or voluntary termination. The Company does not
reduce  stock-based  compensation  for  an  estimate  of  forfeitures,  which  are  inconsequential  in  light  of  historical  experience  and  considering  the
awards vest on a quarterly basis. Actual forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
Compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted is predominantly recognized using the straight-line method over the requisite service
period for the entire award. Awards for employees and non-employee directors provide for accelerated vesting of a portion of outstanding shares
based on cumulative years of service with the Company. Compensation expense for the accelerated shares is recognized upon achievement of the
long-service term. The cumulative amount of compensation cost recognized at any point in time equals at least the portion of the grant-date fair
value of the award that is vested at that date. The fair value of RSUs is calculated as the market value of the common stock on the measurement
date less the present value of the expected dividends forgone during the vesting period.
Stock-based compensation expense is predominantly included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of
income. Certain stock-based compensation costs are capitalized or included in the cost of merchandise. See Note 7 for additional information on the
Company’s stock-based compensation plans.
Leases
The  Company  leases  land  and/or  buildings  at  warehouses  and  certain  other  office  and  distribution  facilities,  primarily  under  operating  leases.
Operating leases expire at various dates through 2064 , with the exception of one lease in the Company’s U.K. subsidiary, which expires in 2151 .
These  leases  generally  contain  one  or  more  of  the  following  options,  which  the  Company  can  exercise  at  the  end  of  the  initial  lease  term:
(a) renewal of the lease for a defined number of years at the then-fair market rental rate or rate stipulated in the lease agreement; (b) purchase of
the property at the then-fair market value; or (c) right of first refusal in the event of a third-party purchase offer.
The Company accounts for its lease expense with free rent periods and step-rent provisions on a straight-line basis over the original term of the
lease and any extension options that the Company more likely than not expects to exercise, from the date the Company has control of the property.
Certain leases provide for periodic rental increases based on price indices, or the greater of minimum guaranteed amounts or sales volume.
The Company has capital leases for certain warehouse locations, expiring at various dates through 2054 . Capital lease assets are included in land
and buildings and improvements in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amortization expense on capital lease assets is recorded as
depreciation  expense  and  is  included  in  selling,  general  and  administrative  expenses.  Capital  lease  liabilities  are  recorded  at  the  lesser  of  the
estimated fair market value of the leased property or the net present value of the aggregate future minimum lease payments and are included in
other current liabilities and other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Interest on these obligations is included in interest
expense in the consolidated statements of income.
The Company records an asset and related financing obligation for the estimated construction costs under build-to-suit lease arrangements where it
is  considered  the  owner  for  accounting  purposes,  to  the  extent  the  Company  is  involved  in  the  construction  of  the  building  or  structural
improvements or has construction risk prior to commencement of a lease. Upon occupancy, the Company assesses whether these arrangements
qualify for sales recognition under the sale-leaseback accounting guidance. If the Company continues to be the deemed owner, it accounts for the
arrangement as a financing lease.
52

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
The Company’s asset retirement obligations (ARO) primarily relate to leasehold improvements that at the end of a lease must be removed. These
obligations are recorded as a liability with an offsetting asset at the inception of the lease term based upon the estimated fair value of the costs to
remove the leasehold improvements. These liabilities are accreted over time to the projected future value of the obligation using the Company’s
incremental borrowing rate. The ARO assets are depreciated using the same depreciation method as the leasehold improvement assets and are
included with buildings and improvements. Estimated ARO liabilities associated with these leases were immaterial at the end of 2017 and 2016 ,
respectively, and are included in other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Preopening Expenses
Preopening expenses related to new warehouses, new regional offices and other startup operations are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax
consequences attributed to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax
bases and tax credits and loss carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable
income in the years in which those temporary differences and carry-forwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax
assets  and liabilities  of a change in tax  rates  is recognized  in income  in  the  period  that  includes the  enactment  date.  A valuation  allowance is
established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to amounts that are more likely than not expected to be realized.
The  determination  of  the  Company’s  provision  for  income  taxes  requires  significant  judgment,  the  use  of  estimates,  and  the  interpretation  and
application  of  complex  tax  laws.  Significant  judgment  is  required  in  assessing  the  timing  and  amounts  of  deductible  and  taxable  items  and  the
probability  of  sustaining  uncertain  tax  positions.  The  benefits  of  uncertain  tax  positions  are  recorded  in  the  Company’s  consolidated  financial
statements  only  after  determining  a  more-likely-than-not  probability  that  the  uncertain  tax  positions  will  withstand  challenge,  if  any,  from  tax
authorities. When facts and circumstances change, the Company reassesses these probabilities and records any changes as appropriate. Certain of
the Company's cumulative foreign undistributed earnings were considered by the Company to be indefinitely reinvested as of September 3, 2017 .
These  earnings  would  be  subject  to  U.S.  income  tax  if  the  Company  changed  its  position  and  could  result  in  a  U.S.  tax  liability.  Although  the
Company has historically asserted that certain non-U.S. undistributed earnings will be permanently reinvested, it may repatriate such earnings to the
extent it can do so without an adverse tax consequence. See Note 8 for additional information.
Net Income per Common Share Attributable to Costco
The  computation  of  basic  net  income  per  share  uses  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares  that  were  outstanding  during  the  period.  The
computation of diluted net income per share uses the weighted average number of shares in the basic net income per share calculation plus the
number of common shares that would be issued assuming vesting of all potentially dilutive common shares outstanding using the treasury stock
method for shares subject to RSUs and the “if converted” method for the convertible note securities.
Stock Repurchase Programs
Repurchased shares of common stock are retired, in accordance with the Washington Business Corporation Act. The par value of repurchased
shares is deducted from common stock and the excess repurchase price over par value is deducted by allocation to additional paid-in capital and
retained earnings. The amount allocated to additional paid-in capital is the current value of additional paid-in capital per share outstanding and is
applied to the number of shares repurchased. Any remaining amount is allocated to retained earnings. See Note 6 for additional information.
53

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued new guidance on the recognition of revenue from contracts with customers.
The guidance converges the requirements for reporting revenue and requires disclosures of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue
and cash flows arising from these contracts. Transition is permitted either retrospectively or as a cumulative effect adjustment as of the date of
adoption. The new standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those years beginning after December 15, 2017. The Company
plans to adopt this guidance at the beginning of its first quarter of fiscal year 2019.
The Company continues to review current accounting policies, business processes, systems and controls to evaluate the impacts of applying the
new standard. Based on its preliminary assessment, the Company believes the new guidance will change recognition timing and classification of
cash card breakage income to reflect the historical pattern of gift card redemption rather than the current methodology of recognizing income when
redemption  is  considered  remote.  The  Company  will  also  present  estimated  sales  returns  on  a  gross  basis  rather  than  net  of  the  sales  return
reserve on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company continues to evaluate various areas such as gross versus net revenue presentation for
certain  contracts,  identification  and  treatment  of  performance  obligations  associated  with  membership  offers,  and  accounting  for  warranty
arrangements on qualified purchases. Management continues to evaluate potential impacts on the contracts associated with the co-branded credit
card arrangement as well as its adoption methodology.
In February 2016, the FASB issued new guidance on leases, which will require lessees to recognize assets and liabilities on the balance sheet for
the rights and obligations created by all leases with terms greater than twelve months. The standard is effective for fiscal years and interim periods
within those years beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted. The Company plans to adopt this guidance at the beginning of
its first quarter of fiscal year 2020. While the Company continues to evaluate this standard and the effect on related disclosures, the primary effect of
adoption will be to require recording right-of-use assets and corresponding lease obligations for current operating leases. The adoption is expected
to  have  a  material  impact  on  the  Company's  consolidated  balance  sheets,  but  not  on  the  consolidated  statements  of  income  or  consolidated
statements of cash flows .
In March 2016, the FASB issued new guidance on stock compensation, intended to simplify accounting for share-based payment transactions. The
guidance makes several modifications related to the accounting for income taxes, forfeitures, and minimum statutory tax withholding requirements.
The  new  standard  is  effective  for  fiscal  years  and  interim  periods  within  those  years  beginning  after  December  15,  2016,  with  early  adoption
permitted. The Company plans to adopt this guidance at the beginning of its first quarter of fiscal year 2018. Adoption of this guidance will likely be
material to the provision for income taxes and earnings per share amounts on the Company’s consolidated income statements for the change in the
recognition of excess tax benefits or deficiencies. Due to the Company's annual vesting and release of shares in its first fiscal quarter, this may
create increased volatility in these amounts during that quarter of each fiscal year. Previously these amounts were reflected in equity. Additionally,
these amounts will be reflected as cash flows from operations instead of cash flows from financing activities in the consolidated statements of cash
flows. Adoption of this guidance is not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of cash
flows, or related disclosures.
54

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 2—Investments
The Company’s investments at the end of 2017 and 2016 were as follows:
2017:
Cost
Basis
Unrealized
Gains, Net
Recorded
Basis
Available-for-sale:
Government and agency securities
$
947
$
0
$
947
Asset and mortgage-backed securities
1
0
1
Total available-for-sale
948
0
948
Held-to-maturity:
Certificates of deposit
285
285
Total short-term investments
$
1,233
$
0
$
1,233
2016:
Cost
Basis
Unrealized
Gains, Net
Recorded
Basis
Available-for-sale:
Government and agency securities
$
1,028
$
6
$
1,034
Asset and mortgage-backed securities
1
0
1
Total available-for-sale
1,029
6
1,035
Held-to-maturity:
Certificates of deposit
306
306
Bankers' acceptances
9
9
Total held-to-maturity
315
315
Total short-term investments
$
1,344
$
6
$
1,350
Gross unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities were not material in 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 . At the end of 2017 and 2015 , the
Company's available-for-sale securities that were in a continuous unrealized-loss position were not material. The Company had no available-for-sale
securities in a continuous unrealized-loss position in 2016 . There were no gross unrealized gains and losses on cash equivalents at the end of 2017
, 2016 , or 2015 .
The proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities were $202 , $291 , and $246 during 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 , respectively. Gross realized
gains or losses from sales of available-for-sale securities were not material in 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 .
The maturities of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities at the end of 2017 were as follows:
 
Available-For-Sale
Held-To-Maturity
 
Cost Basis
Fair Value
Due in one year or less
$
185
$
185
$
285
Due after one year through five years
721
721
0
Due after five years
42
42
0
       Total
$
948
$
948
$
285
55

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 3—Fair Value Measurement
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The tables below present information at the end of 2017 and 2016 , respectively, regarding the Company’s financial assets and financial liabilities
that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis and indicate the level within the fair value hierarchy reflecting the valuation techniques utilized to
determine such fair value.
2017:
Level 1
Level 2
Money market mutual funds (1)
$
7
$
0
Investment in government and agency securities
0
947
Investment in asset and mortgage-backed securities
0
1
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in asset position (2)
0
2
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in (liability) position (2)
0
(8)
Total
$
7
$
942
 
2016:
Level 1
Level 2
Money market mutual funds (1)
$
222
$
0
Investment in government and agency securities
0
1,034
Investment in asset and mortgage-backed securities
0
1
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in asset position (2)
0
11
Forward foreign-exchange contracts, in (liability) position (2)
0
(13)
Total
$
222
$
1,033
 _______________
(1)
Included in cash and cash equivalents in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
(2)
The asset and the liability values are included in other current assets and other current liabilities, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. See
Note 1 for additional information on derivative instruments.
During and at the end of both 2017 and 2016 , the Company did not hold any Level 3 financial assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value
on a recurring basis. There were no transfers in or out of Level 1 or 2 during 2017 and 2016 .
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis
Financial assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include held-to-maturity investments that are carried at amortized cost and are not
remeasured to fair value on a recurring basis. There were no fair value adjustments to these financial assets during 2017 and 2016 . See Note 4 for
the fair value of long-term debt.
Nonfinancial assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include items such as long-lived assets that are measured at fair value resulting
from an impairment, if deemed necessary. There were no fair value adjustments to nonfinancial assets during 2017 and 2016 .
Note 4—Debt
Short-Term Borrowings
The Company enters into various short-term bank credit facilities, which increased to $833 in 2017 from $429 in 2016 due to the addition of a $400
revolving line of credit in the U.S. which expires June 2018. At the end of 2017 and 2016 , there were no outstanding borrowings under these credit
facilities.
In 2017 ,  short  term  borrowings  were  immaterial.  In 2016 ,  the  average  and  maximum  short  term  borrowings  in  Japan  were $99 and $110 ,
respectively, and had a weighted average interest rate of 0.52% during the year. All other short term borrowings during the year were immaterial.
56

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 4—Debt (Continued)
Long-Term Debt
The  Company's  long-term  debt  consists  primarily  of  Senior  Notes  that  have  various  principal  balances,  interest  rates,  and  maturity  dates  as
described below. In May 2017, the Company issued $3,800 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes, with maturity dates between May 2021
and May 2027. In February 2015 and December 2012, the Company issued $1,000 and $3,500 in aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes,
respectively.
In  June 2017 , the Company paid the outstanding $1,100 principal balance and accrued interest on the 1.125% Senior Notes through proceeds
from the Senior Notes issued in May 2017 and existing sources of cash and cash equivalents and short-term  investments.  In March 2017, the
Company paid the outstanding $1,100 principal balance and interest on the 5.5% Senior Notes with existing sources of cash and cash equivalents
and short-term investments.
The  Company,  at  its  option,  may  redeem  the  Senior  Notes  at  any  time,  in  whole  or  in  part,  at  a  redemption  price  plus  accrued  interest.  The
redemption price is equal to the greater of 100% of the principal amount or the sum of the present value of the remaining scheduled payments of
principal and interest to maturity. Additionally, upon certain events, as defined by the terms of the Senior Notes, the holder has the right to require
the Company to purchase this security at a price of 101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest to the date of the event. Interest
on all outstanding long-term debt is payable semi-annually.
The estimated fair value of Senior Notes is valued using Level 2 inputs. Other long-term debt consists primarily of promissory notes and term loans
issued by the Company's Japanese subsidiary and are valued primarily using Level 3 inputs. The carrying value and estimated fair value of long-
term debt at the end of 2017 and 2016 consisted of the following:
 
2017
2016
 
Carrying
Value
Fair
Value
Carrying
Value
Fair
Value
5.5% Senior Notes due March 2017
$
0
$
0
$
1,100
$
1,129
1.125% Senior Notes due December 2017
0
0
1,099
1,103
1.7% Senior Notes due December 2019
1,198
1,201
1,196
1,219
1.75% Senior Notes due February 2020
498
501
498
508
2.15% Senior Notes due May 2021
994
1,007
0
0
2.25% Senior Notes due February 2022
497
504
497
512
2.30% Senior Notes due May 2022
793
805
0
0
2.75% Senior Notes due May 2024
991
1,010
0
0
3.00% Senior Notes due May 2027
986
1,009
0
0
Other long-term debt
702
716
771
803
Total long-term debt
6,659
6,753
5,161
5,274
Less current portion
86
1,100
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
$
6,573
$
4,061
57

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 4—Debt (Continued)
Maturities of long-term debt during the next five fiscal years and thereafter are as follows:  
2018
$
86
2019
91
2020
1,700
2021
1,091
2022
1,300
Thereafter
2,436
Total
$
6,704
Note 5—Leases
Operating Leases
The aggregate rental expense for 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 was $ 258 , $ 250 , and $ 252 , respectively. Sub-lease income and contingent rent was
not material in 2017 , 2016 , or 2015 .
Capital and Build-to-Suit Leases
Gross assets recorded under capital and build-to-suit leases were $ 404 and $ 392 at the end of 2017 and 2016 , respectively. These assets are
recorded net of accumulated amortization of $ 78 and $ 63 at the end of 2017 and 2016 , respectively.
At the end of 2017 , future minimum payments, net of sub-lease income of $ 112 for all years combined, under non-cancelable operating leases with
terms of at least one year and capital leases were as follows:
Operating
Leases
Capital
Leases (1)
2018
$
216
$
32
2019
223
32
2020
206
33
2021
177
33
2022
168
33
Thereafter
2,123
582
Total
$
3,113
745
Less amount representing interest
(365)
Net present value of minimum lease payments
380
Less current installments (2)
(7)
Long-term capital lease obligations less current installments (3)
$
373
_______________
(1)
Includes build-to-suit lease obligations.
(2)
Included in other current liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
(3)
Included in other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
58

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 6—Stockholders’ Equity
Dividends
The Company’s current quarterly dividend rate is $0.50 per share. In May 2017 and February 2015, the Company paid special cash dividends of
$7.00 and $5.00 per share, respectively. The aggregate payment was approximately $3,100 and $2,201 , respectively.
Stock Repurchase Programs
The Company’s stock repurchase program is conducted under a $4,000 authorization by the Board of Directors, approved on April 17, 2015 , which
expires April  17,  2019 .  This  authorization  revoked  previously  authorized  but  unused  amounts,  totaling   $2,528 .  As  of  the  end  of 2017 ,  the
remaining amount available for stock repurchases under the approved plan was $2,749 . The following table summarizes the Company’s stock
repurchase activity:
Shares
Repurchased
(000’s)
Average
Price per
Share
Total Cost
2017
2,998
$
157.87
$
473
2016
3,184
149.90
477
2015
3,456
142.87
494
These  amounts  may  differ  from  the  stock  repurchase  balances  in  the  accompanying  consolidated  statements  of  cash  flows  due  to  changes  in
unsettled stock repurchases at the end of each fiscal year.
Note 7—Stock-Based Compensation Plans
The  Company  grants  stock-based  compensation  primarily  to  employees  and  non-employee  directors.  Since  2009,  RSU  grants  to  all  executive
officers  have  been  performance-based.  Through  a  series  of  shareholder  approvals,  there  have  been  amended  and  restated  plans  and  new
provisions implemented by the Company. RSUs held by employees and non-employee directors are subject to quarterly vesting upon retirement or
voluntary termination. Employees who attain certain years of service with the Company receive shares under accelerated vesting provisions on the
annual vesting date rather than upon retirement. The Seventh Restated 2002 Stock Incentive Plan (Seventh Plan), amended in the second quarter
of fiscal 2015, is the Company’s only stock-based compensation plan with shares available for grant at the end of 2017 . Each share issued in
respect of stock awards is counted as 1.75 shares toward the limit of shares made available under the Seventh Plan. The Seventh Plan authorized
the issuance of 23,500,000 shares ( 13,429,000 RSUs) of common stock for future grants in addition to the shares authorized under the previous
plan. The Company issues new shares of common stock upon vesting of RSUs. Shares for vested RSUs are generally delivered to participants
annually, net of shares equal to the minimum statutory withholding taxes.
As required by the Company's Seventh Plan, in conjunction with the 2017 special cash dividend, the number of shares subject to outstanding RSUs
was increased on the dividend record date to preserve their value. The outstanding RSUs were adjusted by multiplying the number of outstanding
shares by a factor of  1.032 , representing the ratio of the NASDAQ closing price of  $180.20  on May 5, 2017, which was the last trading day
immediately prior to the ex-dividend date, to the NASDAQ opening price of  $174.66 on the ex-dividend date, May 8, 2017. The outstanding RSUs
increased by approximately 247,000 and this adjustment did not result in additional stock-based compensation expense, as the fair value of the
awards  did  not  change.  As  further  required  by  the  Seventh  Plan,  the  maximum  number  of  shares  issuable  under  the  Seventh  Plan  was
proportionally adjusted, which resulted in an additional 364,000 RSU shares available to be granted.
59

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 7—Stock-Based Compensation Plans (Continued)
Summary of Restricted Stock Unit Activity
RSUs granted to employees and to non-employee directors generally vest over five years and three years, respectively. Additionally, the terms of
the RSUs, including performance-based awards, provide for accelerated vesting for employees and non-employee directors who have attained 25 or
more years and five or more years of service with the Company, respectively, and provide for vesting upon retirement or voluntary termination.
Recipients  are  not  entitled  to  vote  or  receive  dividends  on  non-vested  and  undelivered  shares.  At  the  end  of 2017 , 11,780,000 shares  were
available to be granted as RSUs under the Seventh Plan.
The following awards were outstanding at the end of 2017 :
•
7,798,000 time-based RSUs that vest upon continued employment over specified periods of time;
•
401,000 performance-based  RSUs,  of  which 259,000 were  granted  to  executive  officers  subject  to  the  certification  of  the  attainment  of
specified performance targets for 2017 . This certification occurred in October 2017 , at which time a portion vested as a result of the long
service of all executive officers. The remaining awards vest upon continued employment over specified periods of time.
The following table summarizes RSU transactions during 2017 :
Number of
Units
(in 000’s)
Weighted-Average
Grant Date Fair
Value
Outstanding at the end of 2016
8,326
$
120.56
Granted
3,856
144.12
Vested and delivered
(4,026)
119.46
Forfeited
(204)
129.87
Special cash dividend
247
N/A
Outstanding at the end of 2017
8,199
$
128.15
The weighted-average grant date fair value of RSUs granted was $144.12 , $153.46 , and $125.68 in 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 , respectively. The
remaining unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs at the end of 2017 was $ 694 and the weighted-average period of time over
which this cost will be recognized is 1.6 years. Included in the outstanding balance at the end of 2017 were approximately 2,782,000 RSUs vested
but not yet delivered.
Summary of Stock-Based Compensation
The following table summarizes stock-based compensation expense and the related tax benefits under the Company’s plans:
2017
2016
2015
Stock-based compensation expense before income taxes
$
514
$
459
$
394
Less recognized income tax benefit
(167)
(150)
(131)
Stock-based compensation expense, net of income taxes
$
347
$
309
$
263
60

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 8—Income Taxes
Income before income taxes is comprised of the following:
2017
2016
2015
Domestic
$
2,988
$
2,622
$
2,574
Foreign
1,051
997
1,030
Total
$
4,039
$
3,619
$
3,604
The provisions for income taxes for 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 are as follows:
2017
2016
2015
Federal:
Current
$
802
$
468
$
766
Deferred
7
233
(12)
Total federal
809
701
754
State:
Current
161
108
131
Deferred
8
21
1
Total state
169
129
132
Foreign:
Current
389
398
399
Deferred
(42)
15
(90)
Total foreign
347
413
309
Total provision for income taxes
$
1,325
$
1,243
$
1,195
Tax benefits associated with the release of employee RSUs were allocated to equity attributable to Costco in the amount of $ 37 , $ 74 , and $ 86 ,
in 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 , respectively.
The reconciliation between the statutory tax rate and the effective rate for 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 is as follows:
 
2017
2016
2015
Federal taxes at statutory rate
$
1,414
35.0 %
$
1,267
35.0 %
$
1,262
35.0 %
State taxes, net
116
2.9
91
2.5
85
2.3
Foreign taxes, net
(64)
(1.6)
(21)
(0.6)
(125)
(3.5)
Employee stock ownership plan (ESOP)
(104)
(2.6)
(17)
(0.5)
(66)
(1.8)
Other
(37)
(0.9)
(77)
(2.1)
39
1.2
Total
$
1,325
32.8 %
$
1,243
34.3 %
$
1,195
33.2 %
The Company’s provision for income taxes in 2017 and 2015 was favorably impacted by net tax benefits of $104 and $68 , respectfully, primarily
due to tax benefits recorded in connection with the May 2017 and February 2015 special cash dividends paid by the Company to employees through
the Company's 401(k) Retirement Plan of $82 and $57 , respectively. Dividends on these shares are deductible for U.S. income tax purposes.
61

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 8—Income Taxes (Continued)
The components of the deferred tax assets (liabilities) are as follows:
2017
2016
Equity compensation
$
109
$
99
Deferred income/membership fees
167
177
Accrued liabilities and reserves
647
601
Other (1)
18
63
Property and equipment
(747)
(779)
Merchandise inventories
(252)
(256)
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets
$
(58)
$
(95)
_______________
(1)
Includes foreign tax credits of $36 and $78 for 2017 and 2016, respectively, which will expire beginning in 2025.
The deferred tax accounts at the end of 2017 and 2016 include non-current deferred income tax assets of $254 and $202 , respectively, included in
other assets; and non-current deferred income tax liabilities of $312 and $297 , respectively, included in other liabilities.
During 2015, the Company repatriated a portion of the earnings in the Canadian operations that, in 2014, the Company determined were no longer
considered  indefinitely  reinvested.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015,  the  Company  changed  its  position  regarding  an  additional  portion  of  the
undistributed earnings of the Canadian operations, which are no longer considered indefinitely reinvested. These earnings were distributed in 2016.
Current  exchange  rates  compared  to  historical  rates  when  these  earnings  were  generated  resulted  in  an  immaterial  U.S.  benefit,  which  was
recorded at the end of 2015. During 2017, the Company changed its position regarding an additional portion of the undistributed earnings of its
Canadian  operations  as  they  could  be  repatriated  without  adverse  tax  consequences.  Accordingly,  that  portion  is  no  longer  considered  to  be
indefinitely  reinvested.  Subsequent  to  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  the  Company  repatriated  a  portion  of  undistributed  earnings  in  its  Canadian
operations without adverse tax consequences.
The Company has not provided for U.S. deferred taxes on cumulative undistributed earnings of $3,176 and $3,280 at the end of 2017 and 2016 ,
respectively, of certain non-U.S. consolidated subsidiaries because the earnings have not been repatriated, or subsidiaries have invested or will
invest  the  undistributed  earnings  indefinitely,  or  the  earnings,  if  repatriated  would  not  result  in  an  adverse  tax  consequence.  Because  of  the
availability of U.S. foreign tax credits and complexity of the computation, it is not practicable to determine at this time the U.S. federal income tax
liability that would be associated with such earnings if such earnings were not deemed to be indefinitely reinvested. Deferred taxes are recorded for
earnings of foreign operations when it is determined that such earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested.
The Company believes that its U.S. current and projected asset position is sufficient to meet its U.S. liquidity requirements and has no current plans
to repatriate for use in the U.S. the cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held by these non-U.S. subsidiaries whose earnings are
considered indefinitely reinvested.
62

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 8—Income Taxes (Continued)
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits for 2017 and 2016 is as follows:
2017
2016
Gross unrecognized tax benefit at beginning of year
$
52
$
158
Gross increases—current year tax positions
3
2
Gross increases—tax positions in prior years
17
1
Gross decreases—tax positions in prior years
0
(47)
Settlements
(11)
(25)
Lapse of statute of limitations
(9)
(37)
Gross unrecognized tax benefit at end of year
$
52
$
52
The gross unrecognized tax benefit includes tax positions for which the ultimate deductibility is highly certain but there is uncertainty about the timing
of such deductibility. At the end of 2017 and 2016 , these amounts were immaterial. Because of the impact of deferred tax accounting, other than
interest and penalties, the disallowance of these tax positions would not affect the annual effective tax rate but would accelerate the payment of
cash to the taxing authority. The total amount of such unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would favorably affect the effective income tax
rate in future periods is $29 and $46 at the end of 2017 and 2016 , respectively.
Accrued  interest  and  penalties  related  to  income  tax  matters  are  classified  as  a  component  of  income  tax  expense.  Interest  and  penalties
recognized by the Company were not material in 2017 or 2016 . Accrued interest and penalties were not material at the end of 2017 or 2016 .
The  Company  is  currently  under  audit  by  several  taxing  jurisdictions  in  the  United  States  and  in  several  foreign  countries.  Some  audits  may
conclude in the next 12 months and the unrecognized tax benefits recorded in relation to the audits may differ from actual settlement amounts. It is
not practical to estimate the effect, if any, of any amount of such change during the next 12 months to previously recorded uncertain tax positions in
connection with the audits. The Company does not anticipate that there will be a material increase or decrease in the total amount of unrecognized
tax benefits in the next 12 months.
The Company files income tax returns in the United States, various state and local jurisdictions, in Canada and in several other foreign jurisdictions.
With few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state or local examination for years before fiscal 2014. The Company is
currently subject to examination in Canada for fiscal years 2013 to present and in California for fiscal years 2007 to present. No other examinations
are believed to be material.
63

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 9—Net Income per Common and Common Equivalent Share
The following table shows the amounts used in computing net income per share and the effect on net income and the weighted average number of
shares of potentially dilutive common shares outstanding (shares in 000’s):  
2017
2016
2015
Net income available to common stockholders after assumed conversions of dilutive securities
$
2,679
$
2,350
$
2,377
Weighted average number of common shares used in basic net income per common share
438,437
438,585
439,455
RSUs
2,493
2,668
3,249
Conversion of convertible notes
7
10
12
Weighted average number of common shares and dilutive potential of common stock used in
diluted net income per share
440,937
441,263
442,716
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies
Legal Proceedings
The Company is involved in a number of claims, proceedings and litigation arising from its business and property ownership. In accordance with
applicable accounting guidance, the Company establishes an accrual for legal proceedings if and when those matters reach a stage where they
present loss contingencies that are both probable and reasonably estimable. There may be exposure to loss in excess of any amounts accrued. The
Company monitors those matters for developments that would affect the likelihood of a loss (taking into account where applicable indemnification
arrangements concerning suppliers and insurers) and the accrued amount, if any, thereof, and adjusts the amount as appropriate. As of the date of
this Report, the Company has recorded an immaterial accrual with respect to one matter described below, in addition to other immaterial accruals
for matters not described below. If the loss contingency at issue is not both probable and reasonably estimable, the Company does not establish an
accrual, but will continue to monitor the matter for developments that will make the loss contingency both probable and reasonably estimable. In
each case, there is a reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred, including a loss in excess of the applicable accrual. For matters where no
accrual  has  been  recorded,  the  possible  loss  or  range  of  loss  (including  any  loss  in  excess  of  the  accrual)  cannot,  in  the  Company's  view,  be
reasonably estimated because, among other things: (i) the remedies or penalties sought are indeterminate or unspecified; (ii) the legal and/or factual
theories are not well developed; and/or (iii) the matters involve complex or novel legal theories or a large number of parties.
The Company is a defendant in the following matters, among others:
Numerous putative class actions have been brought around the United States against motor fuel retailers, including the Company, alleging that they
have been overcharging consumers by selling gasoline or diesel that is warmer than 60 degrees without adjusting the volume sold to compensate
for heat-related expansion or disclosing the effect of such expansion on the energy equivalent received by the consumer. The Company is named in
the following actions: Raphael Sagalyn, et al., v. Chevron USA, Inc., et al., Case No. 07-430 (D. Md.); Phyllis Lerner, et al., v. Costco Wholesale
Corporation, et al., Case No. 07-1216 (C.D. Cal.); Linda A. Williams, et al., v. BP Corporation North America, Inc., et al., Case No. 07-179 (M.D.
Ala.); James Graham, et al. v. Chevron USA, Inc., et al., Civil Action No. 07-193 (E.D. Va.); Betty A. Delgado, et al., v. Allsups, Convenience Stores,
Inc., et al., Case No. 07-202 (D.N.M.); Gary Kohut, et al. v. Chevron USA, Inc., et al., Case No. 07-285 (D. Nev.); Mark Rushing, et al., v. Alon USA,
Inc., et al., Case No. 06-7621 (N.D. Cal.); James Vanderbilt, et al., v. BP Corporation North America, Inc., et al., Case No. 06-1052 (W.D. Mo.);
Zachary Wilson, et al., v. Ampride, Inc., et al., Case No. 06-2582 (D. Kan.); Diane Foster, et al., v. BP North America Petroleum, Inc., et al., Case
No. 07-02059 (W.D. Tenn.); Mara Redstone, et al., v. Chevron USA, Inc., et al., Case No. 07-20751 (S.D. Fla.); Fred Aguirre, et al. v. BP West
Coast Products LLC, et al., Case No. 07-1534
64

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies (Continued)
(N.D. Cal.); J.C. Wash, et al., v. Chevron USA, Inc., et al.; Case No. 4:07cv37 (E.D. Mo.); Jonathan Charles Conlin, et al., v. Chevron USA, Inc., et
al.; Case No. 07 0317 (M.D. Tenn.); William Barker, et al. v. Chevron USA, Inc., et al.; Case No. 07-cv-00293 (D.N.M.); Melissa J. Couch, et al. v.
BP Products North America, Inc., et al., Case No. 07cv291 (E.D. Tex.); S. Garrett Cook, Jr., et al., v. Hess Corporation, et al., Case No. 07cv750
(M.D. Ala.); Jeff Jenkins, et al. v. Amoco Oil Company, et al., Case No. 07-cv-00661 (D. Utah); and Mark Wyatt, et al., v. B. P. America Corp., et al.,
Case  No.  07-1754  (S.D.  Cal.).  On  June  18,  2007,  the  Judicial  Panel  on  Multidistrict  Litigation  assigned  the  action,  entitled  In  re  Motor  Fuel
Temperature Sales Practices Litigation, MDL Docket No 1840, to Judge Kathryn Vratil in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas.
On April 12, 2009, the Company agreed to settle the actions in which it is named as a defendant. Under the settlement, the Company agreed, to the
extent allowed by law and subject to other terms and conditions in the agreement, to install over five years from the effective date of the settlement
temperature-correcting dispensers in the States of Alabama, Arizona, California, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Nevada, New Mexico, North Carolina,
South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Texas,  Utah,  and  Virginia.  Other  than  payments  to  class  representatives,  the  settlement  did  not  provide  for  cash
payments to class members. On September 22, 2011, the court preliminarily approved a revised settlement, which did not materially alter the terms.
On April 24, 2012, the court granted final approval of the revised settlement. Plaintiffs moved for an award of $10 in attorneys’ fees, as well as an
award of costs and payments to class representatives. A report and recommendation was issued in favor of a fee award of $4 . On August 24, 2016,
the district court affirmed the report and recommendation. On March 20, 2014, the Company filed a notice invoking a “most favored nation” provision
under  the  settlement,  under  which  it  sought  to  adopt  provisions  in  later  settlements  with  certain  other  defendants.  The  motion  was  denied  on
January 23, 2015. Final judgment was entered on September 22, 2015, which was affirmed by the court of appeals in August 2017.
A class action alleging violation of California Wage Order 7-2001 by failing to provide seating to member service assistants who act as greeters and
exit attendants in the Company’s California warehouses. Canela v. Costco Wholesale Corp., et al. (Case No. 5:13-cv-03598, N.D. Cal. filed July 1,
2013). The complaint seeks relief under the California Labor Code, including civil penalties and attorneys’ fees. The Company has filed an answer
denying the material allegations of the complaint.
The Company received notices from most states stating that they have appointed an agent to conduct an examination of the books and records of
the Company to determine whether it has complied with state unclaimed property laws. In addition to seeking the turnover of unclaimed property
subject to escheat laws, the states may seek interest, penalties, costs of examinations, and other relief. The agent appears to have concluded its
examination,  without  seeking  payments  from  the  Company.  Certain  states  have  separately  also  made  requests  for  payment  by  the  Company
concerning a specific type of property, some of which have been paid in immaterial amounts.
The Company received from the Drug Enforcement Administration subpoenas and administrative inspection warrants concerning the Company's
fulfillment of prescriptions related to controlled substances and related practices. As previously disclosed, the Company entered into a settlement
agreement in January 2017 under which it paid $12 to the Department of Justice, an amount for which a previous accrual was made.
On November 23, 2016, the Company’s Canadian subsidiary received from the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care a request for an
inspection and information concerning compliance with the anti-rebate provisions in the Ontario Drug Benefit Act and the Drug Interchangeability
and Dispensing Fee Act. The Company is seeking to cooperate with the request.
In November 2016 and September 2017, the Company received notices of violation from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection regarding hazardous waste practices at its Connecticut warehouses, primarily concerning unsalable pharmaceuticals. The Company is
seeking to cooperate concerning the resolution of these notices.
The Company does not believe that any pending claim, proceeding or litigation, either alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect
on the Company’s financial position; however, it is possible
65

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies (Continued)
that an unfavorable outcome of some or all of the matters, however unlikely, could result in a charge that might be material to the results of an
individual fiscal quarter.
Note 11—Segment Reporting
The Company and its subsidiaries are principally engaged in the operation of membership warehouses in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, U.K., Japan,
Australia,  Spain,  Iceland,  and  France  and  through  majority-owned  subsidiaries  in  Taiwan  and  Korea.  The  Company’s  reportable  segments  are
largely based on management’s organization of the operating segments for operational decisions and assessments of financial performance, which
considers geographic locations. The material accounting policies of the segments are as described in Note 1. All material inter-segment net sales
and expenses  have  been eliminated  in computing  total  revenue  and  operating  income.  Certain  operating  expenses,  predominantly  stock-based
compensation, incurred on behalf of the Company's Canadian and Other International operations, but are included in the U.S. operations because
those costs are not allocated internally and generally come under the responsibility of U.S. management.
United States
Operations
Canadian
Operations
Other
International
Operations
Total
2017
Total revenue
$
93,889
$
18,775
$
16,361
$
129,025
Operating income
2,644
841
626
4,111
Depreciation and amortization
1,044
124
202
1,370
Additions to property and equipment
1,714
277
511
2,502
Net property and equipment
12,339
1,820
4,002
18,161
Total assets
24,068
4,471
7,808
36,347
2016
Total revenue
$
86,579
$
17,028
$
15,112
$
118,719
Operating income
2,326
778
568
3,672
Depreciation and amortization
946
109
200
1,255
Additions to property and equipment
1,823
299
527
2,649
Net property and equipment
11,745
1,628
3,670
17,043
Total assets
22,511
3,480
7,172
33,163
2015
Total revenue
$
84,351
$
17,341
$
14,507
$
116,199
Operating income
2,308
771
545
3,624
Depreciation and amortization
848
119
160
1,127
Additions to property and equipment
1,574
148
671
2,393
Net property and equipment
10,815
1,381
3,205
15,401
Total assets
22,988
3,608
6,421
33,017
The following table summarizes the percentage of net sales by merchandise category:
2017
2016
2015
Foods
21%
22%
22%
Sundries
20%
21%
21%
Hardlines
16%
16%
16%
Fresh Foods
14%
14%
14%
Softlines
12%
12%
11%
Ancillary
17%
15%
16%
66

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 12—Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
The two tables that follow reflect the unaudited quarterly results of operations for 2017 and 2016 .
 
53 Weeks Ended September 3, 2017
 
First
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Second
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Third
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Fourth
Quarter
(17 Weeks)
Total
(53 Weeks)
REVENUE
Net sales
$
27,469
$
29,130
$
28,216
$
41,357
$
126,172
Membership fees
630
636
644
943
2,853
Total revenue
28,099
29,766
28,860
42,300
129,025
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
24,288
25,927
24,970
36,697
111,882
Selling, general and administrative
2,940
2,980
2,907
4,123
12,950
Preopening expenses
22
15
15
30
82
Operating income
849
844
968
1,450
4,111
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(29)
(31)
(21)
(53)
(134)
Interest income and other, net
26
(4)
18
22
62
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
846
809
965
1,419
4,039
Provision for income taxes
291
288
259
(1)  
487
1,325
Net income including noncontrolling interests
555
521
706
932
2,714
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(10)
(6)
(6)
(13)
(35)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
545
$
515
$
700
$
919
$
2,679
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
1.24
$
1.17
$
1.59
$
2.10
$
6.11
Diluted
$
1.24
$
1.17
$
1.59
$
2.08
$
6.08
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
438,007
439,127
438,817
437,987
438,437
Diluted
440,525
440,657
441,056
441,036
440,937
CASH DIVIDENDS DECLARED PER COMMON
SHARE
$
0.45
$
0.45
$
7.50
(2)  $
0.50
$
8.90
_______________
(1)
Includes an $82 tax benefit recorded in the third quarter in connection with the special cash dividend paid to employees through the Company's 401(k) Retirement Plan.
(2)
Includes the special cash dividend of $7.00 per share paid in May 2017.
67

Table of Contents
COSTCO WHOLESALE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(amounts in millions, except share, per share, and warehouse count data) (Continued)
Note 12—Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited) (Continued)
 
52 Weeks Ended August 28, 2016
 
First
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Second
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Third
Quarter
(12 Weeks)
Fourth
Quarter
(16 Weeks)
Total 
(52 Weeks)
REVENUE
Net sales
$
26,627
$
27,567
$
26,151
$
35,728
$
116,073
Membership fees
593
603
618
832
2,646
Total revenue
27,220
28,170
26,769
36,560
118,719
OPERATING EXPENSES
Merchandise costs
23,621
24,469
23,162
31,649
102,901
Selling, general and administrative
2,806
2,835
2,731
3,696
12,068
Preopening expenses
26
10
18
24
78
Operating income
767
856
858
1,191
3,672
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE)
Interest expense
(33)
(31)
(30)
(39)
(133)
Interest income and other, net
28
16
7
29
80
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
762
841
835
1,181
3,619
Provision for income taxes
275
286
286
396
1,243
Net income including noncontrolling interests
487
555
549
785
2,376
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
(7)
(9)
(4)
(6)
(26)
NET INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO
$
480
$
546
$
545
$
779
$
2,350
NET INCOME PER COMMON SHARE
ATTRIBUTABLE TO COSTCO:
Basic
$
1.10
$
1.24
$
1.24
$
1.78
$
5.36
Diluted
$
1.09
$
1.24
$
1.24
$
1.77
$
5.33
Shares used in calculation (000’s)
Basic
438,342
439,648
438,815
437,809
438,585
Diluted
441,386
441,559
441,066
440,868
441,263
CASH DIVIDENDS DECLARED PER COMMON
SHARE
$
0.40
$
0.40
$
0.45
$
0.45
$
1.70
68

Exhibit 21.1
SUBSIDIARIES OF THE COMPANY
The following is a list of subsidiaries of the Company as of September 3, 2017 , omitting subsidiaries which, considered in the aggregate, would not
constitute a significant subsidiary.
Subsidiaries
State or Other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization
Name under Which Subsidiary Does Business
Costco Wholesale Membership, Inc.
California
Costco Wholesale Membership, Inc.
Costco Wholesale Canada Ltd.
Canadian Federal
Costco Wholesale Canada, Ltd., Costco
Wholesale
Costco Western Holdings, Ltd.
Canadian Federal
Costco Western Holdings, Ltd.
Costco Wholesale United Kingdom Ltd.
United Kingdom
Costco Wholesale United Kingdom Ltd.
NW Re Ltd.
Arizona
NW Re Ltd.
PriceCostco International, Inc.
Nevada
PriceCostco International, Inc.
Costco Wholesale Korea, Ltd.
Korea
Costco Wholesale Korea, Ltd.
Costco de Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Mexico
Costco de Mexico, S.A. de C.V.
Costco Wholesale Japan, Ltd.
Japan
Costco Wholesale Japan, Ltd.
Costco Insurance Agency, Inc.
Washington
Costco Insurance Agency, Inc.
Costco Canada Holdings Inc.
Canadian Federal
Costco Canada Holdings Inc.

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors
Costco Wholesale Corporation:
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (Nos. 333‑82782, 333-120523, 333‑129172, 333-135052, 333-150014,
333-151748, 333-165550, 333-180163, 333-187418, 333-202673, 333‑204739 and 333-218397) on Form S-8 and the registration statement (No.
333-207417) on Form S-3 of Costco Wholesale Corporation of our reports dated October 17, 2017, with respect to the consolidated balance sheets
of  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  as  of  September  3,  2017  and  August  28,  2016,  and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  income,
comprehensive income, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years ended September 3, 2017, August 28, 2016, and August
30, 2015, and all related financial statement schedules, and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of September 3, 2017,
which reports appear in the September 3, 2017 annual report on Form 10‑K of Costco Wholesale Corporation.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Seattle, Washington
October 17, 2017

Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I, W. Craig Jelinek, certify that:
1)
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation (“the registrant”);
2)
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3)
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to
us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions
about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting.
October 17, 2017
 
/s/    W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
W. Craig Jelinek
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director

CERTIFICATIONS
I, Richard A. Galanti, certify that:
1)
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Costco Wholesale Corporation (“the registrant”);
2)
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3)
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to
us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions
about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such
evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5)
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting.
October 17, 2017
 
/s/    R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
Richard A. Galanti
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director

Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Costco Wholesale Corporation (the Company) on Form 10-K for the year ended September 3, 2017 , as
filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the  Report),  I,  W.  Craig  Jelinek,  President,  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Director  of  the
Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company.
/s/ W. C RAIG  J ELINEK
 
Date: October 17, 2017
W. Craig Jelinek
 
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
A  signed  original  of  this  written  statement  has  been  provided  to  and  will  be  retained  by  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  and  furnished  to  the
Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.

CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Costco Wholesale Corporation (the Company) on Form 10-K for the year ended September 3, 2017 , as
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the Report), I, Richard A. Galanti, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
of the Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the
Company.
/s/ R ICHARD  A. G ALANTI
 
Date: October 17, 2017
Richard A. Galanti
 
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Director
 
A  signed  original  of  this  written  statement  has  been  provided  to  and  will  be  retained  by  Costco  Wholesale  Corporation  and  furnished  to  the
Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.
