UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
☑ 
 ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019
or
☐ 
 TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from _________ to_________
Commission file number: 001-01011
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
05-0494040
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
One CVS Drive,
Woonsocket,
Rhode Island
02895
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(401)
765-1500
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share
CVS
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
☑
Yes ☐
No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
☐
Yes ☑
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90 days.
☑
Yes ☐
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).
☑
Yes ☐
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an
emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☑
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised
financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).
☐
Yes ☑
No
The aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates was approximately $70,617,679,934 as of June 28, 2019, based on the closing price of the
common stock on the New York Stock Exchange. For purposes of this calculation, only executive officers and directors are deemed to be affiliates of the registrant.
As of February 12, 2020, the registrant had 1,304,159,680 shares of common stock outstanding.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The following materials are incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K:
Information contained in the definitive proxy statement for CVS Health Corporation’s 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 (the “Proxy Statement”), is incorporated by reference in Parts III and IV to the extent
described therein.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
Item 1:
Business
2
Item 1A:
Risk Factors
29
Item 1B:
Unresolved Staff Comments
52
Item 2:
Properties
52
Item 3:
Legal Proceedings
52
Item 4:
Mine Safety Disclosures
53
Information about our Executive Officers
54
Part II
Item 5:
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
55
Item 6:
Selected Financial Data
57
Item 7:
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
58
Item 7A:
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
87
Item 8:
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
90
Item 9:
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
170
Item 9A:
Controls and Procedures
170
Item 9B:
Other Information
171
Part III
Item 10:
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
171
Item 11:
Executive Compensation
171
Item 12:
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
171
Item 13:
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
172
Item 14:
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
172
Part IV
Item 15:
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
173
Item 16:
Form 10-K Summary
177
Signatures
178

Unless the context otherwise requires, references to the terms “we,” “our” or “us” used throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “10-K”) refer to CVS
Health Corporation (a Delaware corporation) (“CVS Health”) and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”). References to competitors and other companies
throughout this 10-K, including the information incorporated herein by reference, are for illustrative or comparison purposes only and do not indicate that these
companies are the Company’s or any segment’s only competitors or closest competitors.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Reform Act”) provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements, so long as (1) those statements
are identified as forward-looking, and (2) the statements are accompanied by meaningful cautionary statements that identify important factors that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those discussed in the statement. We want to take advantage of these safe harbor provisions.
Certain information contained in this 10-K is forward-looking within the meaning of the Reform Act or SEC rules. This information includes, but is not limited to:
“Outlook for 2020” of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) included in Item 7, “Quantitative and
Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” included in Item 7A, “Government Regulation” included in Item 1, and “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A. In
addition, throughout this 10-K and our other reports and communications, we use the following words or variations or negatives of these words and similar
expressions when we intend to identify forward-looking statements:
· Anticipates
· Believes
· Can
· Continue
· Could
· Estimates
· Evaluate
· Expects
· Explore
· Forecast
· Guidance
· Intends
· Likely
· May
· Might
· Outlook
· Plans
· Potential
· Predict
· Probable
· Projects
· Seeks
· Should
· View
· Will
All statements addressing the future operating performance of CVS Health or any segment or any subsidiary and/or future events or developments, including
statements relating to corporate strategy; revenue or adjusted revenue; operating income or adjusted operating income; earnings per share or adjusted earnings
per share; Pharmacy Services segment business, sales results and/or trends and/or operations; Retail/LTC segment business, sales results and/or trends and/or
operations; Health Care Benefits segment business, sales results and/or trends, medical cost trends, medical membership, Medicare Part D membership, medical
benefit ratios and/or operations; incremental investment spending; interest expense; effective tax rate; weighted-average share count; cash flow from operations;
net capital expenditures; cash available for debt repayment; integration synergies; net synergies; integration costs; enterprise modernization; transformation;
leverage ratio; cash available for enhancing shareholder value; inventory reduction, turn rate and/or loss rate; debt ratings; the Company’s ability to attract or
retain customers and clients; store development and/or relocations; new product development; and the impact of industry and regulatory developments, as well as
statements expressing optimism or pessimism about future operating results or events, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Reform Act.
Forward-looking statements rely on a number of estimates, assumptions and projections concerning future events, and are subject to a number of significant risks
and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements. Many of these risks and uncertainties and other
factors are outside our control. Certain of these risks and uncertainties and other factors are described under “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K;
these are not the only risks and uncertainties we face. There can be no assurance that the Company has identified all the risks that affect it. Additional risks and
uncertainties not presently known to the Company or that the Company currently believes to be immaterial also may adversely affect the Company’s businesses. If
any of those risks or uncertainties develops into actual events, these events or circumstances could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s businesses,
operating results, cash flows, financial condition and/or stock price, among other effects.
You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date of this 10-K, and we disclaim any
intention or obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, uncertainties or otherwise.
1

Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1. Business.
Overview
CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”), is the nation’s premier health
innovation company helping people on their path to better health. Whether in one of its pharmacies or through its health services and plans, CVS Health is
pioneering a bold new approach to total health by making quality care more affordable, accessible, simple and seamless. CVS Health is community-based and
locally focused, engaging consumers with the care they need when and where they need it. The Company has approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately
1,100 walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 105 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business
serving more than one million patients per year and expanding specialty pharmacy services. CVS Health also serves an estimated 37 million people through
traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading
standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better
health outcomes and lowers overall health care costs.
On November 28, 2018 (the “Aetna Acquisition Date”), the Company acquired Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”) for a combination of cash and CVS Health stock (the “Aetna
Acquisition”). The Company acquired Aetna to help improve the consumer health care experience by combining Aetna’s health care benefits products and services
with CVS Health’s retail locations, walk-in medical clinics and integrated pharmacy capabilities with the goal of becoming the new, trusted front door to health
care. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Aetna shareholders received $145.00 in cash and 0.8378 CVS Health shares for each Aetna share. The transaction
valued Aetna at approximately $212 per share or approximately $70 billion. Including the assumption of Aetna’s debt, the total value of the transaction was
approximately $78 billion. The Company financed the cash portion of the purchase price through a combination of cash on hand and by issuing approximately $45
billion of new debt, including senior notes and term loans. For additional information, see Note 2 ‘‘Acquisitions and Divestitures’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
On October 10, 2018, the Company and Aetna entered into a consent decree with the U.S. Department of Justice (the “DOJ”) that allowed the Company’s proposed
acquisition of Aetna to proceed, provided Aetna agreed to sell its individual standalone PDPs. As part of the agreement reached with the DOJ, Aetna entered into a
purchase agreement with a subsidiary of WellCare Health Plans, Inc. (“WellCare”) for the divestiture of Aetna’s standalone PDPs effective December 31, 2018. On
November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone PDPs. The Company provided administrative services to, and retained the financial
results of, the divested plans through 2019. Subsequent to 2019, the Company will no longer retain the financial results of the divested plans. Aetna’s standalone
PDPs had an aggregate of 2.5 million members as of December 31, 2019.
As a result of the Aetna Acquisition, the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment. Certain aspects of Aetna’s operations, including products for which the
Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products, are included in the Company’s
Corporate/Other segment.
Effective for the first quarter of 2019, the Company realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and reflect how its
Chief Operating Decision Maker reviews information and manages the business. As a result of this realignment, the Company’s SilverScript® PDP moved from the
Pharmacy Services segment to the Health Care Benefits segment. In addition, the Company moved Aetna’s mail order and specialty pharmacy operations from the
Health Care Benefits segment to the Pharmacy Services segment. Segment financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect these changes. See
Note 17 ‘‘Segment Reporting’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for segment financial information.
The Company has four reportable segments: Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC, Health Care Benefits and Corporate/Other.
Business Strategy
CVS Health’s purpose of helping people on their path to better health guides the Company’s approach to transforming the consumer health experience. The
Company is working to create the most consumer-centric health company by being consumer obsessed and pursuing its three strategic goals: be local, make it
simple and improve health. These goals are embedded in the Company’s four Enterprise priorities: growing and differentiating our businesses, delivering
transformational products and services, creating a consumer-centric technology infrastructure and modernizing Enterprise functions and capabilities. The
2

Company believes its strategy of putting the consumer at the center of care will drive long-term sustainable value and place the Company at the forefront of the
evolution of health care.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease
management services and medical spend management. The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions,
government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care (“Managed Medicaid”) plans, plans offered on public health insurance exchanges
(“Public Exchanges”) and private health insurance exchanges (“Private Exchanges” and together with Public Exchanges, “Insurance Exchanges”), other sponsors
of health benefit plans and individuals throughout the U.S. The Pharmacy Services segment includes retail specialty pharmacy stores, specialty mail order
pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services. During the year ended
December 31, 2019, the Company’s PBM filled or managed 2.0 billion prescriptions on a 30-day equivalent basis.
PBM Services
The Company dispenses prescription drugs directly through its mail order dispensing and specialty mail order pharmacies and through pharmacies in its retail
network. All prescriptions processed by the Company are analyzed, processed and documented by the Company’s proprietary prescription management systems.
These systems provide essential features and functionality to allow plan members to utilize their prescription drug benefits. These systems also streamline the
process by which prescriptions are processed by staff and network pharmacists by enhancing review of various items through automation, including plan eligibility,
early refills, duplicate dispensing, appropriateness of dosage, drug interactions or allergies, over-utilization and potential fraud.
Plan Design Offerings and Administration
The Company administers pharmacy benefit plans for clients who contract with it to facilitate prescription drug coverage and claims processing for their eligible
plan members. The Company assists its PBM clients in designing pharmacy benefit plans that help improve health outcomes while minimizing the costs to the
client. The Company also assists PBM clients in monitoring the effectiveness of their plans through frequent, informal communications, the use of proprietary
software, as well as through formal annual, quarterly and sometimes monthly performance reviews.
The Company makes recommendations to help PBM clients design benefit plans that promote the use of lower cost, clinically appropriate drugs and helps its PBM
clients control costs by recommending plan designs that encourage the use of generic equivalents of brand name drugs when such equivalents are available. Clients
also have the option, through plan design, to further lower their pharmacy benefit plan costs by setting different member payment levels for different products on
their drug lists or “formularies,” which helps guide members to choose lower cost alternatives through appropriate financial incentives.
Formulary Management
The Company utilizes an independent panel of doctors, pharmacists and other medical experts, referred to as the CVS Caremark National Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committee, to review and approve the selection of drugs that meet the Company’s standards of safety and efficacy for inclusion on one of the
Company’s template formularies. The Company’s formularies provide recommended products in numerous drug classes to help ensure member access to clinically
appropriate drugs with alternatives within a class under the client’s pharmacy benefit plan, while helping to drive the lowest net cost for clients that select one of
the Company’s formularies. To help improve clinical outcomes for members and clients, the Company conducts ongoing, independent reviews of all drugs,
including those appearing on the formularies and generic equivalent products. Many of the Company’s clients choose to adopt a template formulary offering as part
of their plan design. Beginning in 2018, PBM clients were given new capabilities to offer real time benefits information for a member’s specific plan design,
provided digitally at the point of prescribing, at the pharmacy and directly to members.
Retail Pharmacy Network Management Services
The Company maintains a national network of more than 68,000 retail pharmacies, consisting of approximately 41,000 chain pharmacies (which includes CVS
Pharmacy locations) and approximately 27,000 independent pharmacies, in the United States, including Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam and the U.S.
Virgin Islands. When a customer fills a prescription in a retail pharmacy, the pharmacy sends prescription data electronically to the Company from the point-of-
sale. This data interfaces with the Company’s proprietary prescription management systems, which verify relevant plan member data and eligibility, while also
performing a drug utilization review to help evaluate clinical appropriateness and safety and confirming that the
3

pharmacy will receive payment for the prescription. The Company also offers a Performance program for non-Medicare customers. The Performance program may
be applied to any network. It can be implemented with either the Company’s broad, national network or with a managed network (as allowed by applicable laws
and regulations). Under the program, high performing pharmacies are eligible to receive an incremental positive performance payment. The program aligns with
key Healthcare Effectiveness Data Information Set measures and is funded by client fees. 
Mail Order Pharmacy Services
The Pharmacy Services segment operates mail order dispensing pharmacies in the United States. Plan members or their prescribers submit prescriptions or refill
requests, primarily for maintenance medications, to these pharmacies, and staff pharmacists review these prescriptions and refill requests with the assistance of the
Company’s prescription management systems. This review may involve communications with the prescriber and, with the prescriber’s approval when required, can
result in generic substitution, therapeutic interchange or other actions designed to help reduce cost and/or improve quality of treatment. The Company’s mail order
dispensing pharmacies have been awarded Mail Service Pharmacy accreditation from URAC, a health care accrediting organization that establishes quality
standards for the health care industry.
Specialty Pharmacy and Infusion Services
The Pharmacy Services segment operates specialty mail order pharmacies, retail specialty pharmacy stores and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services
in the United States. These specialty mail order pharmacies are used for delivery of advanced medications to individuals with chronic or genetic diseases and
disorders. The Company’s specialty mail order pharmacies also have been awarded Specialty Pharmacy accreditation from URAC. Substantially all of the
Company’s specialty mail order pharmacies also have been accredited by the Joint Commission, which is an independent, not-for-profit organization that accredits
and certifies health care programs and organizations in the United States.
Clinical Services
The Company offers multiple clinical programs and services to help clients manage overall pharmacy and health care costs in a clinically appropriate manner.
These programs are primarily designed to promote better health outcomes and to help target inappropriate medication utilization and non-adherence to medication,
each of which may result in adverse medical events that negatively affect member health and client pharmacy and medical spend. These programs include
utilization management (“UM”), medication management, quality assurance, adherence and counseling programs to complement the client’s plan design and
clinical strategies. To help address prescription opioid abuse and misuse, the Company introduced an industry-leading UM approach that limits to seven days the
supply of opioids dispensed for certain acute prescriptions for patients who are new to therapy, limits the daily dosage of opioids dispensed based on the strength of
the opioid and requires the use of immediate-release formulations of opioids before extended-release opioids are dispensed. The Company’s Pharmacy Advisor®
program facilitates pharmacist counseling, both face-to-face and over the telephone, to help participating plan members with certain chronic diseases, such as
diabetes and cardiovascular conditions, to identify gaps in care, adhere to their prescribed medications and manage their health conditions. The Company also has
digital connectivity that helps to lower drug costs for patients by providing expanded visibility to lower cost alternatives through enhanced analytics and data
sharing.
Disease Management Programs
The Company’s clinical programs and services utilize advanced protocols and offer clients convenience in working with health care providers (“providers”) and
other third parties. The Company’s utilization management program covers diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Parkinson’s disease, seizure disorders and
multiple sclerosis and is accredited by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (“NCQA”), a private, not-for-profit organization that evaluates, accredits and
certifies a wide range of health care organizations.
Medical Benefit Management
The Company’s NovoLogix® online preauthorization tool helps identify and capture cost savings opportunities for specialty drugs billed under the medical benefit
by identifying outliers to appropriate dosages and costs, and helps to ensure clinically appropriate use of specialty drugs.
Pharmacy Services Information Systems
The majority of the Pharmacy Services segment’s clients have migrated to a single claim adjudication platform. This platform incorporates architecture that
centralizes the data generated from filling mail order prescriptions, adjudicating retail pharmacy claims and delivering other solutions to PBM clients. The Health
Engagement Engine® technology and proprietary clinical algorithms help connect the various parts of the Enterprise and serve an essential role in cost management
and health improvement. This capability transforms pharmacy data into actionable interventions at key points of care, such as mail and specialty pharmacists, to
help provide quality care.
4

Pharmacy Services Clients
The Company’s Pharmacy Services clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, Medicare Part D
plans, Managed Medicaid plans and plans offered on Insurance Exchanges, other sponsors of health benefit plans and individuals located throughout the United
States. Pharmaceuticals are provided to eligible members in benefit plans maintained by clients and utilize the Company’s information systems, among other
things, to help perform safety checks, drug interaction screening and identify opportunities for generic substitution. Substantially all of the Pharmacy Services
segment’s revenues are generated from dispensing and managing prescription drugs to eligible members in benefit plans maintained by clients. In 2018 and 2017,
revenues from Aetna accounted for approximately 9.8% and 12.3%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated total revenues. On the Aetna Acquisition Date,
Aetna became a wholly-owned subsidiary of CVS Health. Subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date, revenues from Aetna continue to be reported in the Pharmacy
Services segment; however, these revenues are eliminated in the consolidated financial statements.
Pharmacy Services Seasonality
The majority of Pharmacy Services segment revenues are not seasonal in nature.
Pharmacy Services Competition
The Company believes the primary competitive factors in the pharmacy services industry include: (i) the ability to negotiate favorable discounts from drug
manufacturers as well as to negotiate favorable discounts from, and access to, retail pharmacy networks; (ii) the ability to identify and apply effective cost
management programs utilizing clinical strategies, including the development and utilization of preferred formularies; (iii) the ability to market PBM products and
services; (iv) the commitment to provide flexible, clinically-oriented services to clients and be responsive to clients’ needs; (v) the quality, scope and costs of
products and services offered to clients and their members; and (vi) operational excellence in delivering services. The Pharmacy Services segment has a significant
number of competitors (e.g., the Express Scripts business of Cigna Corporation, OptumRx, Prime Therapeutics, MedImpact, Humana and PillPack), offering PBM
services, including large, national PBM companies, PBMs owned by large national health plans and smaller standalone PBMs.
Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of general merchandise, including over-the-counter drugs, beauty products, cosmetics and
personal care products, provides health care services through its MinuteClinic® walk-in medical clinics and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations,
which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other ancillary services to chronic care facilities and other care settings. As of
December 31, 2019, the Retail/LTC segment operated approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail
pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and onsite pharmacies. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Retail/LTC segment filled 1.4 billion prescriptions on
a 30-day equivalent basis. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company dispensed approximately 26.6% of the total retail pharmacy prescriptions in the
United States.
Retail/LTC Products and Services
A typical retail store sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of high-quality, nationally advertised brand name and proprietary brand merchandise. Front
store categories include over-the-counter drugs, beauty products, cosmetics and personal care products. LTC operations include distribution of prescription drugs
and related consulting and ancillary services. The Company purchases merchandise from numerous manufacturers and distributors. The Company believes that
competitive sources are readily available for substantially all of the products carried in its retail stores and the loss of any one supplier would not likely have a
material effect on the Retail/LTC segment. The Company’s MinuteClinic locations offer a variety of health care services.
5

Retail/LTC revenues by major product group are as follows:
Percentage of Revenues
2019
2018
2017
Pharmacy (1)
76.7%
76.4%
75.0%
Front store and other (2)
23.3%
23.6%
25.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Pharmacy includes LTC sales and sales in pharmacies within Target Corporation stores.
(2)
“Other” represents less than 5% of the “Front store and other” revenue category.
Pharmacy
Pharmacy revenues represented approximately three-fourths of Retail/LTC segment revenues in each of 2019, 2018 and 2017. The Company believes that retail
pharmacy operations will continue to represent a critical part of the Company’s business due to industry demographics, e.g., an aging American population
consuming a greater number of prescription drugs, prescription drugs being used more often as the first line of defense for managing illness, the introduction of
new pharmaceutical products, and Medicare Part D growth. The Company believes the retail pharmacy business benefits from investment in both people and
technology, as well as innovative collaborations with health plans, PBMs and providers. Given the nature of prescriptions, consumers want their prescriptions filled
accurately by professional pharmacists using the latest tools and technology, and ready when promised. Consumers also need medication management programs
and better information to help them get the most out of their health care dollars. To assist consumers with these needs, the Company has introduced integrated
pharmacy health care services that provide an earlier, easier and more effective approach to engaging consumers in behaviors that can help lower costs, improve
health and save lives.
Front Store
Front store revenues reflect the Company’s strategy of innovating with new and unique products and services, using innovative personalized marketing and
adjusting the mix of merchandise to match customers’ needs and preferences. A key component of the front store strategy is the ExtraCare® card program, which is
one of the largest and most successful retail loyalty programs in the United States. The ExtraCare program allows the Company to balance marketing efforts so it
can reward its best customers by providing them with automatic sale prices, customized coupons, ExtraBucks® rewards and other benefits. The Company also
offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass®, under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course of the subscription
period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. The Company continues to launch and enhance new and exclusive
brands to create unmatched offerings in beauty products and deliver other unique product offerings, including a full range of high-quality CVS Health and other
proprietary brand products that are only available through CVS stores. The Company currently carries approximately 7,000 CVS Health and proprietary brand
products, which accounted for approximately 22% of front store revenues during 2019.
MinuteClinic
As of December 31, 2019, the Company operated approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic locations in the United States. The clinics are staffed by nurse practitioners
and physician assistants who utilize nationally established guidelines to deliver a variety of health care services. Payors value these clinics because they provide
convenient, high-quality, cost-effective care, in many cases offering an attractive alternative to more expensive sites of care. Visits paid for by employers, health
insurers or other third parties accounted for approximately 92% of MinuteClinic’s total revenues in 2019. MinuteClinic is collaborating with the Pharmacy Services
and Health Care Benefits segments to help meet the needs of CVS Caremark’s client plan members and the Company’s health plan members by offering programs
that can improve member health and lower costs. MinuteClinic is now affiliated with more than 90 major health systems and continues to build a platform that
supports primary care.
Long-term Care Pharmacy Operations
The Retail/LTC segment provides LTC pharmacy services through the Omnicare® business. Omnicare’s customers consist of skilled nursing facilities, assisted
living facilities, independent living communities, hospitals, correctional facilities, and other health care service providers. The Company provides pharmacy
consulting, including monthly patient drug therapy evaluations, to assist in compliance with state and federal regulations and provide proprietary clinical and health
management programs. It also provides pharmaceutical case management services for retirees, employees and dependents who have drug benefits under corporate-
sponsored health care programs.
Onsite Pharmacies
The Company also operates a limited number of pharmacies located at client sites, which provide certain health plan members and customers with a convenient
alternative for filling their prescriptions.
6

Retail Store Development
The addition of new retail locations has played, and will continue to play, a key role in the Company’s continued growth and success. The Company’s store
development program focuses on three areas: entering new service areas, adding stores within existing service areas and relocating stores to more convenient sites.
During 2019, the Company opened approximately 100 new retail locations, relocated approximately 25 stores, converted approximately 50 stores into HealthHUB®
locations and closed approximately 130 locations. HealthHUBs are stores with a redesigned format that provide enhanced services, offer a care concierge and focus
on health and wellness products. HealthHUBs are designed to meet consumer needs and improve the customer experience by providing care that complements
physician practices and hospital systems, enabling improved health outcomes and reducing overall health care costs. The Company expects to continue HealthHUB
conversions through 2021. During the last five years, the Company opened approximately 790 new and relocated locations, and acquired approximately 1,810
locations, including the pharmacies acquired from Target Corporation (“Target”) in 2015. The Company believes that continuing to assess the appropriateness of
its store base and locate retail stores in more accessible locations are essential components of competing effectively in the current health care environment. As a
result, the Company believes that its store development program is an integral part of its ability to meet the needs of customers and maintain its leadership position
in the retail pharmacy marketplace given the changing health care landscape.
Retail/LTC Information Systems
The Company has continued to invest in information systems to enable it to deliver exceptional customer service, enhance safety and quality, and expand patient
care services while lowering operating costs. The proprietary WeCARE Workflow supports pharmacy teams by prioritizing work to meet customer expectations,
facilitating prescriber outreach, and seamlessly integrating clinical programs. This solution delivers improved efficiency and enhances the customer experience, as
well as providing a framework to accommodate the evolution of pharmacy practice and the expansion of clinical programs. The Health Engagement Engine
technology and proprietary clinical algorithms enable the Company to help identify opportunities for pharmacists to deliver face-to-face counseling regarding
patient health and safety matters, including medication adherence issues, gaps in care and management of certain chronic health conditions. The Company’s digital
strategy is to empower the consumer to navigate their pharmacy experience and manage their condition through integrated online and mobile solutions that offer
utility and convenience. The Company’s LTC digital technology suite, Omniview®, improves the efficiency of customers’ operations with tools that include
executive dashboards, pre-admission pricing, electronic ordering of prescription refills, proof-of-delivery tracking, access to patient profiles, receipt and
management of facility bills, and real-time validation of Medicare Part D coverage, among other capabilities.
Retail/LTC Customers
The success of the Retail/LTC segment’s businesses is dependent upon the Company’s ability to establish and maintain contractual relationships with pharmacy
benefit managers and other payors on acceptable terms. Substantially all of the Retail/LTC segment’s pharmacy revenues are derived from pharmacy benefit
managers, managed care organizations, government funded health care programs, commercial employers and other third party payors. No single Retail/LTC payor
accounted for 10% or more of the Company’s consolidated total revenues in 2019, 2018 or 2017.
Retail/LTC Seasonality
The majority of Retail/LTC segment revenues, particularly pharmacy revenues, generally are not seasonal in nature. However, front store revenues tend to be
higher during the December holiday season. In addition, both pharmacy and front store revenues are affected by the timing and severity of the cough, cold and flu
season. Uncharacteristic or extreme weather conditions also can adversely affect consumer shopping patterns and Retail/LTC revenues, expenses and operating
results.
Retail/LTC Competition
The retail pharmacy business is highly competitive. The Company believes that it competes principally on the basis of: (i) store location and convenience,
(ii) customer service and satisfaction, (iii) product selection and variety, and (iv) price. In the areas it serves, the Company competes with other drugstore chains
(e.g., Walgreens and Rite Aid), supermarkets, discount retailers (e.g., Wal-Mart), independent pharmacies, restrictive pharmacy networks, membership
clubs, internet companies, and retail health clinics (including urgent care centers), as well as mail order dispensing pharmacies.
LTC pharmacy services are highly regional or local in nature, and within a given geographic area of operation, highly competitive. The Company’s largest LTC
pharmacy competitor nationally is PharMerica. The Company also competes with
7

numerous local and regional institutional pharmacies, pharmacies owned by long-term care facilities and local retail pharmacies. Some states have enacted
“freedom of choice” or “any willing provider” requirements as part of their state Medicaid programs or in separate legislation, which may increase the competition
that the Company faces in providing services to long-term care facility residents in these states.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment is one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers, serving an estimated 37 million people as of
December 31, 2019. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals,
make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare
Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care management services, workers’ compensation administrative services and health
information technology (“HIT”) products and services. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-
time and hourly workers, health plans, health care providers, governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. For periods prior to
November 28, 2018 (the Aetna Acquisition Date), the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business.
Health Care Benefits Products and Services
The Company refers to insurance products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services
contract products (where the plan sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk of medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” Health Care Benefits products and
services consist of the following:
•
Commercial Medical: The Health Care Benefits segment offers point-of-service (“POS”), preferred provider organization (“PPO”), health maintenance
organization (“HMO”) and indemnity benefit (“Indemnity”) plans. Commercial medical products also include health savings accounts (“HSAs”) and
consumer-directed health plans that combine traditional POS or PPO and/or dental coverage, subject to a deductible, with an accumulating benefit account
(which may be funded by the plan sponsor and/or the member in the case of HSAs). Principal products and services are targeted specifically to large multi-site
national, mid-sized and small employers, individual insureds and expatriates. The Company offers medical stop loss insurance coverage for certain employers
who elect to self-insure their health benefits. Under medical stop loss insurance products, the Company assumes risk for costs associated with large individual
claims and/or aggregate loss experience within an employer’s plan above a pre-set annual threshold.
•
Government Medical: In select geographies, the Health Care Benefits segment offers Medicare Advantage plans, Medicare Supplement plans and prescription
drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries; participates in Medicaid and subsidized Children’s Health Insurance Programs (“CHIP”); and participates in
demonstration projects for members who are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid (“Duals”). These Government Medical products are further described
below:
•
Medicare Advantage: Through annual contracts with the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”), the Company offers HMO and
PPO products for eligible individuals in certain geographic areas through the Medicare Advantage program. Members typically receive enhanced
benefits over traditional fee-for-service Medicare coverage (“Original Medicare”), including reduced cost-sharing for preventive care, vision and
other services. The Company offered network-based HMO and/or PPO plans in 1,416 counties in 45 states and Washington, D.C. in 2019. The
Company has expanded to 1,680 counties in 45 states and Washington, D.C. for 2020. For certain qualifying employer groups, the Company offers
Medicare PPO products nationally. When combined with the Company’s PDP product, these national PPO plans form an integrated national Insured
Medicare product for employers that provides medical and pharmacy benefits.
•
Medicare PDP: The Company is a national provider of drug benefits under the Medicare Part D prescription drug program. All Medicare eligible
individuals are eligible to participate in this voluntary prescription drug plan. Members typically receive coverage for certain prescription drugs,
usually subject to a deductible, co-insurance and/or co-payment. On November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone
PDPs to WellCare effective December 31, 2018. The Company provided administrative services to, and retained the financial results of, the divested
plans through 2019. Subsequent to 2019, the Company will no longer retain the financial results of the divested plans.
•
Medicare Supplement: For certain Medicare eligible members, the Company offers supplemental coverage for certain health care costs not covered
by Original Medicare. The products included in the Medicare Supplement portfolio help to cover some of the gaps in Original Medicare, and include
coverage for Medicare deductibles and
8

coinsurance amounts. The Company offered a wide selection of Medicare Supplement products in 49 states and Washington, D.C. in 2019.
•
Medicaid and CHIP: The Company offers health care management services to individuals eligible for Medicaid and CHIP under multi-year contracts
with government agencies in various states that are subject to annual appropriations. CHIP are state-subsidized insurance programs that provide
benefits for families with uninsured children. The Company offered these services on an Insured or ASC basis in 16 states in 2019.
•
Duals: The Company provides health coverage to beneficiaries who are dually eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid coverage. These members
must meet certain income and resource requirements in order to qualify for this coverage. The Company coordinates 100% of the care for these
members and may provide them with additional services in order to manage their health care costs.
•
Specialty: The Health Care Benefits segment has a portfolio of additional health products and services that complement its medical products such as dental
plans, behavioral health and employee assistance products, provider network access and vision products and workers’ compensation administrative services.
•
Transformative Products and Services: The Company has a portfolio of transformative products and services aimed at creating a holistic and integrated
approach to individual health and wellness. These products and services complement the Commercial Medical and Government Medical products and aim to
provide innovative solutions, create integrated experience offerings and enable enhanced care delivery to customers.
Health Care Benefits Provider Networks
The Company contracts with physicians, hospitals and other providers for services they provide to the Company’s members. The Company uses a variety of
techniques designed to help encourage appropriate utilization of medical services (“utilization”) and maintain affordability of quality coverage. In addition to
contracts with providers for negotiated rates of reimbursement, these techniques include creating risk sharing arrangements that align economic incentives with
providers, the development and implementation of guidelines for the appropriate utilization of medical services and the provision of data to providers to enable
them to improve health care quality. At December 31, 2019, the Company’s underlying nationwide provider network had approximately 1.3 million participating
providers, including over 706,000 primary care and specialist physicians and approximately 5,900 hospitals. Other providers in the Company’s provider networks
also include laboratory, imaging, urgent care and other freestanding health facilities.
Health Care Benefits Quality Assessment
CMS uses a 5-star rating system to monitor Medicare health care and drug plans and ensure that they meet CMS’s quality standards. CMS uses this rating system
to provide Medicare beneficiaries with a tool that they can use to compare the overall quality of care and level of customer service of companies that provide
Medicare health care and drug plans. The rating system considers a variety of measures adopted by CMS, including quality of preventative services, chronic illness
management and overall customer satisfaction. See “Health Care Benefits Pricing” below in this Item 1 for further discussion of star ratings. The Company seeks
Health Plan accreditation for Aetna HMO plans from the NCQA. Health care plans seeking accreditation must pass a rigorous, comprehensive review and must
annually report on their performance.
Aetna Life Insurance Company (“ALIC”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, has received nationwide NCQA PPO Health Plan accreditation. As of
December 31, 2019, all of the Company’s Commercial HMO and all of ALIC’s PPO members who were eligible participated in HMOs or PPOs that are accredited
by the NCQA.
The Company’s provider selection and credentialing/re-credentialing policies and procedures are consistent with NCQA and URAC, as well as state and federal,
requirements. In addition, the Company is certified under the NCQA Credentials Verification Organization (“CVO”) certification program for all certification
options and has URAC CVO accreditation.
Quality assessment programs for contracted providers who participate in the Company’s networks begin with the initial review of health care practitioners.
Practitioners’ licenses and education are verified, and their work history is collected by the Company or in some cases by the practitioner’s affiliated group or
organization. The Company generally requires participating hospitals to be certified by CMS or accredited by the Joint Commission, the American Osteopathic
Association, or Det Norske Veritas Healthcare.
The Company also offers quality and outcome measurement programs, quality improvement programs, and health care data analysis systems to providers and
purchasers of health care services.
9

Health Care Benefits Information Systems
The Health Care Benefits segment currently operates and supports an end-to-end suite of information technology platforms to support member engagement,
enrollment, health benefit administration, care management, service operations, financial reporting and analytics. The multiple platforms are supported by an
integration layer to facilitate the transfer of real-time data. There is continued focus and investment in digital products to offer innovative solutions and a seamless
experience to the Company’s members through mobile and web channels. The Company is making concerted investments in emerging technology capabilities such
as voice, artificial intelligence and robotics to further automate and improve the experience for all of its constituents. The Health Care Benefits segment is
integrating with the Retail/LTC and Pharmacy Services segments to build Enterprise technology assets that will help guide our members through their health care
journey, provide them a high level of service, enable healthier outcomes and encourage them to take next best actions to lead healthier lives.
Health Care Benefits Customers
Medical membership is dispersed throughout the United States, and the Company also serves medical members in certain countries outside the United States. The
Company offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, many of which are available
nationwide. Depending on the product, the Company markets to a range of customers including employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and
hourly workers, health plans, providers, governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates.
For additional information on medical membership, see “Health Care Benefits Segment” in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations (the “MD&A”) included in Item 7 of this 10-K.
The Company markets both Commercial Insured and ASC products and services primarily to employers that sponsor the Company’s products for the benefit of
their employees and their employees’ dependents. Frequently, larger employers offer employees a choice among coverage options, from which the employee
makes his or her selection during a designated annual open enrollment period. Typically, employers pay all of the monthly premiums to the Company and, through
payroll deductions, obtain reimbursement from employees for a percentage of the premiums that is determined by each employer. Some Health Care Benefits
products are sold directly to employees of employer groups on a fully employee-funded basis. In some cases, the Company bills the covered individual directly.
The Company offers Insured Medicare coverage on an individual basis as well as through employer groups to their retirees. Medicaid and CHIP members are
enrolled on an individual basis. The Company also offers Insured health care coverage to members who are dually-eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.
Health Care Benefits products are sold through the Company’s sales personnel; through independent brokers, agents and consultants who assist in the production
and servicing of business; and through Private Exchanges. For large plan sponsors, independent consultants and brokers are frequently involved in employer health
plan selection decisions and sales. In some instances, the Company may pay commissions, fees and other amounts to brokers, agents, consultants and sales
representatives who place business with the Company. In certain cases, the customer pays the broker for services rendered, and the Company may facilitate that
arrangement by collecting the funds from the customer and transmitting them to the broker. The Company supports marketing and sales efforts with an advertising
program that may include television, radio, billboards, print media and social media, supplemented by market research and direct marketing efforts.
The U.S. federal government is a significant customer of the Health Care Benefits segment through contracts with CMS for coverage of Medicare-eligible
individuals and federal employee-related benefit programs. Other than the contracts with CMS, the Health Care Benefits segment is not dependent upon a single
customer or a few customers the loss of which would have a significant effect on the earnings of the segment. The loss of business from any one, or a few,
independent brokers or agents would not have a material adverse effect on the earnings of the Health Care Benefits segment. In 2019, Health Care Benefits
segment revenues from the federal government accounted for approximately 13% of the Company’s consolidated total revenues. Contracts with CMS for coverage
of Medicare-eligible individuals accounted for approximately 95% of the Company’s revenues from the federal government in 2019. No single Health Care
Benefits customer accounted for 10% or more of the Company’s consolidated total revenues in 2018 or 2017.
10

Health Care Benefits Pricing
For Commercial Insured plans, contracts containing the pricing and other terms of the relationship are generally established in advance of the policy period and
typically have a duration of one year. Fees under ASC plans are generally fixed for a period of one year.
Generally, a fixed premium rate is determined at the beginning of the policy period for Commercial Insured plans. The Company typically cannot recover
unanticipated increases in health care and other benefit costs in the current policy period; however, it may consider prior experience for a product in the aggregate
or for a specific customer, among other factors, in determining premium rates for future policy periods. Where required by state laws, premium rates are filed and
approved by state regulators prior to contract inception. Future operating results could be adversely affected if the premium rates requested are not approved or are
adjusted downward or their approval is delayed by state or federal regulators.
The Company has Medicare Advantage and PDP contracts with CMS to provide HMO, PPO and prescription drug coverage to Medicare beneficiaries in certain
geographic areas. Under these annual contracts, CMS pays the Company a fixed per member (or “capitation”) payment and/or a portion of the premium, both of
which are based on membership and adjusted for demographic and health risk factors. CMS also considers inflation, changes in utilization patterns and average per
capita fee-for-service Medicare costs in the calculation of the fixed capitation payment or premium. PDP contracts also provide a risk-sharing arrangement with
CMS to limit the Company’s exposure to unfavorable expenses or benefit from favorable expenses. Amounts payable to the Company under the Medicare
arrangements are subject to annual revision by CMS, and the Company elects to participate in each Medicare service area or region on an annual basis. Premiums
paid to the Company for Medicare products are subject to federal government reviews and audits, which can result, and have resulted, in retroactive and
prospective premium adjustments and refunds to the government and/or members. In addition to payments received from CMS, some of Medicare Advantage
products and all PDP products require a supplemental premium to be paid by the member or sponsoring employer. In some cases these supplemental premiums are
adjusted based on the member’s income and asset levels. Compared to Commercial Medical products, Medicare contracts generate higher per member per month
revenues and higher health care and other benefit costs.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) ties a portion of each
Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement to the plan’s “star ratings.” Plans must have a star rating of four or higher (out of five) to qualify for bonus payments.
CMS released the Company’s 2020 star ratings in October 2019. The Company’s 2020 star ratings will be used to determine which of the Company’s Medicare
Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2021. Based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2019, 83% of
the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2020 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars, compared to 79% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage
members being in plans with 2019 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2018.
Rates for Medicare Supplement products are regulated at the state level and vary by state and plan.
Under Insured Medicaid contracts, state government agencies pay the Company fixed monthly rates per member that vary by state, line of business and
demographics; and the Company arranges, pays for and manages the health care services provided to Medicaid beneficiaries. These rates are subject to change by
each state, and, in some instances, provide for adjustment for health risk factors. CMS requires these rates to be actuarially sound. The Company also receives fees
from customers where it provides services under ASC Medicaid contracts. ASC Medicaid contracts generally are for periods of more than one year, and certain of
them contain performance incentives and limited financial risk sharing with respect to certain medical, financial and operational metrics. Under these
arrangements, performance is evaluated annually, with associated financial incentive opportunities, and financial risk share obligations are typically limited to a
percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company. Payments to the Company under Medicaid contracts are subject to the annual appropriation process in
the applicable state.
Under Duals contracts, the rate setting process is generally established by CMS in partnership with the state government agency participating in the demonstration
project. Both CMS and the state government agency may seek premium and other refunds under certain circumstances, including if the Company fails to comply
with CMS regulations or other contractual requirements.
The Company offers HMO and consumer-directed medical and dental plans to federal employees under the Federal Employees Health Benefits (“FEHB”) Program
and the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program. Premium rates and fees
11

for those plans are subject to federal government review and audit, which can result, and have resulted, in retroactive and prospective premium and fee adjustments
and refunds to the government and/or members.
Beginning in 2014, the ACA imposed significant new industry-wide fees, assessments and taxes, including an annual levy known as the Health Insurer Fee (the
“HIF”). The HIF applies for 2020 and was temporarily suspended for 2019 and 2017. In December 2019, the HIF was repealed for calendar years after 2020. For
additional information on the ACA fees, assessments and taxes, see Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K. The Company’s
goal is to collect in premiums and fees where possible, or solve for, all of the ACA-related fees, assessments and taxes.
Health Care Benefits Seasonality
For periods prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business. The quarterly
earnings and operating cash flows of the PDP business are impacted by the Medicare Part D benefit design and changes in the composition of PDP membership.
The Medicare Part D standard benefit design results in coverage that varies with a member’s cumulative annual out-of-pocket costs. The benefit design generally
results in employers or other entities that sponsor the Company’s products (“plan sponsors”) sharing a greater portion of the responsibility for total prescription
drug costs in the early part of the year. As a result, the PDP pay percentage or benefit ratio generally decreases and operating income generally increases as the year
progresses. For periods subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition, the Health Care Benefits segment’s quarterly operating income progression is also impacted by (i) the
seasonality of benefit costs which generally increase during the year as Insured members progress through their annual deductibles and out-of-pocket expense
limits and (ii) the seasonality of operating expenses which are generally the highest during the fourth quarter due primarily to spending to support readiness for the
start of the upcoming Medicare plan year and marketing associated with Medicare annual enrollment.
Health Care Benefits Competition
The health care benefits industry is highly competitive, primarily due to a large number of for-profit and not-for-profit competitors, competitors’ marketing and
pricing and a proliferation of competing products, including new products that are continually being introduced into the marketplace. New entrants into the
marketplace, as well as consolidation within the industry, have contributed to and are expected to intensify the competitive environment. In addition, the rapid pace
of change as the industry evolves towards a consumer-focused retail marketplace, including Insurance Exchanges, and the increased use of technology to interact
with members, providers and customers, increase the risks the Company currently faces from new entrants and disruptive actions by existing competitors compared
to prior periods.
The Company believes that the significant factors that distinguish competing health plans include the perceived overall quality (including accreditation status),
quality of service, comprehensiveness of coverage, cost (including premium rates, provider discounts and member out-of-pocket costs), product design, financial
stability and ratings, breadth and quality of provider networks, ability to offer different provider network options, providers available in such networks, and quality
of member support and care management programs. The Company believes that it is competitive on each of these factors. The Company’s ability to increase the
number of persons covered by its health plans or to increase Health Care Benefits segment revenues is affected by its ability to differentiate itself from its
competitors on these factors. Competition may also affect the availability of services from health care providers, including primary care physicians, specialists and
hospitals.
Insured products compete with local and regional health care benefits plans, health care benefits and other plans sponsored by other large commercial health care
benefit insurance companies, health system owned health plans, new entrants into the marketplace and numerous for-profit and not-for-profit organizations
operating under licenses from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. The largest competitor in Medicare products is Original Medicare. Additional Health
Care Benefits segment competitors include other types of medical and dental provider organizations, various specialty service providers (including PBM services
providers), health care consultants, financial services companies, integrated health care delivery organizations (networks of providers who also coordinate
administrative services for and assume insurance risk of their members), third party administrators (“TPAs”), HIT companies and, for certain plans, programs
sponsored by the federal or state governments. Emerging competitors include start up health care benefits plans, technology companies, provider-owned health
plans, new joint ventures (including not-for-profit joint ventures among firms from multiple industries), technology firms, financial services firms that are
distributing competing products on their proprietary Private Exchanges, and consulting firms that are distributing competing products on their proprietary Private
Exchanges, as well as non-traditional distributors such as retail companies. The Company’s ability to increase the number of persons enrolled in Insured
Commercial Medical products also is affected by the desire and ability of employers to self-fund their health coverage.
12

The Health Care Benefits segment’s ASC plans compete primarily with other large commercial health care benefit companies, numerous for-profit and not-for-
profit organizations operating under licenses from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association and TPAs.
The Health Care Benefits segment’s international products compete with local, global and U.S.-based health plans and commercial health care benefit insurance
companies, many of whom are licensed in more geographies and have a longer operating history, better brand recognition and greater marketplace presence in one
or more geographies.
The provider solutions and HIT marketplaces and products are evolving rapidly. The Company competes for provider solutions and HIT business with other large
health plans and commercial health care benefit insurance companies as well as information technology companies and companies that specialize in provider
solutions and HIT. Many information technology product competitors have longer operating histories, better brand recognition, greater marketplace presence and
more experience in developing innovative products.
In addition to competitive pressures affecting the Company’s ability to obtain new customers or retain existing customers, the Health Care Benefits segment’s
medical membership has been and may continue to be adversely affected by adverse and/or uncertain economic conditions and reductions in workforce by existing
customers due to adverse and/or uncertain general economic conditions, especially in the United States and industries where such membership is concentrated.
Health Care Benefits Reinsurance
The Company currently has several reinsurance agreements with non-affiliated insurers that relate to Health Care Benefits insurance policies. The Company
entered into these contracts to reduce the risk of catastrophic losses which in turn reduces capital and surplus requirements. The Company frequently evaluates
reinsurance opportunities and refines its reinsurance and risk management strategies on a regular basis.
Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the overall operations of the Company, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and Enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
Generic Sourcing Venture
The Company and Cardinal Health, Inc. (“Cardinal”) each have a 50% ownership in Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (“Red Oak”), a generic pharmaceutical sourcing
entity. Under this arrangement, the Company and Cardinal contributed their sourcing and supply chain expertise to Red Oak and agreed to source and negotiate
generic pharmaceutical supply contracts for both companies through Red Oak. Red Oak does not own or hold inventory on behalf of either company.
Working Capital Practices
The Company funds the growth of its businesses through a combination of cash flow from operations, commercial paper and other short-term borrowings, proceeds
from sale-leaseback transactions and long-term borrowings. For additional information on the Company’s working capital practices, see “Liquidity and Capital
Resources” in the MD&A included in Item 7 of this 10-K. The majority of the Retail/LTC segment non-pharmacy revenues are paid in cash, or with debit or credit
cards. Managed care organizations, pharmacy benefit managers, government funded health care programs, commercial employers and other third party insurance
programs, which represent the vast majority of the Company’s consolidated pharmacy revenues, typically settle in less than 30 days. The remainder of the
Company’s consolidated pharmacy revenues are paid in cash, or with debit or credit cards. Employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly
workers, health plans, providers, governmental units, government-sponsored plans (with the exception of Medicare Part D services, which are described below),
labor groups and expatriates, which represent the vast majority of Health Care Benefits segment revenues, typically settle in less than 30 days. As a provider of
Medicare Part D services, the Company contracts annually with CMS. Utilization of services each plan
13

year results in the accumulation of either a receivable from or a payable to CMS. The timing of settlement of the receivable or payable with CMS takes several
quarters, which impacts working capital from year to year.
Colleague Development
As of December 31, 2019, the Company employed approximately 290,000 colleagues in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and a number of
countries outside the United States. To deliver the highest levels of service to customers, the Company devotes considerable time and attention to its people and
service standards. The Company emphasizes attracting and training knowledgeable, friendly and helpful associates to work in the organization.
Intellectual Property
The Company has registered and/or applied to register a variety of trademarks and service marks used throughout its businesses, as well as domain names, and
relies on a combination of copyright, patent, trademark and trade secret laws, in addition to contractual restrictions, to establish and protect the Company’s
proprietary rights. The Company regards its intellectual property as having significant value in the Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits
segments. The Company is not aware of any facts that could materially impact the continuing use of any of its intellectual property.
Government Regulation
Overview
The Company’s operations are subject to comprehensive federal, state and local laws and regulations and comparable multiple levels of international regulation in
the jurisdictions in which it does business. There also continues to be a heightened level of review and/or audit by federal, state and international regulators of the
health and related benefits industry’s business and reporting practices. In addition, many of the Company’s PBM clients and the Company’s payors in the
Retail/LTC segment, including insurers, Medicare Part D plans, Managed Medicaid plans and managed care organizations (“MCOs”), are themselves subject to
extensive regulations that affect the design and implementation of prescription drug benefit plans that they sponsor. Similarly, the Company’s LTC clients, such as
skilled nursing facilities, are subject to government regulations, including many of the same government regulations to which the Company is subject.
The laws and rules governing the Company’s businesses and interpretations of those laws and rules continue to expand and become more restrictive each year and
are subject to frequent change. The application of these complex legal and regulatory requirements to the detailed operation of the Company’s businesses creates
areas of uncertainty. Further, there are numerous proposed health care, financial services and other laws and regulations at the federal, state and international levels,
some of which could adversely affect the Company’s businesses if they are enacted. The Company cannot predict whether pending or future federal or state
legislation or court proceedings, including fundamental changes to the dynamics of one or more of the industries in which it competes, such as the federal or one or
more state governments fundamentally restructuring the Commercial, Medicare or Medicaid marketplace or reducing payments to the Company under or financing
for Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible or special needs programs, increasing its involvement in drug reimbursement, pricing, purchasing, and/or importation or
changing the laws governing PBMs, will change various aspects of the industries in which it competes or the health care industry generally or the impact those
changes will have on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or stock price, but the effects could be materially adverse. Any failure or alleged
failure to comply with applicable laws and regulations summarized below, or any adverse applications or interpretations of, or changes in, the laws and regulations
affecting the Company and/or its businesses, could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results, financial condition, cash flows and/or stock
price. See Item 3 of this 10-K, “Legal Proceedings,” for further information.
The Company can give no assurance that its businesses, financial condition, operating results and/or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected, or that the
Company will not be required to materially change its business practices, based on: (i) future enactment of new health care or other laws or regulations; (ii) the
interpretation or application of existing laws or regulations, including the laws and regulations described in this Government Regulation section, as they may relate
to one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iii) pending
or future federal or state governmental investigations of one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes
and/or the health care industry generally; (iv) pending or future government audits, investigations or enforcement actions against the Company; (v) adverse
developments in any pending qui tam lawsuit against the Company, whether sealed or unsealed, or in any future qui tam lawsuit that may be filed against the
Company; or (vi) adverse developments in pending or future legal proceedings against the Company or affecting one or more of the industries in which the
Company competes and/or the health care industry generally.
14

Laws and Regulations Related to Multiple Segments of the Company’s Business
Laws Related to Reimbursement by Government Programs - The Company is subject to various federal and state laws concerning its submission of claims and
other information to Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state government-sponsored health care programs. Potential sanctions for violating these laws
include recoupment or reduction of government reimbursement amounts, civil penalties, treble damages, and exclusion from participation in government health
care programs. Such laws include the federal False Claims Act (the “False Claims Act”), the federal anti-kickback statute, state false claims acts and anti-kickback
statutes in most states, the federal “Stark Law” and related state laws. In particular, the False Claims Act prohibits intentionally submitting, conspiring to submit, or
causing to be submitted, false claims, records, or statements to the federal government, or intentionally failing to return overpayments, in connection with
reimbursement by federal government programs. In addition, any claim for government reimbursement also violates the False Claims Act where it results from a
violation of the federal anti-kickback statute.
Both federal and state false claims laws permit private individuals to file qui tam or “whistleblower” lawsuits on behalf of the federal or state government.
Participants in the health and related benefits industry, including the Company, frequently are subject to actions under the False Claims Act or similar state laws.
The federal Stark Law generally prohibits physicians from referring Medicare or Medicaid beneficiaries for certain services, including outpatient prescription
drugs, to any entity with which the physician, or an immediate family member of the physician, has a financial relationship. The Stark Law further prohibits the
entity receiving a prohibited referral from presenting a claim for reimbursement by Medicare or Medicaid for services furnished pursuant to the prohibited referral.
Various states have enacted similar laws.
The ACA - The ACA made broad-based changes to the U.S. health care system. While the Company anticipates continued efforts in 2020 and beyond to
invalidate, modify, repeal or replace the ACA, the Company expects aspects of the ACA to continue to significantly impact its business operations and operating
results, including pricing, medical benefit ratios (“MBRs”) and the geographies in which the Company’s products are available.
While most of the significant aspects of the ACA became effective during or prior to 2014, parts of the ACA continue to evolve through the promulgation of
executive orders, legislation, regulations and guidance as well as ongoing litigation. Additional changes to the ACA and those regulations and guidance at the
federal and/or state level are likely, and those changes are likely to be significant. Growing federal and state budgetary pressures make it more likely that any
changes, including changes at the state level in response to changes to, or invalidation, repeal or replacement of, the ACA and/or changes in the funding levels
and/or payment mechanisms of federally supported benefit programs, will be adverse to us. For example, if any elements of the ACA are invalidated or repealed at
the federal level, the Company expects that some states would seek to enact similar requirements, such as prohibiting pre-existing condition exclusions, prohibiting
rescission of insurance coverage, requiring coverage for dependents up to age 26, requiring guaranteed renewability of insurance coverage and prohibiting lifetime
limits on insurance coverage.
The expansion of health care coverage contemplated by the ACA is being funded in part by reductions to the reimbursements the Company and other health plans
are paid by the federal government for Medicare members, among other sources. While not all-inclusive, the following are some of the key funding changes related
to the ACA (assuming it continues to be implemented in its current form) that become effective on or after January 1, 2020. The Company continues to evaluate
these provisions and the related regulations and regulatory guidance to determine the impact that they will have on its business operations and operating results:
•
The repeal of the annual non-tax deductible industry-wide HIF for calendar years after 2020. The HIF was $14.3 billion for 2018 and suspended for 2019. As
currently enacted, the HIF will be $15.5 billion for 2020.
•
The repeal of the non-tax deductible 40% excise tax on employer-sponsored health care benefits above a certain threshold that was scheduled to begin in 2022.
•
Reduced funding for Medicaid expansion, which began in 2017.
The ACA also specifies minimum medical loss ratios (“MLRs”) for Commercial and Medicare Insured products, specifies features required to be included in
Commercial benefit designs, limits Commercial individual and small group rating and pricing practices, encourages additional competition (including potential
incentives for new participants to enter the marketplace) and significantly increases federal and state oversight of health plans, including regulations and processes
that could delay or limit the Company’s ability to appropriately increase its health plan premium rates. This in turn could adversely affect the Company’s ability to
continue to participate in certain product lines and/or geographies that it serves today.
15

Potential repeal of the ACA, ongoing legislative, regulatory and administrative policy changes to the ACA, the results of federal and state level elections, pending
litigation challenging the constitutionality of the ACA or funding for the law and federal budget negotiations continue to create uncertainty about the ultimate
impact of the ACA. The time frame for conclusion and final outcome and ultimate impact of this litigation are uncertain. Given the inherent difficulty of foreseeing
the nature and scope of future changes to the ACA and how states, businesses and individuals will respond to those changes, the Company cannot predict the
impact on it of future changes to the ACA. It is reasonably possible that invalidation, repeal or replacement of or other changes to the ACA and/or states’ responses
to such changes, in the aggregate, could have a significant adverse effect on the Company’s businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Medicare Regulation - The Company’s Medicare Advantage products compete directly with Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage products offered by
other Medicare Advantage organizations and Medicare Supplement products offered by other insurers. The Company’s Medicare PDP and Medicare Supplement
products are products that Medicare beneficiaries who are enrolled in Original Medicare purchase to enhance their Original Medicare coverage.
The Company continues to expand the number of counties in which it offers Medicare products. The Company expects to further expand its Medicare service area
and products in 2020 and is seeking to substantially grow its Medicare membership, revenue and operating results over the next several years, including through
growth in Medicare Supplement products. The anticipated organic expansion of the Medicare service area and Medicare products offered and the Medicare-related
provisions of the ACA significantly increase the Company’s exposure to funding and regulation of, and changes in government policy with respect to and/or
funding or regulation of, the various Medicare programs in which the Company participates, including changes in the amounts payable to us under those programs
and/or new reforms or surcharges on existing programs. For example, the ACA requires minimum MLRs for Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D plans of
85%. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays minimum MLR rebates for three consecutive years, it will become ineligible to enroll new
members. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays such rebates for five consecutive years, it will be terminated by CMS.
The Company’s Medicare Advantage and PDP products are heavily regulated by CMS. The regulations and contractual requirements applicable to the Company
and other private participants in Medicare programs are complex, expensive to comply with and subject to change. For example, in the second quarter of 2014,
CMS issued a final rule implementing the ACA requirements that Medicare Advantage and PDP plans report and refund to CMS overpayments that those plans
receive from CMS. The precise interpretation, impact and legality of this rule are not clear and are subject to pending litigation. Payments the Company receives
from CMS for its Medicare Advantage and Part D businesses also are subject to risk adjustment based on the health status of the individuals enrolled. Elements of
that risk adjustment mechanism continue to be challenged by the DOJ, the Office of the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(the “OIG”) and CMS itself. Substantial changes in the risk adjustment mechanism, including changes that result from enforcement or audit actions, could
materially affect the amount of the Company’s Medicare reimbursement, require the Company to raise prices or reduce the benefits offered to Medicare
beneficiaries, and potentially limit the Company’s (and the industry’s) participation in the Medicare program.
The Company has invested significant resources to comply with Medicare standards, and its Medicare compliance efforts will continue to require significant
resources. CMS may seek premium and other refunds, prohibit the Company from continuing to market and/or enroll members in or refuse to passively enroll
members in one or more of the Company’s Medicare or Medicare-Medicaid demonstration (historically known as “dual eligible”) plans, exclude us from
participating in one or more Medicare, dual eligible or dual eligible special needs plan programs and/or institute other sanctions and/or civil monetary penalties
against the Company if it fails to comply with CMS regulations or its Medicare contractual requirements. The Company’s Medicare Supplement products are
regulated at the state level and subject to similar significant compliance requirements and risks.
CMS regularly audits the Company’s performance to determine its compliance with CMS’s regulations and its contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of
services it provides to Medicare Advantage and PDP beneficiaries. For example, CMS conducts risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”) audits of a subset of
Medicare Advantage contracts for each contract year. Since 2013, CMS has selected certain of the Company’s Medicare Advantage contracts for various years for
RADV audit, and the number of RADV audits continues to increase. The OIG also is auditing the Company’s risk adjustment data and that of other companies, and
the Company expects CMS and the OIG to continue auditing risk adjustment data. The Company also has received Civil Investigative Demands (“CIDs”) from,
and provided documents and information to, the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of its patient chart review processes in
connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D of the Medicare program.
16

On October 26, 2018, CMS issued proposed rules related to, among other things, changes to the RADV audit methodology established by CMS in 2012. CMS
projects that the changes to the RADV audit methodology would increase its recoveries from Medicare Advantage plans as a result of RADV audits. CMS has
requested comments on the proposed rules, including whether the proposed RADV rule change should apply retroactively to audits of Medicare Advantage plans
for contract year 2011 and forward. The Company is evaluating the potential adverse effect, which could be material, on the Company’s operating results, financial
condition, and cash flows if the proposed RADV rule change were adopted as proposed. CMS also has announced that its goal is to subject all Medicare Advantage
contracts to either a comprehensive or a targeted RADV audit for each contract year.
A portion of each Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement is tied to the plan’s “star ratings.” The star rating system considers a variety of measures adopted by
CMS, including quality of preventative services, chronic illness management, compliance and overall customer satisfaction. Only Medicare Advantage plans with
an overall star rating of four or more stars (out of five stars) are eligible for a quality bonus in their basic premium rates. As a result, the Company’s Medicare
Advantage plans’ operating results in 2020 and going forward will be significantly affected by their star ratings. The Company’s star ratings and past performance
scores are adversely affected by the compliance issues that arise each year in its Medicare operations. CMS released the Company’s 2020 star ratings in October
2019. The Company’s 2020 star ratings will be used to determine which of its Medicare Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus
payments in 2021. Based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2019, 83% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2020
star ratings of at least 4.0 stars. CMS will release updated stars ratings in October 2020 that will be used to determine which Medicare Advantage plans have
ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2022. CMS also gives PDPs star ratings which affect PDP’s enrollment. Medicare Advantage and
PDP plans that are rated less than three stars for three consecutive years are subject to contract termination by CMS. CMS continues to revise its star ratings system
to make it harder to achieve four stars or more. Despite the Company’s success in achieving high 2020 star ratings and other quality measures and the continuation
of its improvement efforts, there can be no assurances that it will be successful in maintaining or improving its star ratings in future years. Accordingly, the
Company’s Medicare Advantage plans may not be eligible for full level quality bonuses, which could adversely affect the benefits such plans can offer, reduce
membership and/or reduce profit margins.
Overall, the Company projects the benchmark payment rates in CMS’s April 2019 final notice detailing final Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates for
2020 (the “Final Notice”) will increase funding for the Company’s Medicare Advantage business, excluding the impact of the HIF, by approximately 2.0% in 2020
compared to 2019. This 2020 rate increase only partially offsets the challenge the Company faces from the impact of the increasing cost of medical care (including
prescription medications) and CMS local and national coverage decisions that require the Company to pay for services and supplies that are not factored into the
Company’s bids. The federal government may seek to impose restrictions on the configuration of pharmacy or other provider networks for Medicare Advantage
and/or PDP plans, or otherwise restrict the ability of these plans to alter benefits, negotiate prices or establish other terms to improve affordability or maintain
viability of products. The Company currently believes that the payments it has received and will receive in the near term are adequate to justify the Company’s
continued participation in the Medicare Advantage and PDP programs, although there are economic and political pressures to continue to reduce spending on the
program, and this outlook could change.
Going forward, the Company expects CMS, the OIG, the DOJ, other federal agencies and the U.S. Congress to continue to scrutinize closely each component of
the Medicare program (including Medicare Advantage, PDP, demonstration projects such as Medicare-Medicaid plans and provider network access and adequacy),
modify the terms and requirements of the program and possibly seek to recast or limit private insurers’ role. It is not possible to predict the outcome of this
Congressional or regulatory activity, any of which could materially and adversely affect the Company.
Anti-Remuneration Laws - Federal law prohibits, among other things, an entity from knowingly and willfully offering, paying, soliciting or receiving, subject to
certain exceptions and “safe harbors,” any remuneration to induce the referral of individuals or the purchase, lease or order of items or services for which payment
may be made under Medicare, Medicaid or certain other federal and state health care programs. A number of states have similar laws, some of which are not
limited to services paid for with government funds. Sanctions for violating these federal and state anti-remuneration laws may include imprisonment, criminal and
civil fines, and exclusion from participation in Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state government-sponsored health care programs. Companies involved in
public health care programs such as Medicare and/or Medicaid are required to maintain compliance programs to detect and deter fraud, waste and abuse, and are
often the subject of fraud, waste and abuse investigations and audits. The Company has invested significant resources to comply with Medicare and Medicaid
program standards. Ongoing vigorous law enforcement and the highly technical regulatory scheme mean that the Company’s compliance efforts in this area will
continue to require significant resources.
17

Antitrust and Unfair Competition - The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”) investigates and prosecutes practices that are “unfair trade practices” or “unfair
methods of competition.” Numerous lawsuits have been filed throughout the United States against pharmaceutical manufacturers, retail pharmacies and/or PBMs
under various federal and state antitrust and unfair competition laws challenging, among other things: (i) brand name drug pricing and rebate practices of
pharmaceutical manufacturers, (ii) the maintenance of retail or specialty pharmacy networks by PBMs, and (iii) various other business practices of PBMs and retail
pharmacies. To the extent that the Company appears to have actual or potential market power in a relevant market or CVS Pharmacy, CVS Specialty or
MinuteClinic plays a unique or expanded role in a PBM or Health Care Benefits segment product offering, the Company’s business arrangements and uses of
confidential information may be subject to heightened scrutiny from an anti-competitive perspective and possible challenge by state and/or federal regulators
and/or private parties.
Privacy and Confidentiality Requirements - Many of the Company’s activities involve the receipt, use and disclosure by the Company of personally identifiable
information (“PII”) as permitted in accordance with applicable federal and state privacy and data security laws, which require organizations to provide appropriate
privacy and security safeguards for such information. In addition to PII, the Company uses and discloses de-identified data for analytical and other purposes when
permitted. Additionally, there are industry standards for handling credit card data known as the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, which are a set of
requirements designed to help ensure that entities that process, store or transmit credit card information maintain a secure environment. Certain states have
incorporated these requirements into state laws or enacted other requirements relating to the use and/or disclosure of PII.
The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and the regulations issued thereunder (collectively, “HIPAA”), as further modified by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (“ARRA”) impose extensive requirements on the way in which health plans, health care providers, health care
clearinghouses (known as “covered entities”) and their business associates use, disclose and safeguard protected health information (“PHI”). Further, ARRA
requires the Company and other covered entities to report any breaches of PHI to impacted individuals and to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(“HHS”) and to notify the media in any states where 500 or more people are impacted by the unauthorized release or use of or access to PHI. Criminal penalties
and civil sanctions may be imposed for failing to comply with HIPAA standards. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (the
“HITECH Act”), enacted as part of ARRA, amended HIPAA to impose additional restrictions on third-party funded communications using PHI and the receipt of
remuneration in exchange for PHI. The HITECH Act also extended HIPAA privacy and security requirements and penalties directly to business associates. HHS
has begun to audit health plans, providers and other parties to enforce HIPAA compliance, including with respect to data security.
In addition to HIPAA, state health privacy laws apply to the extent they are more protective of individual privacy than is HIPAA, including laws that place stricter
controls on the release of information relating to specific diseases or conditions and requirements to notify members of unauthorized release or use of or access to
PHI. States also have adopted regulations to implement provisions of the Financial Modernization Act of 1999 (also known as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(“GLBA”)) which generally require insurers, including health insurers, to provide customers with notice regarding how their non-public personal health and
financial information is used and the opportunity to “opt out” of certain disclosures before the insurer shares such information with a non-affiliated third party. Like
HIPAA, GLBA sets a “floor” standard, allowing states to adopt more stringent requirements governing privacy protection. Complying with additional state
requirements requires us to make additional investments beyond those the Company has made to comply with HIPAA and GLBA.
The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 encourages organizations to share cyber threat indicators with the federal government and, among other things,
directs HHS to develop a set of voluntary cybersecurity best practices for organizations in the health care industry. In addition, states have begun to enact more
comprehensive privacy laws and regulations addressing consumer rights to data access, deletion, protection or transparency, such as the California Consumer
Privacy Act (“CCPA”). States also are starting to issue regulations and proposed regulations specifically related to cybersecurity, such as the regulations issued by
the New York Department of Financial Services. Complying with conflicting cybersecurity regulations, which may differ from state to state, requires significant
resources. In addition, differing approaches to state privacy and/or cyber-security regulation and varying enforcement philosophies may materially and adversely
affect the Company’s ability to standardize its products and services across state lines. Widely-reported large scale commercial data breaches in the United States
and abroad increase the likelihood that additional data security legislation will be considered by additional states. These legislative and regulatory developments
will impact the design and operation of the Company’s businesses, its privacy and security strategy and its web-based and mobile assets.
Finally, each Public Exchange is required to adhere to privacy and security standards with respect to PII, and to impose privacy and security standards that are at
least as protective of PII as those the Public Exchange has implemented for itself or non-
18

Public Exchange entities, which include insurers offering plans through the Public Exchange and their designated downstream entities, including PBMs and other
business associates. These standards may differ from, and be more stringent than, HIPAA.
Consumer Protection Laws - The federal government has many consumer protection laws, such as the Federal Trade Commission Act, the Federal Postal Service
Act, the Consumer Product Safety Act and the FTC’s Telemarketing Sales Rule. Most states also have similar consumer protection laws. In addition, the federal
government and most states have adopted laws and/or regulations requiring places of public accommodation, health care services and other goods and services to
be accessible to people with disabilities. These consumer protection and accessibility laws and regulations have been the basis for investigations, lawsuits and
multistate settlements relating to, among other matters, the marketing of loyalty programs, and health care products and services, pricing accuracy, expired front
store products, financial incentives provided by drug manufacturers to pharmacies in connection with therapeutic interchange programs, disclosures related to how
personal data is used and protected and the accessibility of goods and services to people with disabilities. As a result of the Company’s direct-to-consumer
activities, including mobile and web-based solutions offered to members and to other consumers, the Company also is subject to federal and state regulations
applicable to electronic communications and to other general consumer protection laws and regulations. For example, the CCPA became effective in 2020, and
additional federal and state regulation of consumer privacy protection may be proposed or enacted in 2020. The Company expects these new laws and regulations
to impact the design of its products and services and the management and operation of its businesses and to increase its compliance costs.
Telemarketing and Other Outbound Contacts - Certain federal and state laws, such as the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, give the FTC, the Federal
Communications Commission and state attorneys general the ability to regulate, and bring enforcement actions relating to, telemarketing practices and certain
automated outbound contacts such as phone calls, texts or emails. Under certain circumstances, these laws provide consumers with a private right of action.
Violations of these laws could result in substantial statutory penalties and other sanctions.
Pharmacy and Professional Licensure and Regulation - The Company is subject to a variety of intersecting federal and state statutes and regulations that govern
the wholesale distribution of drugs; operation of retail, specialty, infusion, LTC and mail order pharmacies; licensure of facilities and professionals, including
pharmacists, technicians, nurses and other health care professionals; registration of facilities with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (the “DEA”) and
analogous state agencies that regulate controlled substances; packaging, storing, shipping and tracking of pharmaceuticals; repackaging of drug products; labeling,
medication guides and other consumer disclosures; interactions with prescribers and health care professionals; compounding of prescription medications;
dispensing of controlled and non-controlled substances; counseling of patients; transfers of prescriptions; advertisement of prescription products and pharmacy
services; security; inventory control; recordkeeping; reporting to Boards of Pharmacy, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”), the U.S. Consumer
Product Safety Commission, the DEA and related state agencies; and other elements of pharmacy practice. Pharmacies are highly regulated and have contact with a
wide variety of federal, state and local agencies with various powers to investigate, inspect, audit or solicit information, including Boards of Pharmacy and
Nursing, the DEA, the FDA, the DOJ, HHS and others. Many of these agencies have broad enforcement powers, conduct audits on a regular basis, can impose
substantial fines and penalties, and may revoke the license, registration or program enrollment of a facility or professional.
State Insurance, HMO and Insurance Holding Company Regulation - A number of states regulate affiliated groups of insurers and HMOs such as the
Company under holding company statutes. These laws may, among other things, require prior regulatory approval of dividends and material intercompany transfers
of assets and transactions between the regulated companies and their affiliates, including their parent holding companies. The Company expects the states in which
its insurance and HMO subsidiaries are licensed to continue to expand their regulation of the corporate governance and internal control activities of its insurance
companies and HMOs. Changes to state insurance, HMO and/or insurance holding company laws or regulations or changes to the interpretation of those laws or
regulations, including due to regulators’ increasing concerns regarding insurance company and/or HMO solvency due, among other things, to past and expected
payor insolvencies, could negatively affect the Company’s businesses in various ways, including through increases in solvency fund assessments, requirements that
the Company hold greater levels of capital and/or delays in approving dividends from regulated subsidiaries.
PBM offerings of prescription drug coverage under certain risk arrangements may be subject to laws and regulations in various states. Such laws may require that
the party at risk become licensed as an insurer, establish reserves or otherwise demonstrate financial viability. Laws that may apply in such cases include insurance
laws and laws governing MCOs and limited prepaid health service plans.
The states of domicile of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries have statutory risk-based capital, or “RBC”, requirements for health and other insurance companies
and HMOs based on the National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ Risk-Based Capital (RBC) for Insurers Model Act (the “RBC Model Act”). These
RBC requirements are intended to assess the capital
19

adequacy of life and health insurers and HMOs, taking into account the risk characteristics of a company’s investments and products. The RBC Model Act sets
forth the formula for calculating RBC requirements, which are designed to take into account asset risks, insurance risks, interest rate risks and other relevant risks
with respect to an individual company’s business. In general, under these laws, an insurance company or HMO must submit a report of its RBC level to the
insurance department or insurance commissioner of its state of domicile for each calendar year. At December 31, 2019, the RBC level of each of the Company’s
insurance and HMO subsidiaries was above the level that would require regulatory action.
For information regarding restrictions on certain payments of dividends or other distributions by the Company’s HMO and insurance company subsidiaries, see
Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The holding company laws for the states of domicile of certain of the Company’s subsidiaries also restrict the ability of any person to obtain control of an insurance
company or HMO without prior regulatory approval. Under those statutes, without such approval (or an exemption), no person may acquire any voting security of
an insurance holding company (such as the Company’s ultimate parent company, CVS Health) that controls an insurance company or HMO, or merge with such a
holding company, if as a result of such transaction such person would control the insurance holding company. Control is generally defined as the direct or indirect
power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person and is presumed to exist if a person directly or indirectly owns or controls 10% or
more of the voting securities of another person.
Certain states have laws that prohibit submitting a false claim or making a false record or statement in order to secure reimbursement from an insurance company.
These state laws vary, and violation of them may lead to the imposition of civil or criminal penalties.
Government Agreements and Mandates - The Company and/or its various affiliates are subject to certain consent decrees, settlement and other agreements,
corrective action plans and corporate integrity agreements with various federal, state and local authorities relating to such matters as privacy practices, controlled
substances, PDPs, expired products, environmental and safety matters, marketing and advertising practices, PBM, LTC and other pharmacy operations and various
other business practices. Certain of these agreements contain ongoing reporting, monitoring and/or other compliance requirements for the Company. Failure to
meet the Company’s obligations under these agreements could result in civil or criminal remedies, financial penalties, administrative remedies, and/or exclusion
from participation in federal health care programs.
Environmental and Safety Regulation - The Company’s businesses are subject to various federal, state and local laws, regulations and other requirements
pertaining to protection of the environment, public health and employee safety, including, for example, regulations governing the management of hazardous
substances, the cleaning up of contaminated sites, and the maintenance of safe working conditions in the Company’s stores, distribution centers and other facilities.
Governmental agencies at the federal, state and local levels continue to focus on the retail and health care sectors’ compliance with such laws and regulations, and
have at times pursued enforcement activities. Any failure to comply with these regulations could result in fines or other sanctions by government authorities.
ERISA Regulation - The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), provides for comprehensive federal regulation of certain employee
pension and benefit plans, including private employer and union sponsored health plans and certain other plans that contract with us to provide PBM services. In
general, the Company assists plan sponsors in the administration of their health benefit plans, including the prescription drug benefit portion of those plans, in
accordance with the plan designs adopted by the plan sponsors. In addition, the Company may have fiduciary duties where it has specifically contracted with a plan
sponsor to accept limited fiduciary responsibility, such as for the adjudication of initial prescription drug benefit claims and/or the appeals of denied claims under a
plan. In addition to its fiduciary provisions, ERISA imposes civil and criminal liability on service providers to health plans and certain other persons if certain
forms of illegal remuneration are made or received. These provisions of ERISA are broadly written and their application to specific business practices is often
uncertain.
Some of the Company’s health and related benefits and large case pensions products and services and related fees also are subject to potential issues raised by
judicial interpretations relating to ERISA. Under those interpretations, together with U.S. Department of Labor (“DOL”) regulations, the Company may have
ERISA fiduciary duties with respect to PBM members and/or certain general account assets held under contracts that are not guaranteed benefit policies. As a
result, certain transactions related to those general account assets are subject to conflict of interest and other restrictions, and the Company must provide certain
disclosures to policyholders annually. The Company must comply with these restrictions or face substantial penalties.
In addition, ERISA generally preempts all state and local laws that relate to employee benefit plans, but the extent of the pre-emption continues to be reviewed by
courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court.
20

Other Legislative Initiatives and Regulatory Initiatives - The U.S. federal and state governments, as well as governments in other countries where the Company
does business, continue to enact and seriously consider many broad-based legislative and regulatory proposals that have had a material impact on or could
materially impact various aspects of the health care and related benefits system and the Company’s businesses, operating results and/or cash flows. For example:
•
Under the Budget Control Act of 2011 and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 significant, automatic across-the-board budget cuts (known as
sequestration) began in March 2013, including Medicare spending cuts of not more than 2% of total program costs per year through 2024. Significant
uncertainty remains as to whether and how the U.S. Congress will proceed with actions that create additional federal revenue and/or with entitlement reform.
The Company cannot predict future federal Medicare or federal or state Medicaid funding levels or the impact that future federal or state budget actions or
entitlement program reform, if it occurs, will have on the Company’s businesses, operations or operating results, but the effects could be materially adverse,
particularly on the Company’s Medicare and/or Medicaid revenues, MBRs and operating results.
•
The European Union’s (“EU’s”) General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) began to apply across the EU during 2018.
•
Other significant legislative and/or regulatory measures which are or recently have been under consideration include the following:
•
Elimination of the payment of manufacturer’s rebates on prescription drugs to PBMs, PDPs and Managed Medicaid organizations in connection with
federally funded health care programs.
•
Imposing requirements and restrictions on the design and/or administration of pharmacy benefit plans offered by the Company’s and its clients’
health plans and/or its PBM clients and/or the services the Company provides to those clients, including prohibiting “differential” or “spread” pricing
in PBM contracts; restricting or eliminating the use of formularies for prescription drugs; restricting the Company’s ability to require members to
obtain drugs through a home delivery or specialty pharmacy; restricting the Company’s ability to place certain specialty or other drugs in the higher
cost tiers of its pharmacy formularies; restricting the Company’s ability to make changes to drug formularies and/or clinical programs; limiting or
eliminating rebates on pharmaceuticals; requiring the use of up front purchase price discounts on pharmaceuticals in lieu of rebates; restricting the
Company’s ability to configure its health plan and retail pharmacy provider networks; and restricting or eliminating the use of certain drug pricing
methodologies.
•
Increased federal or state government regulation of, or involvement in, the pricing and/or purchasing of drugs.
•
Restricting the Company’s ability to limit providers’ participation in its networks and/or remove providers from its networks by imposing network
adequacy requirements or otherwise (including in its Medicare and Commercial Health Care Benefits products).
•
Imposing assessments on (or to be collected by) health plans or health carriers that may or may not be passed through to their customers. These
assessments may include assessments for insolvency, the uninsured, uncompensated care, Medicaid funding or defraying health care provider
medical malpractice insurance costs.
•
Mandating coverage by the Company’s and its clients’ health plans for additional conditions and/or specified procedures, drugs or devices (for
example, high cost pharmaceuticals, experimental pharmaceuticals and oral chemotherapy regimens).
•
Regulating electronic connectivity.
•
Mandating or regulating the disclosure of provider fee schedules, manufacturer’s rebates and other data about the Company’s payments to providers
and/or payments the Company receives from pharmaceutical manufacturers.
•
Mandating or regulating disclosure of provider outcome and/or efficiency information.
•
Prescribing or limiting members’ financial responsibility for health care or other covered services they utilize, including restricting “surprise” bills by
providers and by specifying procedures for resolving “surprise” bills.
•
Prescribing payment levels for health care and other covered services rendered to the Company’s members by providers who do not have contracts
with the Company.
•
Assessing the medical device status of HIT products and/or solutions, mobile consumer wellness tools and clinical decision support tools, which may
require compliance with FDA requirements in relation to some of these products, solutions and/or tools.
•
Restricting the ability of employers and/or health plans to establish or impose member financial responsibility.
•
Amending or supplementing ERISA to impose greater requirements on PBMs or the administration of employer-funded benefit plans or limit the
scope of current ERISA pre-emption, which would among other things expose the Company and other health plans to expanded liability for punitive
and other extra-contractual damages and additional state regulation.
21

It is uncertain whether the Company can counter the potential adverse effects of such potential legislation or regulation on its operating results or cash flows,
including whether it can recoup, through higher premium rates, expanded membership or other measures, the increased costs of mandated coverage or benefits,
assessments, fees, taxes or other increased costs, including the cost of modifying its systems to implement any enacted legislation or regulations.
The Company’s businesses also may be affected by other legislation and regulations. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the
“Financial Reform Act”) creates incentives for whistleblowers to speak directly to the government rather than utilizing internal compliance programs and reduces
the burden of proof under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (the “FCPA”). There also are laws and regulations that set standards for the escheatment of
funds to states.
Health savings accounts, health reimbursement arrangements and flexible spending accounts and certain of the tax, fee and subsidy provisions of the ACA also are
regulated by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service.
The Company also may be adversely affected by court and regulatory decisions that expand or revise the interpretations of existing statutes and regulations or
impose medical malpractice or bad faith liability. Federal and state courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court, continue to consider cases, and federal and state
regulators continue to issue regulations and interpretations, addressing bad faith liability for denial of medical claims, the scope of ERISA’s fiduciary duty
requirements, the scope of the False Claims Act and the pre-emptive effect of ERISA on state laws.
Contract Audits - The Company is subject to audits of many of its contracts, including its PBM client contracts, its PBM rebate contracts, its PBM network
contracts, its contracts relating to Medicare Advantage and/or Medicare Part D, the agreements the Company’s pharmacies enter into with other payors, its
Medicaid contracts and its customer contracts. Because some of the Company’s contracts are with state or federal governments or with entities contracted with
state or federal agencies, audits of these contracts are often regulated by the federal or state agencies responsible for administering federal or state benefits
programs, including those which operate Medicaid fee for service plans, Managed Medicaid plans, Medicare Part D plans or Medicare Advantage organizations.
Federal Employee Health Benefits Program - The Company’s subsidiaries contract with the Office of Personnel Management (the “OPM”) to provide managed
health care services under the FEHB program in their service areas. These contracts with the OPM and applicable government regulations establish premium rating
arrangements for this program. OPM regulations require that community-rated FEHB plans meet a FEHB program-specific minimum MLR by plan code and
market. Managing to these rules is complicated by the simultaneous application of the minimum MLR standards and associated premium rebate requirements of
the ACA. The Company also has a contractual arrangement with carriers for the FEHB program, such as the BlueCross BlueShield Association, to provide
pharmacy services to federal employees, postal workers, annuitants, and their dependents under the Government-wide Service Benefit Plan, as authorized by the
FEHB Act and as part of the FEHB program. Additionally, the Company manages certain FEHB plans on a “cost-plus” basis. These arrangements subject the
Company to certain aspects of FEHB Act, and other federal regulations, such as the FEHB Acquisition Regulation, that otherwise would not be applicable to the
Company. The OPM also is auditing the Company and its other contractors to, among other things, verify that plans meet their applicable FEHB program-specific
MLR and the premiums established under the OPM’s Insured contracts and costs allocated pursuant to the OPM’s cost-based contracts are in compliance with the
requirements of the applicable FEHB program. The OPM may seek premium refunds or institute other sanctions against the Company if it fails to comply with the
FEHB program requirements.
Clinical Services Regulation - The Company provides clinical services to health plan and PBM plan members for complex and common medical conditions,
including arranging for those members to participate in disease management programs. State laws regulate the practice of medicine, the practice of pharmacy, the
practice of nursing and certain other clinical activities. Clinicians engaged in a professional practice in connection with the provision of clinical services must
satisfy applicable state licensing requirements and must act within their scope of practice.
Third Party Administration and Other State Licensure Laws - Many states have licensure or registration laws governing certain types of administrative
organizations, such as PPOs, TPAs and companies that provide utilization review services. Several states also have licensure or registration laws governing the
organizations that provide or administer consumer card programs (also known as cash card or discount card programs).
International Regulation - The Company has insurance licenses in several foreign jurisdictions and does business directly or through local affiliations in
numerous countries around the world. The Company has taken steps to be able to continue to serve
22

customers in the European Economic Area following the United Kingdom’s exit from the EU (“Brexit”). However, the impact of Brexit on the Company’s
international business and operating results is uncertain.
The Company’s international operations are subject to different, and sometimes more stringent, legal and regulatory requirements, which vary widely by
jurisdiction, including anti-corruption laws; economic sanctions laws; various privacy, insurance, tax, tariff and trade laws and regulations; corporate governance,
privacy, data protection (including the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation which began to apply across the EU during 2018), data mining, data transfer, labor
and employment, intellectual property, consumer protection and investment laws and regulations; discriminatory licensing procedures; compulsory cessions of
reinsurance; required localization of records and funds; higher premium and income taxes; limitations on dividends and repatriation of capital; and requirements for
local participation in an insurer’s ownership. In addition, the expansion of the Company’s operations into foreign countries increases the Company’s exposure to
the anti-bribery, anti-corruption and anti-money laundering provisions of U.S. law, including the FCPA, and corresponding foreign laws, including the U.K.
Bribery Act 2010 (the “UK Bribery Act”).
Anti-Corruption Laws - The FCPA prohibits offering, promising or authorizing others to give anything of value to a foreign government official to obtain or
retain business or otherwise secure a business advantage. The Company also is subject to applicable anti-corruption laws of the jurisdictions in which it operates. In
many countries outside the United States, health care professionals are employed by the government. Therefore, the Company’s dealings with them are subject to
regulation under the FCPA. Violations of the FCPA and other anti-corruption laws may result in severe criminal and civil sanctions as well as other penalties, and
there continues to be a heightened level of FCPA enforcement activity by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and the DOJ. The UK
Bribery Act is an anti-corruption law that is broader in scope than the FCPA and applies to all companies with a nexus to the United Kingdom. Disclosures of
FCPA violations may be shared with the UK authorities, thus potentially exposing companies to liability and potential penalties in multiple jurisdictions. The
Company has internal control policies and procedures and conducts training and compliance programs for its employees to deter prohibited practices. However, if
the Company’s employees or agents fail to comply with applicable laws governing its international or other operations, it may face investigations, prosecutions and
other legal proceedings and actions which could result in civil penalties, administrative remedies and criminal sanctions.
Anti-Money Laundering Regulations - Certain lines of the Company’s businesses are subject to Treasury anti-money laundering regulations. Those lines of
business have implemented anti-money laundering policies designed to ensure their compliance with the regulations. The Company also is subject to anti-money
laundering laws in non-U.S. jurisdictions where it operates.
Office of Foreign Assets Control - The Company also is subject to regulation by OFAC. OFAC administers and enforces economic and trade sanctions based on
U.S. foreign policy and national security goals against targeted foreign countries and regimes, terrorists, international narcotics traffickers, those engaged in
activities related to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and other threats to the national security, foreign policy or economy of the United States. In
addition, the Company is subject to similar regulations in the non-U.S. jurisdictions in which it operates.
FDA Regulation - The FDA regulates the Company’s compounding pharmacy and clinical research operations. The FDA also generally has authority to, among
other things, regulate the manufacture, distribution, sale and labeling of medical devices (including hemodialysis devices such as the device the Company is
developing and mobile medical devices) and many products sold through retail pharmacies, including prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, cosmetics,
dietary supplements and certain food items. In addition, the FDA regulates the Company’s activities as a distributor of store brand products.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Pharmacy Services Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state and
local statutes and regulations governing the operation of its Pharmacy Services segment specifically. Among these are the following:
PBM Laws and Regulation - Legislation and/or regulations seeking to regulate PBM activities in a comprehensive manner have been proposed or enacted in a
number of states. This legislation could adversely affect the Company’s ability to conduct business on commercially reasonable terms in states where the
legislation is in effect and the Company’s ability to standardize its PBM products and services across state lines. In addition, certain quasi-regulatory organizations,
including the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (“NAIC”) and the National Council of
Insurance Legislators, have issued model regulations or may propose future regulations concerning PBMs and/or PBM activities. Similarly, credentialing
organizations such as NCQA and URAC may establish voluntary standards regarding
23

PBM, mail order pharmacy and/or specialty pharmacy activities. While the actions of these quasi-regulatory or standard-setting organizations do not have the force
of law, they may influence states to adopt their requirements or recommendations and influence client requirements for PBM, mail order pharmacy and/or specialty
pharmacy services. Moreover, any standards established by these organizations could also impact the Company’s health plan clients and/or the services provided to
those clients and/or the Company’s health plans.
The Company’s PBM activities also are regulated directly and indirectly at the federal and state levels, including being subject to the False Claims Act and state
false claims acts and federal and state anti-kickback laws. These laws and regulations govern, and proposed legislation and regulations may govern and/or further
restrict, critical PBM practices, including disclosure, receipt and retention of rebates and other payments received from pharmaceutical manufacturers; use of,
administration of and/or changes to drug formularies, maximum allowable cost (“MAC”) list pricing, average wholesale prices (“AWPs”) and/or clinical programs;
the offering to plan sponsors of pricing that includes retail network “differential” or “spread” (i.e., a difference between the drug price charged to the plan sponsor
by a PBM and the price paid by the PBM to the dispensing provider); disclosure of data to third parties; drug utilization management practices; the level of duty a
PBM owes its customers; configuration of pharmacy networks; the operations of the Company’s pharmacies (including audits of its pharmacies); disclosure of
negotiated provider reimbursement rates; disclosure of fees associated with administrative service agreements and patient care programs that are attributable to
members’ drug utilization; and registration or licensing of PBMs. Failure by the Company or one of its PBM services suppliers to comply with these laws or
regulations could result in material fines and/or sanctions and could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results and/or cash flows.
The Company’s PBM service contracts, including those in which the Company assumes certain risks under performance guarantees or similar arrangements, are
generally not subject to insurance regulation by the states. However, state departments of insurance are increasing their oversight of PBM activities due to
legislation passing in a number of states requiring PBMs to register or obtain a license with the department. Rulemaking is either underway or has already taken
place in a number of states with the areas of focus on licensure requirements, pharmacy reimbursement for generics (MAC reimbursement) and pharmacy audits -
most of which fall under the state insurance code.
Pharmacy Network Access Legislation - Medicare Part D and a majority of states now have some form of legislation affecting the Company’s (and its health
plans’ and its health plan clients’) ability to limit access to a pharmacy provider network or remove pharmacy network providers. For example, certain “any willing
provider” legislation may require the Company or its clients to admit a nonparticipating pharmacy if such pharmacy is willing and able to meet the plan’s price and
other applicable terms and conditions for network participation. These laws could negatively affect the services and economic benefits achievable through a limited
pharmacy provider network. Also, a majority of states now have some form of legislation affecting the Company’s ability (and the Company’s and its client health
plans’ ability) to conduct audits of network pharmacies regarding claims submitted to the Company for payment. These laws could negatively affect the
Company’s ability to recover overpayments of claims submitted by network pharmacies that the Company identifies through pharmacy audits.
Pharmacy Pricing Legislation - A number of states have passed legislation regulating the Company’s ability to manage and establish MACs for generic
prescription drugs. MAC methodology is a common cost management practice used by private and public payors (including CMS) to pay pharmacies for
dispensing generic prescription drugs. MAC prices specify the allowable reimbursement by a PBM for a particular strength and dosage of a generic drug that is
available from multiple manufacturers but sold at different prices. State legislation can regulate the disclosure of MAC prices and MAC price methodologies, the
kinds of drugs that a PBM can pay for at a MAC price, and the rights of pharmacies to appeal a MAC price established by a PBM. These laws could negatively
affect the Company’s ability to establish MAC prices for generic drugs.
Formulary and Plan Design Regulation - A number of government entities regulate the administration of prescription drug benefits. HHS regulates how
Medicare Part D formularies are developed and administered, including requiring the inclusion of all drugs in certain classes and categories, subject to limited
exceptions. Under the ACA, CMS imposes drug coverage requirements for health plans required to cover essential health benefits, including plans offered through
federal or state Public Exchanges. Additionally, the NAIC and health care accreditation agencies like NCQA and URAC have developed model acts and standards
for formulary development that are often incorporated into government requirements. Many states regulate the scope of prescription drug coverage, as well as the
delivery channels to receive prescriptions, for insurers, MCOs and Medicaid managed care plans. The increasing government regulation of formularies could
significantly affect the Company’s ability to develop and administer formularies, pharmacy networks and other plan design features on behalf of its insurer, MCO
and other clients. Similarly, some states prohibit health plan sponsors from implementing certain restrictive pharmacy benefit plan design features. This regulation
could limit or preclude (i) limited networks, (ii) a requirement to use particular providers, (iii) copayment differentials among providers and (iv) formulary tiering
practices.
24

Laws and Regulations Related to the Retail/LTC Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state and
local statutes and regulations governing the operation of its Retail/LTC segment specifically. Among these are the following:
Retail Medical Clinics - States regulate retail medical clinics operated by nurse practitioners or physician assistants through physician oversight, clinic and lab
licensure requirements and the prohibition of the corporate practice of medicine. A number of states have implemented or proposed laws or regulations that impact
certain components of retail medical clinic operations such as physician oversight, signage, third party contracting requirements, bathroom facilities, and scope of
services. These laws and regulations may affect the operation and expansion of the Company’s owned and managed retail medical clinics.
Other Laws - Other federal, state and local laws and regulations also impact the Company’s retail operations, including laws and regulations governing the
practice of optometry, the practice of audiology, the provision of dietician services and the sale of durable medical equipment, contact lenses, eyeglasses, hearing
aids and alcohol.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Health Care Benefits Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state, local
and international statutes and regulations governing its Health Care Benefits segment specifically.
Overview - Differing approaches to state insurance regulation and varying enforcement philosophies may materially and adversely affect the Company’s ability to
standardize its Health Care Benefits products and services across state lines. These laws and regulations, including the ACA, restrict how the Company conducts its
business and result in additional burdens and costs to the Company. Significant areas of governmental regulation include premium rates and rating methodologies,
underwriting rules and procedures, required benefits, sales and marketing activities, provider rates of payment, restrictions on health plans’ ability to limit
providers’ participation in their networks and/or remove providers from their networks and financial condition (including reserves and minimum capital or risk
based capital requirements). These laws and regulations are different in each jurisdiction and vary from product to product.
Each health insurer and HMO must file periodic financial and operating reports with the states in which it does business. In addition, health insurers and HMOs are
subject to state examination and periodic license renewal. Applicable laws also restrict the ability of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries to pay dividends, and
certain dividends require prior regulatory approval. In addition, some of the Company’s businesses and related activities may be subject to PPO, managed care
organization, utilization review or TPA-related licensure requirements and regulations. These licensure requirements and regulations differ from state to state, but
may contain provider network, contracting, product and rate, financial and reporting requirements. There also are laws and regulations that set specific standards
for the Company’s delivery of services, payment of claims, fraud prevention, protection of consumer health information, and payment for covered benefits and
services.
Required Regulatory Approvals - The Company must obtain and maintain regulatory approvals to price, market and administer many of its Health Care Benefits
products. Supervisory agencies, including CMS, the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight and the DOL, as well as state health, insurance,
managed care and Medicaid agencies, have broad authority to take one or more of the following actions:
•
Grant, suspend and revoke the Company’s licenses to transact business;
•
Suspend or exclude the Company from participation in government programs;
•
Suspend or limit the Company’s authority to market products;
•
Regulate many aspects of the products and services the Company offers, including the pricing and underwriting of many of its products and services;
•
Assess damages, fines and/or penalties;
•
Terminate the Company’s contract with the government agency and/or withhold payments from the government agency to the Company;
•
Impose retroactive adjustments to premiums and require the Company to pay refunds to the government, customers and/or members;
•
Restrict the Company’s ability to conduct acquisitions or dispositions;
25

•
Require the Company to maintain minimum capital levels in its subsidiaries and monitor its solvency and reserve adequacy;
•
Regulate the Company’s investment activities on the basis of quality, diversification and other quantitative criteria; and/or
•
Exclude the Company’s plans from participating in Public Exchanges if they are deemed to have a history of “unreasonable” premium rate increases or fail to
meet other criteria set by HHS or the applicable state.
The Company’s operations, current and past business practices, current and past contracts, and accounts and other books and records are subject to routine, regular
and special investigations, audits, examinations and reviews by, and from time to time the Company receives subpoenas and other requests for information from,
federal, state and international supervisory and enforcement agencies, attorneys general and other state, federal and international governmental authorities and
legislators.
Commercial Product Pricing and Underwriting Restrictions - Pricing and underwriting regulation by states limits the Company’s underwriting and rating
practices and those of other health insurers, particularly for small employer groups, and varies by state. In general, these limitations apply to certain customer
segments and limit the Company’s ability to set prices for new or renewing groups, or both, based on specific characteristics of the group or the group’s prior claim
experience. In some states, these laws and regulations restrict the Company’s ability to price for the risk it assumes and/or reflect reasonable costs in the
Company’s pricing.
The ACA expanded the premium rate review process by, among other things, requiring the Company’s Commercial Insured rates to be reviewed for
“reasonableness” at either the state or the federal level. HHS established a federal premium rate review process that generally applies to proposed premium rate
increases equal to or exceeding a federally (or lower state) specified threshold. HHS’s rate review process imposes additional public disclosure requirements as
well as additional review on filings requesting premium rate increases equal to or exceeding this “reasonableness” threshold. These combined state and federal
review requirements may prevent, further delay or otherwise affect the Company’s ability to price for the risk it assumes, which could adversely affect its MBRs
and operating results, particularly during periods of increased utilization of medical services and/or medical cost trend or when such utilization and/or trend
exceeds the Company’s projections.
The ACA also specifies minimum MLRs of 85% for large group Commercial products and 80% for individual and small group Commercial products. Because the
ACA minimum MLRs are structured as “floors” for many of their requirements, states have the latitude to enact more stringent rules governing these restrictions.
For Commercial products, states have and may adopt higher minimum MLR requirements, use more stringent definitions of “medical loss ratio,” incorporate
minimum MLR requirements into prospective premium rate filings, require prior approval of premium rates or impose other requirements related to minimum
MLR. Minimum MLR requirements and similar actions further limit the level of margin the Company can earn in its Insured Commercial products while leaving
the Company exposed to medical costs that are higher than those reflected in its pricing. The Company also may be subject to significant fines, penalties, premium
refunds and litigation if it fails to comply with minimum MLR laws and regulations.
In addition, the Company requested significant increases in its premium rates in its Commercial Health Care Benefits business for 2020 (including as a result of the
reinstatement of the HIF for 2020 following the temporary suspension of the HIF for 2019) and expects to continue to request increases in those rates for 2021 and
beyond in order to adequately price for projected medical cost trends, required expansions of coverage and rating limits, and significant assessments, fees and taxes
imposed by the federal and state governments, including as a result of the ACA. The Company’s rates also must be adequate to reflect adverse selection in its
products, particularly in small group Commercial products, which the Company expects to continue and potentially worsen in 2020. These rate increases may be
significant and thus heighten the risks of adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and adverse selection and the likelihood that the Company’s requested
premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed, which could lead to operating margin compression.
Many of the laws and regulations governing the Company’s pricing and underwriting practices also limit the differentials in premium rates insurers and other
carriers may charge between new and renewal business, and/or between groups based on differing characteristics. They may also require that carriers disclose to
customers the basis on which the carrier establishes new business and renewal premium rates and limit the ability of a carrier to terminate customers’ coverage.
Medicaid Regulation - The Company is seeking to substantially grow its Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan businesses over the next
several years. As a result, the Company also is increasing its exposure to changes in government policy with respect to and/or regulation of the various Medicaid,
dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs in which the Company participates, including changes in the amounts payable to the Company under
those programs.
26

Since 2017, Managed Medicaid products, including those the Company offers, are subject to a minimum federal MLR of 85%. A Medicaid managed care quality
rating system and provider network adequacy requirements also apply to Medicaid products. Because the federal minimum MLR is structured as a “floor,” states
have the latitude to enact more stringent rules governing these restrictions. For Managed Medicaid products, states may adopt higher minimum MLR requirements,
use more stringent definitions of “medical loss ratio” or impose other requirements related to minimum MLR. Minimum MLR requirements and similar actions
further limit the level of margin the Company can earn in its Insured Medicaid products while leaving the Company exposed to medical costs that are higher than
those reflected in its pricing. The Company also may be subject to significant fines, penalties, premium refunds and litigation if it fails to comply with minimum
MLR laws and regulations.
The impact of Medicaid expansion under the ACA is uncertain. The future of the ACA is uncertain, and states may opt out of the elements of the ACA requiring
expansion of Medicaid coverage without losing their current federal Medicaid funding. To date, a number of states and the District of Columbia have expanded
Medicaid coverage to the higher eligibility levels contemplated by the ACA. In addition, the election of new governors and/or state legislatures may impact states’
previous decisions regarding Medicaid expansion. Proposals for substantial changes to federal funding of state Medicaid programs are likely to be considered in
2020 and beyond, including the possibility of converting federal Medicaid support to block grants (such as the block grant option outlined by CMS on January 30,
2020) and per capita caps on federal funding. Uncertainty regarding federal funding is causing and will continue to cause states to re-evaluate their Medicaid
expansions and consider new assessments, fees and/or taxes on health plans. That re-evaluation and any changes to federal funding of state Medicaid programs may
adversely affect Medicaid payment rates, the Company’s revenues and its Medicaid membership.
The economic aspects of the Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan business vary from state to state and are subject to frequent change.
Medicaid premiums are paid by each state and differ from state to state. The federal government and certain states also are considering proposals and legislation for
Medicaid and dual eligible program reforms or redesigns, including restrictions on the collection of manufacturer’s rebates on pharmaceuticals by Medicaid MCOs
and their contracted PBMs, further program, population and/or geographic expansions of risk-based managed care, increasing beneficiary cost-sharing or payment
levels, and changes to benefits, reimbursement, eligibility criteria, provider network adequacy requirements (including requiring the inclusion of specified high cost
providers in the Company’s networks) and program structure. In some states, current Medicaid and dual eligible funding and premium revenue may not be
adequate for the Company to continue program participation. The Company’s Medicaid and dual eligible contracts with states (or sponsors of Medicaid managed
care plans) are subject to cancellation by the state (or the sponsors of the managed care plans) after a short notice period without cause (for example, when a state
discontinues a managed care program) or in the event of insufficient state funding.
The Company’s Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan products also are heavily regulated by CMS and state Medicaid agencies, which have
the right to audit the Company’s performance to determine compliance with CMS contracts and regulations. The Company’s Medicaid products, dual eligible
products and CHIP contracts also are subject to complex federal and state regulations and oversight by state Medicaid agencies regarding the services provided to
Medicaid enrollees, payment for those services, network requirements (including mandatory inclusion of specified high-cost providers), and other aspects of these
programs, and by external review organizations which audit Medicaid plans on behalf of state Medicaid agencies. The laws, regulations and contractual
requirements applicable to the Company and other participants in Medicaid and dual eligible programs, including requirements that the Company submit encounter
data to the applicable state agency, are extensive, complex and subject to change. The Company has invested significant resources to comply with these standards,
and its Medicaid and dual eligible program compliance efforts will continue to require significant resources. CMS and/or state Medicaid agencies may fine the
Company, withhold payments to the Company, seek premium and other refunds, terminate the Company’s existing contracts, elect not to award the Company new
contracts or not to renew the Company’s existing contracts, prohibit the Company from continuing to market and/or enroll members in or refuse to automatically
assign members to one or more of the Company’s Medicaid or dual eligible products, exclude the Company from participating in one or more Medicaid or dual
eligible programs and/or institute other sanctions and/or civil monetary penalties against the Company if it fails to comply with CMS or state regulations or
contractual requirements.
The Company cannot predict whether pending or future federal or state legislation or court proceedings will change various aspects of the Medicaid program, nor
can it predict the impact those changes will have on its business operations or operating results, but the effects could be materially adverse.
State Workers’ Compensation Laws - The Company’s workers’ compensation business includes the comparison of medical claims data against the applicable
state’s fee schedule pricing, including applicable regulations and clinical guidelines. State fee schedules, which typically represent the maximum reimbursement for
medical services provided to the injured worker, differ by state and change as state laws and regulations are passed and/or amended. The Company’s workers’
compensation business also includes PBM and care management services, both of which are regulated at the state level. The Company’s workers’
27

compensation customers include insurance carriers and TPAs who also are regulated at the state level. The laws and regulations applicable to the Company and
other participants in the workers’ compensation business are extensive, complex and subject to change. The Company has invested significant resources to comply
with these standards, and its workers’ compensation compliance efforts will continue to require significant resources. The Company may be subject to significant
fines, penalties and litigation if it fails to comply with those laws and regulations.
Federal and State Reporting - The Company is subject to extensive financial and business reporting requirements, including penalties for inaccuracies and/or
omissions, at both the federal and state level. The Company’s ability to comply with certain of these requirements depends on receipt of information from third
parties that may not be readily available or reliably provided in all instances. The Company is and will continue to be required to modify its information systems,
dedicate significant resources and incur significant expenses to comply with these requirements. However, the Company cannot eliminate the risks of unavailability
of or errors in its reports.
Product Design and Administration and Sales Practices - State and/or federal regulatory scrutiny of health care benefit product design and administration and
marketing and advertising practices, including the filing of insurance policy forms, the adequacy of provider networks, the accuracy of provider directories, and the
adequacy of disclosure regarding products and their administration, is increasing as are the penalties being imposed for inappropriate practices. Medicare, Medicaid
and dual eligible products and products offering more limited benefits in particular continue to attract increased regulatory scrutiny.
Guaranty Fund Assessments/Solvency Protection - Under guaranty fund laws existing in all states, insurers doing business in those states can be assessed (in
most states up to prescribed limits) for certain obligations of insolvent insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. The life and health insurance guaranty
associations in which the Company participates that operate under these laws respond to insolvencies of long-term care insurers as well as health insurers. The
Company’s assessments generally are based on a formula relating to the Company’s health care premiums in the state compared to the premiums of other insurers.
Certain states allow assessments to be recovered over time as offsets to premium taxes. Some states have similar laws relating to HMOs and/or other payors such
as not-for-profit consumer governed health plans established under the ACA. While historically the Company has ultimately recovered more than half of guaranty
fund assessments through statutorily permitted premium tax offsets, significant increases in assessments could lead to legislative and/or regulatory actions that limit
future offsets.
Available Information
CVS Health Corporation was incorporated in Delaware in 1996. The corporate office is located at One CVS Drive, Woonsocket, Rhode Island 02895, telephone
(401) 765-1500. CVS Health’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the trading symbol “CVS.” General information about CVS Health
is available through the Company’s website at http://www.cvshealth.com. The Company’s financial press releases and filings with the SEC are available free of
charge within the Investors section of the Company’s website at http://investors.cvshealth.com. In addition, the SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports,
proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers, such as the Company, that file electronically with the SEC. The address of that website
is http://www.sec.gov. The information on or linked to the Company’s website is neither a part of nor incorporated by reference in this 10-K or any of the
Company’s other SEC filings.
In accordance with guidance provided by the SEC regarding use by a company of its websites and social media channels as a means to disclose material
information to investors and to comply with its disclosure obligations under SEC Regulation FD, CVS Health Corporation (the “Registrant”) hereby notifies
investors, the media and other interested parties that it intends to continue to use its media and investor relations website (http://investors.cvshealth.com/) and its
Twitter feed (@CVSHealthIR) to publish important information about the Registrant, including information that may be deemed material to investors. The list of
social media channels that the Registrant uses may be updated on its media and investor relations website from time to time. The Registrant encourages investors,
the media, and other interested parties to review the information the Registrant posts on its website and social media channels as described above, in addition to
information announced by the Registrant through its SEC filings, press releases and public conference calls and webcasts.
28

Table of Contents
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
You should carefully consider each of the following risks and uncertainties and all of the other information set forth in this Form 10-K. These risks and
uncertainties and other factors may affect forward-looking statements, including those we make in this Form 10-K or elsewhere, such as in news releases or
investor or analyst calls, meetings or presentations, on our websites or through our social media channels. The risks and uncertainties described below are not the
only ones we face. There can be no assurance that we have identified all the risks that affect us. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that
we currently believe to be immaterial also may adversely affect our businesses. Any of these risks or uncertainties could cause our actual results to differ materially
from our expectations and the expected results discussed in our forward-looking statements. You should not consider past results to be an indication of future
performance.
If any of the following risks or uncertainties develops into actual events or if the circumstances described in the risks or uncertainties occur or continue to occur,
those events or circumstances could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results, cash flows, financial condition and/or stock price, among
other effects on us. You should read the following section in conjunction with the MD&A, included in Item 7 of this Form 10-K, our consolidated financial
statements and the related notes, included in Item 8 of this 10-K, and our “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” in this 10-K.
Risks Relating to Our Businesses
Each of our segments operates in a highly competitive and evolving business environment; and gross margins in the industries in which we compete may
decline.
Each of our segments, Pharmacy Services, which includes our pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) business, Retail/LTC, and Health Care Benefits, operates in
a highly competitive and evolving business environment. Specifically:
•
As competition increases in the geographies in which we operate, including competition from new entrants, a significant increase in price compression and/or
reimbursement pressures could occur, and this could require us to reevaluate our pricing structures to remain competitive.
•
The competitive success of our Pharmacy Services segment is dependent on our ability to establish and maintain contractual relationships with network
pharmacies as PBM clients evaluate adopting narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks.
•
The competitive success of our Retail/LTC segment and our specialty pharmacy operations is dependent on our ability to establish and maintain contractual
relationships with PBMs and other payors on acceptable terms as the payors’ clients evaluate adopting narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks.
•
In our PBM business, we maintain contractual relationships with brand name drug manufacturers that provide for purchase discounts and/or rebates on drugs
dispensed by pharmacies in our retail network and by our specialty and mail order pharmacies (all or a portion of which may be passed on to clients).
Manufacturer’s rebates often depend on a PBM’s ability to meet contractual requirements, including the placement of a manufacturer’s products on the PBM’s
formularies. If we lose our relationship with one or more drug manufacturers, or if the discounts or rebates provided by drug manufacturers decline, our
operating results, cash flows and/or prospects could be adversely affected.
•
The PBM industry has been experiencing price compression as a result of competitive pressures and increased client demands for lower prices, increased
revenue sharing, including sharing in a larger portion of rebates received from drug manufacturers, enhanced service offerings and/or higher service levels.
Marketplace dynamics and regulatory changes also have adversely affected our ability to offer plan sponsors pricing that includes the use of retail
“differential” or “spread,” which could adversely affect our future profitability, and we expect these trends to continue.
•
Our retail pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and LTC pharmacy operations have been affected by reimbursement pressure caused by competition, including client
demands for lower prices, generic drug pricing, earlier than expected generic drug introductions and network reimbursement pressure. If we are unable to
increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely affected. If we are unable to limit our
price increases, we may lose customers to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and operating results.
•
A shift in the mix of our pharmacy prescription volume towards programs offering lower reimbursement rates as a result of competition or otherwise could
adversely affect our margins, including the ongoing shift in pharmacy mix towards 90-day prescriptions at retail and the ongoing shift in pharmacy mix
towards Medicare Part D prescriptions.
•
PBM client contracts often are for a period of approximately three years. However, PBM clients may require early or periodic re-negotiation of pricing prior to
contract expiration. PBM clients are generally well informed, can move between us and our competitors and often seek competing bids prior to expiration of
their contracts. We are therefore under pressure
29

to contain price increases despite being faced with increasing drug costs and increasing operating costs. If we are unable to increase our prices to reflect, or
otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely affected. If we are unable to limit our price increases, we may lose
customers to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and operating results.
•
The operating results and margins of our LTC business are further affected by the increased efforts of health care payors to negotiate reduced or capitated
pricing arrangements and by the financial health of, and purchases and sales of, our LTC customers.
•
In our Health Care Benefits segment we are seeking to substantially grow our Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan membership over the
next several years. In many instances, to acquire and retain our government customers’ business, we must bid against our competitors in a highly competitive
environment. Winning bids often are challenged successfully by unsuccessful bidders.
•
Customer contracts in our Health Care Benefits segment are generally for a period of one year, and our customers have considerable flexibility in moving
between us and our competitors. One of the key factors on which we compete for customers, especially in uncertain economic environments, is overall cost.
We are therefore under pressure to contain premium price increases despite being faced with increasing health care and other benefit costs and increasing
operating costs. If we are unable to increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely
affected. If we are unable to limit our price increases, we may lose members to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and
operating results. In response to rising prices, our customers may elect to self-insure or to reduce benefits in order to limit increases in their benefit costs.
Alternatively, our customers may purchase different types of products from us that are less profitable. Such elections may result in reduced membership in our
more profitable Insured products and/or lower premiums for our Insured products, which may adversely affect our revenues and operating results, although
such elections also may reduce our health care and other benefit costs. In addition, our Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP products are subject to termination
without cause, periodic re-bid, rate adjustment and program redesign, as customers seek to contain their benefit costs, particularly in an uncertain economy,
and our exposure to this risk is increasing as we grow our Government products membership. These actions may adversely affect our membership, revenues
and operating results.
•
We requested significant increases in our premium rates in our Commercial Health Care Benefits business for 2020 (including as a result of the reinstatement
for 2020 of the Health Insurer Fee (the “HIF”) imposed by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) following the temporary suspension of the HIF for 2019) and expect to continue to request increases in those rates for
2021 and beyond in order to adequately price for projected medical cost trends, required expansions of coverage and rating limits, and significant assessments,
fees and taxes imposed by the federal and state governments, including as a result of the ACA. Our rates also must be adequate to reflect the risk that our
products will be selected by people with a higher risk profile or utilization rate than the pool of participants we anticipated when we established pricing for the
applicable products (also known as “adverse selection”), particularly in small group Commercial products, which we expect to continue and potentially worsen
in 2020. These rate increases may be significant and thus heighten the risks of adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and adverse selection and the
likelihood that our requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed, which could lead to operating margin compression.
In addition, competitors in each of our businesses may offer services and pricing terms that we may not be willing or able to offer. Competition also may come
from new entrants and other sources in the future. Unless we can demonstrate enhanced value to our clients through innovative product and service offerings in the
rapidly changing health care industry, we may be unable to remain competitive.
Disruptive innovation by existing or new competitors could alter the competitive landscape in the future and require us to accurately identify and assess such
alterations and make timely and effective changes to our strategies and business model to compete effectively. For example, decisions to buy our Pharmacy
Services and Health Care Benefits products and services increasingly are made or influenced by consumers, either through direct purchasing (for example,
Medicare Advantage plans and PDPs) or through public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) and private health insurance exchanges (together with
Public Exchanges, collectively, “Insurance Exchanges”) that allow individual choice. Consumers also are increasingly seeking to access consumer goods and
health care products and services locally and through other direct channels such as mobile devices and websites. To compete effectively in the consumer-driven
marketplace, we will be required to develop or acquire new capabilities, attract new talent and develop new service and distribution relationships that respond to
consumer needs and preferences.
30

Changes in marketplace dynamics or the actions of competitors or manufacturers, including industry consolidation, the emergence of new competitors and strategic
alliances, and decisions to exclude us from new narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks could materially and adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or prospects.
A change in our Health Care Benefits product mix may adversely affect our profit margins.
Our Insured Health Care Benefits products that involve greater potential risk generally tend to be more profitable than our ASC products. Historically, smaller
employer groups have been more likely to purchase Insured Health Care Benefits products because such purchasers are generally unable or unwilling to bear
greater liability for health care expenditures, although over the last several years even relatively small employers have moved to ASC products. We also serve, and
expect to grow our business with, government-sponsored programs, including Medicare and Medicaid, that are subject to competitive bids and have lower profit
margins than our Commercial Insured Health Care Benefits products. A shift of enrollees from more profitable products to less profitable products could have a
material adverse effect on the Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
Negative public perception of the industries in which we operate, or of our industries’ or our practices, can adversely affect our businesses, operating results,
cash flows and prospects.
Our brand and reputation are two of our most important assets, and the industries in which we operate have been and are negatively perceived by the public from
time to time. Negative publicity may come as a result of adverse media coverage, litigation against us and other industry participants, the ongoing public debates
over drug pricing, PBMs, government involvement in drug pricing and purchasing, the future of the ACA, “surprise” medical bills, governmental hearings and/or
investigations, actual or perceived shortfalls regarding our industries’ or our own products and/or business practices (including PBM operations, drug pricing and
insurance coverage determinations) and social media and other media relations activities. Negative publicity also may come from a failure to meet customer
expectations for consistent, high quality and accessible care. This risk may increase as we continue to offer products and services that make greater use of data and
as our business model becomes more focused on delivering health care to consumers.
Negative public perception and/or publicity of our industries in general, or of us or our key vendors, brokers or product distribution networks in particular, can
further increase our costs of doing business and adversely affect our operating results and our stock price by:
•
adversely affecting our brand and reputation;
•
adversely affecting our ability to market and sell our products and/or services and/or retain our existing customers and members;
•
requiring us to change our products and/or services;
•
reducing or restricting the revenue we can receive for our products and/or services; and/or
•
increasing or significantly changing the regulatory and legislative requirements with which we must comply.
We must maintain and improve our relationships with our retail and specialty pharmacy customers and increase the demand for our products and services,
including proprietary brands.
The success of our businesses depends in part on customer loyalty, superior customer service and our ability to persuade customers to frequent our retail stores and
online sites and to purchase products in additional categories and our proprietary brands. Failure to timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer
preferences and spending patterns, and evolving demographic mixes in the communities we serve, an inability to expand the products being purchased by our
clients and customers, or the failure or inability to obtain or offer particular categories of products could adversely affect our relationship with our customers and
clients and the demand for our products and services and could result in excess inventories of products.
We offer our retail customers proprietary brand products that are available exclusively at our retail stores and through our online retail sites. The sale of proprietary
products subjects us to unique risks including potential product liability risks, mandatory or voluntary product recalls, potential supply chain and distribution chain
disruptions for raw materials and finished products, our ability to successfully protect our intellectual property rights and the rights of applicable third parties, and
other risks generally encountered by entities that source, market and sell private-label products. We also face similar risks for the other products we sell in our retail
operations, including supply chain and distribution chain disruption risk. Any failure to adequately address some or all of these risks could have an adverse effect
on our retail business, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition. Additionally, an increase in the sales of our proprietary brands may adversely affect
our sales of products owned by
31

our suppliers and adversely impact certain of our supplier relationships. Our ability to locate qualified, economically stable suppliers who satisfy our requirements,
and to acquire sufficient products in a timely and effective manner, is critical to ensuring, among other things, that customer confidence is not diminished. Any
failure to develop sourcing relationships with a broad and deep supplier base could adversely affect our operating results and erode customer loyalty.
We also could be adversely affected if we fail to identify or effectively respond to changes in marketplace dynamics. For example, specialty pharmacy represents a
significant and growing proportion of prescription drug spending in the U.S., a significant portion of which is dispensed outside of traditional retail pharmacies.
Because our specialty pharmacy business focuses on complex and high-cost medications, many of which are made available by manufacturers to a limited number
of pharmacies (so-called limited distribution drugs) that serve a relatively limited universe of patients, the future growth of our specialty pharmacy business
depends largely upon expanding our access to key drugs and penetration in certain treatment categories. Any contraction of our base of patients or reduction in
demand for the prescriptions we currently dispense could have an adverse effect on our specialty pharmacy business, operating results and cash flows.
We face risks relating to the availability, pricing and safety profiles of prescription drugs that we purchase and sell.
The profitability of our Retail/LTC and Pharmacy Services segments is dependent upon the utilization of prescription drug products. We dispense significant
volumes of brand name and generic drugs from our retail, LTC, specialty and mail order pharmacies, and the retail pharmacies in our PBM’s network also dispense
significant volumes of brand name and generic drugs. Our revenues, operating results and cash flows may decline if physicians cease writing prescriptions for
drugs or the utilization of drugs is reduced due to:
•
increased safety risk profiles or regulatory restrictions;
•
manufacturing or other supply issues;
•
certain products being withdrawn by their manufacturers or transitioned to over-the-counter products;
•
future FDA rulings restricting the supply or increasing the cost of products;
•
the introduction of new and successful prescription drugs or lower-priced generic alternatives to existing brand name products; or
•
inflation in the price of brand name drugs.
In addition, increased utilization of generic drugs (which normally yield a higher gross profit rate than equivalent brand name drugs) has resulted in pressure to
decrease reimbursement payments to retail, mail order, specialty and LTC pharmacies for generic drugs, causing a reduction in our margins on sales of generic
drugs. Consolidation within the generic drug manufacturing industry and other external factors may enhance the ability of manufacturers to sustain or increase
pricing of generic drugs and diminish our ability to negotiate reduced generic drug acquisition costs. Any inability to offset increased brand name or generic
prescription drug acquisition costs or to modify our activities to lessen the financial impact of such increased costs could have a significant adverse effect on our
operating results.
A number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, contribute to rising health care and other benefit costs. We may not be able to accurately forecast
health care and other benefit costs, which could adversely affect our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
Premiums for our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which comprised 91% of our Health Care Benefits revenues for 2019, are priced in advance based on our
forecasts of health care and other benefit costs during a fixed premium period, which is generally one year. These forecasts are typically developed several months
before the fixed premium period begins, are influenced by historical data (and recent historical data in particular), are dependent on our ability to anticipate and
detect medical cost trends and changes in our members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns and require a significant degree of judgment. For example, our
revenue on Medicare policies is based on bids submitted in June of the year before the contract year. Cost increases in excess of our projections cannot be
recovered in the fixed premium period through higher premiums. As a result, our profits are particularly sensitive to the accuracy of our forecasts and our ability to
anticipate and detect medical cost trends. Even relatively small differences between predicted and actual health care and other benefit costs as a percentage of
premium revenues can result in significant adverse changes in our operating results.
A number of factors contribute to rising health care and other benefit costs, including previously uninsured members entering the health care system, changes in
members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns, turnover in our membership, additional government mandated benefits or other regulatory changes, changes
in the health status of our members, the aging of the population and other changing demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology, increases in the
number and
32

cost of prescription drugs (including specialty pharmacy drugs and ultra-high cost drugs and therapies), direct-to-consumer marketing by drug manufacturers, the
increasing influence of social media on our members’ health care utilization and other behaviors, changes in health care practices and general economic conditions
(such as inflation and employment levels). In addition, government-imposed limitations on Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements to health plans and providers
have caused the private sector to bear a greater share of increasing health care and other benefits costs over time, and future amendments or repeal or replacement
of the ACA that increase the uninsured population may exacerbate this problem. Other factors that affect our health care and other benefit costs include changes as
a result of the ACA, changes to the ACA and other changes in the regulatory environment, the evolution toward a consumer driven business model, new
technologies, influenza related health care costs (which may be substantial and higher than we project), clusters of high-cost cases, epidemics or pandemics, health
care provider and member fraud, and numerous other factors that are or may be beyond our control. For example, the 2019-2020 influenza season had an earlier
than average start and has a higher incidence of influenza than the 2018-2019 influenza season; and influenza related health care costs were higher than Aetna
projected in 2017-2018.
Our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results and competitiveness depend in large part on our ability to appropriately manage future health care and other
benefit costs through underwriting criteria, product design, provider network configuration, negotiation of favorable provider contracts and medical management
programs. Our medical cost management programs may not be successful and may have a smaller impact on health care and benefit costs than we expect. The
factors described above may adversely affect our ability to predict and manage health care and other benefit costs, which can adversely affect our competitiveness
and operating results.
The reserves we hold for expected claims in our Insured Health Care Benefits products are based on estimates that involve an extensive degree of judgment
and are inherently variable. Any reserve, including a premium deficiency reserve, may be insufficient. If actual claims exceed our estimates, our operating
results could be materially adversely affected, and our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future costs may be limited.
A large portion of health care claims are not submitted to us until after the end of the quarter in which services are rendered by providers to our members. Our
reported health care costs payable for any particular period reflect our estimates of the ultimate cost of such claims as well as claims that have been reported to us
but not yet paid. We also must estimate the amount of rebates payable under the ACA’s, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (“CMS’s”) and the
federal Office of Personnel Management’s (“OPM’s”) minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rules and the amounts payable by us to, and receivable by us from, the
United States federal government under the ACA’s remaining premium stabilization program.
Our estimates of health care costs payable are based on a number of factors, including those derived from historical claim experience, but this estimation process
also makes use of extensive judgment. Considerable variability is inherent in such estimates, and the accuracy of the estimates is highly sensitive to changes in
medical claims submission and processing patterns and/or procedures, turnover and other changes in membership, changes in product mix, changes in the
utilization of medical and/or other covered services, including prescription drugs, changes in medical cost trends, changes in our medical management practices
and the introduction of new benefits and products. We estimate health care costs payable periodically, and any resulting adjustments, including premium deficiency
reserves, are reflected in current-period operating results within benefit costs. For example, as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, we established a premium
deficiency reserve of $4 million and $16 million, respectively, related to Medicaid products in the Health Care Benefits segment. A worsening (or improvement) of
health care cost trend rates or changes in claim payment patterns from those that we assumed in estimating health care costs payable as of December 31, 2019
would cause these estimates to change in the near term, and such a change could be material.
Furthermore, if we are not able to accurately and promptly anticipate and detect medical cost trends or accurately estimate the cost of incurred but not yet reported
claims or reported claims that have not been paid, our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future health care costs and reflect our current benefit cost
experience in our pricing process may be limited, which would further exacerbate the extent of any adverse impact on our operating results. These risks are
particularly acute during and following periods when utilization of medical and/or other covered services and/or medical cost trends are below recent historical
levels and in products where there is significant turnover in our membership each year, and such risks are further magnified by the ACA and other legislation and
regulations that limit our ability to price for our projected and/or experienced increases in utilization and/or medical cost trends.
Our operating results are affected by the health of the economy in general and in the geographies we serve.
Our businesses are affected by the U.S. economy and consumer confidence in general and in the geographies we serve, including various economic factors,
including inflation and changes in consumer purchasing power, preferences and/or spending patterns. An unfavorable, uncertain or volatile economic environment
could cause a decline in drug utilization, an
33

increase in health care utilization and dampen demand for PBM services as well as consumer demand for products sold in our retail stores.
If our customers’ operating and financial performance deteriorates, or they are unable to make scheduled payments or obtain adequate financing, our customers
may not be able to pay timely, or may delay payment of, amounts owed to us. Any inability of our customers to pay us for our products and services may adversely
affect our businesses, operating results and cash flows. In addition, both state and federal government sponsored payers, as a result of budget deficits or spending
reductions, may suspend payments or seek to reduce their health care expenditures resulting in our customers delaying payments to us or renegotiating their
contracts with us.
Further, economic conditions including interest rate fluctuations, changes in capital market conditions and regulatory changes may affect our ability to obtain
necessary financing on acceptable terms, our ability to secure suitable store locations under acceptable terms, our ability to execute sale-leaseback transactions
under acceptable terms and the value of our investment portfolio. Adverse changes in the U.S. economy, consumer confidence and economic conditions could have
an adverse effect on our businesses and financial results. This adverse effect could be further exacerbated by the increasing prevalence of high deductible health
plans and health plan designs favoring co-insurance over co-payments as members and other consumers may decide to postpone, or not to seek, medical treatment
which may lead them to incur more expensive medical treatment in the future and/or decrease our prescription volumes.
In addition, our Health Care Benefits membership remains concentrated in certain U.S. geographies and in certain industries. Unfavorable changes in health care or
other benefit costs or reimbursement rates or increased competition in those geographic areas where our membership is concentrated could therefore have a
disproportionately adverse effect on our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results. Our Health Care Benefits membership has been and may continue to be
affected by workforce reductions by our customers due to adverse and/or uncertain general economic conditions, especially in the U.S. geographies and industries
where our membership is concentrated. As a result, we may not be able to profitably grow and diversify our Health Care Benefits membership geographically, by
product type or by customer industry, and our revenues and operating results may be disproportionately affected by adverse changes affecting our customers.
We are exposed to risks relating to the solvency of other insurers.
We are subject to assessments under guaranty fund laws existing in all states for obligations of insolvent insurance companies (including long-term care insurers),
HMOs, ACA co-ops and other payors to policyholders and claimants. For example, in the first quarter of 2017, Aetna recorded a discounted estimated liability
expense of $231 million pretax for our estimated share of future assessments for long-term care insurer Penn Treaty Network America Insurance Company and one
of its subsidiaries. Guaranty funds are maintained by state insurance commissioners to protect policyholders and claimants in the event that an insurer, HMO, ACA
co-op and/or other payor becomes insolvent or is unable to meet its financial obligations. These funds are usually financed by assessments against insurers
regulated by a state. Future assessments may have an adverse effect on our operating results and cash flows.
Extreme events, or the threat of extreme events, could materially increase our health care (including behavioral health) costs.
Nuclear, biological or other attacks, whether as a result of war or terrorism, other man-made disasters, natural disasters, epidemics, pandemics and other extreme
events can affect the U.S. economy in general, our industries and us specifically. In particular, such extreme events or the threat of such extreme events could result
in significant health care (including behavioral health) costs, which also would be affected by the government’s actions and the responsiveness of public health
agencies and other insurers. Such extreme events or the threat of such extreme events also could disrupt our supply chains and/or our distribution chains for the
products we sell. In addition, our employees and those of our vendors are concentrated in certain large, metropolitan areas which may be particularly exposed to
these events. Such events could adversely affect our businesses, operating results and cash flows, and, in the event of extreme circumstances, our financial
condition or viability, particularly if our responses to such events are less adequate than those of our competitors.
34

Risks From Changes in Public Policy and Other Legal and Regulatory Risks
We are subject to potential changes in public policy, laws and regulations, including reform of the U.S. health care system, which can adversely affect our
businesses. Entitlement program reform, if it occurs, could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operations and/or operating results.
The political environment in which we operate remains uncertain. It is reasonably possible that our business operations and operating results could be materially
adversely affected by legislative, regulatory and public policy changes at the federal or state level, increased government involvement in drug reimbursement,
pricing, purchasing and/or importation and/or increased regulation of PBMs, including: changes to the Medicare or Medicaid programs (including the block grant
option outlined by CMS on January 30, 2020) or the regulatory environment for health care and related benefits, including the ACA; changes to laws or regulations
governing drug reimbursement and/or pricing; changes to the laws and regulations governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions
with government funded health care programs; changes to laws and/or regulations governing drug manufacturers’ rebates; changes to laws and/or regulations
governing reimbursements paid to pharmacists by and/or reporting required by PBMs; changes to immigration policies and/or other public policy initiatives. It is
not possible to predict whether or when any such changes will occur or what form any such changes may take (including through the use of U.S. Presidential
Executive Orders). Other significant changes to health care and related benefits system legislation or regulation as well as changes with respect to tax and trade
policies, tariffs and other government regulations affecting trade between the United States and other countries also are possible and could adversely affect our
businesses. If we fail to respond adequately to such changes, including by implementing strategic and operational initiatives, or do not respond as effectively as our
competitors, our businesses, operations and operating results may be materially adversely affected.
In addition to efforts to amend, repeal or replace the ACA and related regulations, we expect the federal and state governments to continue to enact and seriously
consider many broad-based legislative and regulatory proposals that will or could materially impact various aspects of the health care and related benefits system
and our businesses. Potential modification to the ACA, including changes in enforcement and/or funding that further destabilize the Public Exchanges, as well as
significant changes to Medicaid funding (including the block grant option outlined by CMS on January 30, 2020) could impact the number of Americans with
health insurance and, consequently, prescription drug coverage. Further changes to federal health care and related benefits laws, including the ACA, drug
reimbursement and pricing laws, laws governing PBMs and/or laws governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with
government funded health care programs, are probable. We cannot predict the effect, if any, that new health care and related benefits legislation, future changes to
the ACA or the implementation of or failure to implement the outstanding provisions of ACA, may have on our Pharmacy Services, retail pharmacy, LTC
pharmacy and/or Health Care Benefits operations and/or operating results. The federal and many state governments also are considering changes in the
interpretation, enforcement and/or application of existing programs, laws and regulations, including changes to payments under and funding of Medicare and
Medicaid programs and increased regulation of PBMs.
Further, changes in existing federal or state laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or regulations relating to additional regulation of PBMs (including
formulary management or other PBM services), drug pricing or purchasing, patent term extensions and/or purchase discount and/or rebate arrangements with drug
manufacturers also could reduce the discounts or rebates we receive. Changes in existing federal or state laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or
regulations relating to claims processing and billing, including our ability to use MAC lists and collect transmission fees, also could adversely affect our
profitability.
We cannot predict the enactment or content of new legislation or regulations or changes to existing laws or regulations or their enforcement, interpretation or
application, or the effect they will have on our business operations or operating results, which could be materially adverse. Even if we could predict such matters, it
is not possible to eliminate the adverse impact of public policy changes that would fundamentally change the dynamics of one or more of the industries in which
we compete. Examples of such changes include: the federal or one or more state governments fundamentally restructuring or reducing the funding available for
Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible or dual eligible special needs plan programs, increasing its involvement in drug reimbursement, pricing, purchasing and/or
importation, changing the laws and regulations governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care
programs, changing the tax treatment of health or related benefits, or repealing or otherwise significantly altering the ACA. The likelihood of adverse changes
remains high due to state and federal budgetary pressures, and our businesses and operating results could be materially and adversely affected by such changes,
even if we correctly predict their occurrence.
For more information on these matters, see “Government Regulation” included in Item 1 of this Form 10-K.
35

If we fail to comply with applicable laws and regulations, many of which are highly complex, we could be subject to significant adverse regulatory actions or
suffer brand and reputational harm.
Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and oversight by state, federal and international governmental authorities. The laws and regulations governing
our operations and interpretations of those laws and regulations are increasing in number and complexity, change frequently and can be inconsistent or conflict
with one another. In general, these laws and regulations are designed to benefit and protect customers, members and providers rather than us or our investors. In
addition, the governmental authorities that regulate our businesses have broad latitude to make, interpret and enforce the laws and regulations that govern us and
continue to interpret and enforce those laws and regulations more strictly and more aggressively each year. We also must follow various restrictions on certain of
our businesses and the payment of dividends by certain of our subsidiaries put in place by certain state regulators.
Certain of our Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC operations, products and services are subject to:
•
the clinical quality, patient safety and other risks inherent in the dispensing, packaging and distribution of drugs and other health care products and services,
including claims related to purported dispensing and other operational errors (any failure by our Pharmacy Services and/or Retail/LTC operations to adhere to
the laws and regulations applicable to the dispensing of drugs could subject us to civil and criminal penalties);
•
federal and state anti-kickback and other laws that govern our relationship with drug manufacturers, customers and consumers;
•
compliance requirements under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), including fiduciary obligations in connection with the
development and implementation of items such as drug formularies and preferred drug listings; and
•
federal and state legislative proposals and/or regulatory activity that could adversely affect pharmacy benefit industry practices.
Our Health Care Benefits products are highly regulated, particularly those that serve Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible, dual eligible special needs and small group
Commercial customers and members. The laws and regulations governing participation in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual
eligible special needs plan programs are complex, are subject to interpretation and can expose us to penalties for non-compliance.
The scope of the practices and activities that are prohibited by federal and state false claims acts is the subject of pending litigation. Claims under federal and state
false claims acts can be brought by the government or by private individuals on behalf of the government through a qui tam or “whistleblower” suit, and we are a
defendant in a number of such proceedings. If we are convicted of fraud or other criminal conduct in the performance of a government program or if there is an
adverse decision against us under the federal False Claims Act (the “False Claims Act”), we may be temporarily or permanently suspended from participating in
government health care programs, including Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs, and we
also may be required to pay significant fines and/or other monetary penalties. Whistleblower suits have resulted in significant settlements between governmental
agencies and health care companies. The significant incentives and protections provided to whistleblowers under applicable law increase the risk of whistleblower
suits.
If we fail to comply with laws and regulations that apply to government programs, we could be subject to criminal fines, civil penalties, premium refunds,
prohibitions on marketing or active or passive enrollment of members, corrective actions, termination of our contracts or other sanctions which could have a
material adverse effect on our ability to participate in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible, dual eligible special needs plan and other
programs and on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Our businesses, profitability and growth also may be adversely affected by (i) judicial and regulatory decisions that change and/or expand the interpretations of
existing statutes and regulations, impose medical or bad faith liability, increase our responsibilities under ERISA or the remedies available under ERISA, or reduce
the scope of ERISA pre-emption of state law claims (including Rutledge v. Pharm. Care Mgmt. Assoc., which is currently pending before the U.S. Supreme Court)
or (ii) other legislation and regulations.
36

If our compliance or other systems and processes fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and become subject to regulatory
actions and/or litigation.
In addition to being subject to extensive and complex regulations, many of our contracts with customers include detailed requirements. In order to be eligible to
offer certain products or bid on certain contracts, we must demonstrate that we have robust systems and processes in place that are designed to maintain compliance
with all applicable legal, regulatory and contractual requirements. These systems and processes frequently are reviewed and audited by our customers and
regulators. If our systems and processes designed to maintain compliance with applicable legal and contractual requirements, and to prevent and detect instances
of, or the potential for, non-compliance fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and be subject to regulatory actions, litigation
and other proceedings which may result in damages, fines, suspension or loss of licensure, suspension or exclusion from participation in government programs
and/or other penalties, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
We routinely are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings, including class actions and qui tam actions. Many of these proceedings seek
substantial damages which may not be covered by insurance. These proceedings are costly to defend, may result in changes in our business practices, harm our
brand and reputation and adversely affect our businesses and operating results.
PBM, retail pharmacy, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy, LTC pharmacy and health care and related benefits are highly regulated industries whose
participants frequently are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings. We are currently subject to various litigation and arbitration matters,
investigations, regulatory audits, inspections, government inquiries, and regulatory and other legal proceedings, both inside and outside the U.S. Outside the U.S.,
contractual rights, tax positions and applicable regulations may be subject to interpretation or uncertainty to a greater degree than in the U.S. Litigation related to
our provision of professional services in our medical clinics, pharmacies and LTC operations is increasing as we expand our services along the continuum of health
care.
Litigation, and particularly securities, derivative, collective or class action and qui tam litigation, is often expensive and disruptive. Many of the legal proceedings
against us seek substantial damages (including non-economic or punitive damages and treble damages), and certain of these proceedings also seek changes in our
business practices. While we currently have insurance coverage for some potential liabilities, other potential liabilities may not be covered by insurance, insurers
may dispute coverage and/or the amount of our insurance may not be enough to cover the damages awarded or costs incurred. In addition, some types of damages,
like punitive damages, may not be covered by insurance, and in some jurisdictions the coverage of punitive damages is prohibited. Insurance coverage for all or
some forms of liability also may become unavailable or prohibitively expensive in the future.
The outcome of litigation and other adverse legal proceedings is always uncertain, and outcomes that are not justifiable by the evidence or existing law or
regulation can and do occur, and the costs incurred frequently are substantial regardless of the outcome. Litigation and other adverse legal proceedings could
materially adversely affect our businesses, operating results and/or cash flows because of brand and reputational harm to us caused by such proceedings, the cost of
defending such proceedings, the cost of settlement or judgments against us, or the changes in our operations that could result from such proceedings. See Item 3 of
this Form 10-K for additional information.
We frequently are subject to regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews that could result in changes to our business practices and also
could result in material refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities and other sanctions.
As one of the largest national retail, mail order, specialty and LTC pharmacy, PBM and health care and related benefits providers, we frequently are subject to
regular and special governmental market conduct and other audits, investigations and reviews by, and we receive subpoenas and other requests for information
from, various federal and state agencies, regulatory authorities, attorneys general, committees, subcommittees and members of the U.S. Congress and other state,
federal and international governmental authorities. For example, we have received civil investigative demands (“CIDs”) from, and provided documents and
information to, the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of our patient chart review processes in connection with risk adjustment
data submissions under Parts C and D of the Medicare program. CMS and the Office of the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (the “OIG”) also are auditing the risk adjustment-related data of certain of our Medicare Advantage plans, and the number of such audits continues to
increase. Several such audits, investigations and reviews by governmental authorities currently are pending, some of which may be resolved in 2020, the results of
which may be adverse to us.
37

Federal and state governments have made investigating and prosecuting health care and other insurance fraud, waste and abuse a priority. Fraud, waste and abuse
prohibitions encompass a wide range of activities, including kickbacks for referral of members, billing for unnecessary medical and/or other covered services,
improper marketing and violations of patient privacy rights. The regulations and contractual requirements applicable to us and other industry participants are
complex and subject to change, making it necessary for us to invest significant resources in complying with our regulatory and contractual requirements. Ongoing
vigorous law enforcement and the highly technical regulatory scheme mean that our compliance efforts in this area will continue to require significant resources. In
addition, our medical costs and the medical expenses of our Health Care Benefits ASC customers may be adversely affected if we do not prevent or detect
fraudulent activity by providers and/or members.
Regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews by federal, state and international regulators could result in changes to our business practices,
and also could result in significant or material premium refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities or other sanctions, including suspension or
exclusion from participation in government programs and suspension or loss of licensure. Any of these audits, investigations or reviews could have a material
adverse effect on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition or result in significant liabilities and negative publicity for us.
See “Legal and Regulatory Proceedings” in Note 16 “Commitments and Contingencies” included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Our litigation and regulatory risk profile are changing as we offer new products and services and expand in business areas beyond our historical core
businesses of Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits.
Historically, we focused primarily on providing Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits products and services. As a result of our transformation
program and other innovation initiatives, we are expanding our presence in the health care space and plan to offer new products and services (such as the home
hemodialysis device we are developing) which present a different litigation and regulatory risk profile than the products and services that we historically have
offered.
The increased volume of business in areas beyond our historical core businesses and new products and services subject us to litigation and regulatory risks that are
different from the risks of providing Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits products and services and increase significantly our exposure to
other risks.
We face unique regulatory and other challenges in our Medicare and Medicaid businesses.
We are seeking to substantially grow the Medicare and Medicaid membership in our Health Care Benefits segment in 2020 and over the next several years. We
face unique regulatory and other challenges that may inhibit the growth and profitability of those businesses.
•
In April 2019, CMS issued a final notice detailing final Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates for 2020 (the “Final Notice”). Overall, we project the
benchmark rates in the Final Notice will increase funding for our Medicare Advantage business, excluding the impact of the HIF, by approximately 2.0 percent
in 2020 compared to 2019. This 2020 rate increase only partially offsets the challenge we face from the impact of the increasing cost of medical care
(including prescription medications) and CMS local and national coverage decisions that require us to pay for services and supplies that are not factored into
our bids and creates continued pressure on our Medicare Advantage operating results. We cannot predict future Medicare funding levels, the impact of future
federal budget actions or ensure that such changes or actions will not have an adverse effect on our Medicare operating results.
•
The organic expansion of our Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D service area is subject to the ability of CMS to process our requests for service area
expansions and our ability to build cost competitive provider networks in the expanded service areas that meet applicable network adequacy requirements.
CMS’ decisions on our requests for service area expansions also may be affected adversely by compliance issues that arise each year in our Medicare
operations.
•
CMS regularly audits our performance to determine our compliance with CMS’s regulations and our contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of the
services we provide to our Medicare members. As a result of these audits, we may be subject to significant or material retroactive adjustments to and/or
withholding of certain premiums and fees, fines, criminal liability, civil monetary penalties, CMS imposed sanctions (including suspension or exclusion from
participation in government programs) or other restrictions on our Medicare, Medicaid and other businesses, including suspension or loss of licensure.
38

•
“Star ratings” from CMS for our Medicare Advantage plans will continue to have a significant effect on our plans’ operating results. Since 2015, only
Medicare Advantage plans with a star rating of four or higher (out of five) are eligible for a quality bonus in their basic premium rates. CMS continues to
change its rating system to make achieving and maintaining a four or higher star rating more difficult. Our star ratings and past performance scores are
adversely affected by the compliance issues that arise each year in our Medicare operations. If our star ratings fall below 4 for a significant portion of our
Medicare Advantage membership or do not match the performance of our competitors or the star rating quality bonuses are reduced or eliminated, our
revenues, operating results and cash flows may be significantly adversely affected.
•
Payments we receive from CMS for our Medicare Advantage and Part D businesses also are subject to risk adjustment based on the health status of the
individuals we enroll. Elements of that risk adjustment mechanism continue to be challenged by the DOJ, the OIG and CMS itself. Substantial changes in the
risk adjustment mechanism, including changes that result from enforcement or audit actions, could materially affect the amount of our Medicare
reimbursement, require us to raise prices or reduce the benefits we offer to Medicare beneficiaries, and potentially limit our (and the industry’s) participation
in the Medicare program.
•
Medicare Part D has resulted in increased utilization of prescription medications and puts pressure on our pharmacy gross margin rates due to regulatory and
competitive pressures. Further, as a result of the ACA and changes to the retiree drug subsidy rules, clients of our PBM business could decide to discontinue
providing prescription drug benefits to their Medicare-eligible members. To the extent this phenomenon occurs, the adverse effects of increasing customer
migration into Medicare Part D may outweigh the benefits we realize from growth of our Medicare Part D products.
•
Our Medicare Part D operating results and our ability to expand our Medicare Part D business could be adversely affected if: the cost and complexity of
Medicare Part D exceed management’s expectations or prevent effective program implementation or administration; changes to the regulations regarding how
drug costs are reported for Medicare Part D are implemented in a manner that adversely affects the profitability of our Medicare Part D business; changes to
the applicable regulations impact our ability to retain fees from third parties including network pharmacies; the government alters Medicare Part D program
requirements or reduces funding because of the higher-than-anticipated cost to taxpayers of Medicare Part D or for other reasons; the government mandates the
use of point-of-sale manufacturer’s rebates or up front drug pricing discounts, makes drug manufacturer’s rebates illegal, or makes changes to how pharmacy
pay-for-performance is calculated; or reinsurance thresholds are reduced below their current levels.
•
We have experienced challenges in obtaining complete and accurate encounter data for our Medicaid products due to difficulties with providers and third-party
vendors submitting claims in a timely fashion in the proper format, and with state agencies in coordinating such submissions. As states increase their reliance
on encounter data, these difficulties could affect the Medicaid premium rates we receive and how Medicaid membership is assigned to us, which could have a
material adverse effect on our Medicaid operating results and cash flows and/or our ability to bid for, and continue to participate in, certain Medicaid
programs.
•
Federal funding for expanded Medicaid coverage began to decrease in 2017. This reduction is causing states to re-evaluate funding for their Medicaid
expansions. That re-evaluation may adversely affect Medicaid payment rates, our Medicaid membership in those states, our revenues, our MLRs and our
operating results.
•
If we fail to report and correct errors discovered through our own auditing procedures or during a CMS audit or otherwise fail to comply with the applicable
laws and regulations, we could be subject to fines, civil monetary penalties or other sanctions, including fines and penalties under the False Claims Act, which
could have a material adverse effect on our ability to participate in Medicare Advantage, Part D or other government programs, and on our operating results,
cash flows and financial condition.
•
In the second quarter of 2014, CMS issued a final rule implementing ACA requirements that Medicare Advantage and PDP plans report and refund to CMS
overpayments that those plans receive from CMS. However, CMS’s statements in formalized guidance regarding “overpayments” to Medicare Advantage
plans appear to be inconsistent with CMS’s prior risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”) audit guidance. These statements appear to equate each Medicare
Advantage risk adjustment data error with an “overpayment” without reconciliation to the principles underlying the fee for service adjustment comparison
contemplated by CMS’s RADV audit methodology. The precise interpretation, impact and legality of the final rule are not clear and are subject to pending
litigation. If Medicare Advantage plans were not paid based on payment model principles that align with the requirements of the Social Security Act or such
payments were not implemented correctly, it could have a material adverse effect on our operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
•
Certain of our Medicaid contracts require the submission of complete and correct encounter data. The accurate and timely reporting of encounter data is
increasingly important to the success of our Medicaid programs because more states are using encounter data to determine compliance with performance
standards and, in part, to set premium rates. We have expended and may continue to expend additional effort and incur significant additional costs to collect
accurate, or to
39

correct inaccurate or incomplete, encounter data and have been and could be exposed to premium withholding, operating sanctions and financial fines and
penalties for noncompliance. We have experienced challenges in obtaining complete and accurate encounter data due to difficulties with providers and third-
party vendors submitting claims in a timely fashion in the proper format, and with state agencies in coordinating such submissions. As states increase their
reliance on encounter data, these difficulties could affect the Medicaid premium rates we receive and how Medicaid membership is assigned to us, which
could have a material adverse effect on our Medicaid operating results and cash flows and/or our ability to bid for, and continue to participate in, certain
Medicaid programs.
•
Our businesses that dispense drugs also face challenges in the Medicaid space. The ACA made several significant changes to Medicaid rebates and to
reimbursement rates. One of these changes was to revise the definition of the Average Manufacturer Price, a pricing element common to most payment
formulas, and the reimbursement formula for generic drugs. This change has adversely affected the reimbursements we receive when we dispense prescription
drugs to Medicaid recipients.
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to
increase.
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to increase. As
our government funded businesses grow, our exposure to changes in federal and state government policy with respect to and/or regulation of the various
government funded programs in which we participate also increases.
Our revenues from government funded programs, including in Health Care Benefits’ Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan
businesses and from government customers in its Commercial business, are dependent on annual funding by the federal government and/or applicable state or local
governments. Federal, state and local governments have the right to cancel or not to renew their contracts with us on short notice without cause or if funds are not
available. Funding for these programs is dependent on many factors outside our control, including general economic conditions, continuing government efforts to
contain health care costs and budgetary constraints at the federal or applicable state or local level and general political issues and priorities.
The U.S. federal government and our other government customers also may reduce funding for health care or other programs, cancel or decline to renew contracts
with us, or make changes that adversely affect the number of persons eligible for certain programs, the services provided to enrollees in such programs, our
premiums and our administrative and health care and other benefit costs, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and
cash flows. When federal funding is delayed, suspended or curtailed, we continue to receive, and we remain liable for and are required to fund, claims from
providers for providing services to beneficiaries of federally funded health benefits programs in which we participate. An extended federal government shutdown
or a delay by Congress in raising the federal government’s debt ceiling also could lead to a delay, reduction, suspension or cancellation of federal government
spending and a significant increase in interest rates that could, in turn, have a material adverse effect on the value of our investment portfolio, our ability to access
the capital markets and our businesses, operating results, cash flows and liquidity.
Possible changes in industry pricing benchmarks and drug pricing generally can adversely affect our PBM and Retail/LTC businesses.
It is possible that the pharmaceutical industry or regulators may evaluate and/or develop an alternative pricing reference to replace Average Wholesale Price
(“AWP”) or Wholesale Acquisition Cost (“WAC”), which are the pricing references used for many of our PBM and LTC client contracts, drug purchase
agreements, retail network contracts, specialty payor agreements and other contracts with third party payors in connection with the reimbursement of drug
payments. In addition, many state Medicaid fee-for-service programs (“FFS Medicaid”) have established pharmacy network payments on the basis of Actual
Acquisition Cost (“AAC”). The use of an AAC basis in FFS Medicaid could have an impact on reimbursement practices in Health Care Benefits’ Commercial and
other Government products.
Future changes to the use of AWP, WAC or to other published pricing benchmarks used to establish drug pricing, including changes in the basis for calculating
reimbursement by federal and state health care programs and/or other payors, could impact the reimbursement we receive from Medicare and Medicaid programs,
the reimbursement we receive from our PBM clients and other payors and/or our ability to negotiate rebates and/or discounts with drug manufacturers, wholesalers,
PBMs and retail pharmacies. A failure or inability to fully offset any increased prices or costs or to modify our operations to mitigate the impact of such increases
could have a material adverse effect on our operating results. Additionally, any future changes in drug prices could be significantly different than our projections.
We cannot predict the effect of these possible changes on our businesses.
40

We may not be able to obtain adequate premium rate increases in our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which would have an adverse effect on our
revenues, MBRs and operating results and could magnify the adverse impact of increases in health care and other benefit costs and of ACA assessments, fees
and taxes.
Premium rates for our Insured Health Care Benefits products generally must be filed with state insurance regulators and are subject to their approval, which creates
risk for us in the current political and regulatory environment. The ACA generally requires a review by HHS in conjunction with state regulators of premium rate
increases that exceed a federally specified threshold (or lower state-specific thresholds set by states determined by HHS to have adequate processes). Rate reviews
can magnify the adverse impact on our operating margins, medical benefit ratios (“MBRs”) and operating results of increases in health care and other benefit costs,
increased utilization of covered services, and ACA assessments, fees and taxes, by restricting our ability to reflect these increases and/or these assessments, fees
and taxes in our pricing. Further, our ability to reflect ACA assessments, fees and taxes in our Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP premium rates is limited.
Since 2013, HHS has issued determinations to health plans that their premium rate increases were “unreasonable,” and we continue to experience challenges to
appropriate premium rate increases in certain states. Regulators or legislatures in several states have implemented or are considering limits on premium rate
increases, either by enforcing existing legal requirements more stringently or proposing different regulatory standards. Regulators or legislatures in several states
also have conducted hearings on proposed premium rate increases, which can result, and in some instances have resulted, in substantial delays in implementing
proposed rate increases even if they ultimately are approved. Our plans can be excluded from participating in small group Public Exchanges if they are deemed to
have a history of “unreasonable” rate increases. Any significant rate increases we may request heighten the risks of adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and
adverse selection and the likelihood that our requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed, which could adversely affect our MBRs and lead
to operating margin compression.
We anticipate continued regulatory and legislative action to increase regulation of premium rates in our Insured Health Care Benefits products. We may not be able
to obtain rates that are actuarially justified or that are sufficient to make our policies profitable in one or more product lines or geographies. If we are unable to
obtain adequate premium rates and/or premium rate increases, it could materially and adversely affect our operating margins and MBRs and our ability to earn
adequate returns on Insured Health Care Benefits products in one or more states or cause us to withdraw from certain geographies and/or products.
Minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in our Insured Health Care Benefits products while leaving us exposed to higher
than expected medical costs. Challenges to our minimum MLR rebate methodology and/or reports could adversely affect our operating results.
The ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in Health Care Benefits’ Commercial Insured and Medicare Insured
businesses. CMS minimum MLR rebate regulations limit the level of margin we can earn in our Medicaid Insured business. Certain portions of our Health Care
Benefits Medicaid and Federal Employees Health Benefits (“FEHB”) program business also are subject to minimum MLR rebate requirements in addition to but
separate from those imposed by the ACA. Minimum MLR rebate requirements leave us exposed to medical costs that are higher than those reflected in our pricing.
The process supporting the management and determination of the amount of MLR rebates payable is complex and requires judgment, and the minimum MLR
reporting requirements are detailed. Federal and state auditors are challenging our Commercial Health Care Benefits business’ compliance with the ACA’s
minimum MLR requirements as well as our FEHB plans’ compliance with OPM’s FEHB program-specific minimum MLR requirements. Our Medicare and
Medicaid contracts also are subject to minimum MLR audits. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays minimum MLR rebates for three
consecutive years, it will become ineligible to enroll new members. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays such rebates for five consecutive
years, it will be terminated by CMS. Additional challenges to our methodology and/or reports relating to minimum MLR and related rebates by federal and state
regulators and private litigants are reasonably possible. The outcome of these audits and additional challenges could adversely affect our operating results.
Our operating results may be adversely affected by changes in laws and policies governing employers and by union organizing activity.
The federal and certain state legislatures continue to consider and pass legislation that increases our costs of doing business, including increased minimum wages
and requiring employers to provide paid sick leave or paid family leave. In addition, our employee-related operating costs may be increased by union organizing
activity. If we are unable to reflect these increased expenses in our pricing or otherwise modify our operations to mitigate the effects of such increases, our
operating results will be adversely affected.
41

We face international political, legal and compliance, operational, regulatory, economic and other risks that may be more significant than in our domestic
operations.
We significantly expanded our international operations as a result of the Aetna Acquisition. As a result of our expanded international operations, we face political,
legal, compliance, operational, regulatory, economic and other risks that we do not face or that are more significant than in our domestic operations. These risks
vary widely by country and include varying regional and geopolitical business conditions and demands, government intervention and censorship, discriminatory
regulation, nationalization or expropriation of assets and pricing constraints. Our international products need to meet country-specific customer and member
preferences as well as country-specific legal requirements, including those related to licensing, data privacy, data storage and data protection.
Our international operations increase our exposure to, and require us to devote significant management resources to implement controls and systems to comply
with, the privacy and data protection laws of non-U.S. jurisdictions, such as the European Union’s (“EU’s”) General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”), and the
anti-bribery, anti-corruption and anti-money laundering laws of the United States (including the FCPA) and the United Kingdom (including the UK Bribery Act)
and similar laws in other jurisdictions. Implementing our compliance policies, internal controls and other systems upon our expansion into new countries and
geographies may require the investment of considerable management time and financial and other resources over several years before any significant revenues or
profits are generated. Violations of these laws and regulations could result in fines, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or employees, restrictions or outright
prohibitions on the conduct of our business, and significant brand and reputational harm. We must regularly reassess the size, capability and location of our global
infrastructure and make appropriate changes, and must have effective change management processes and internal controls in place to address changes in our
businesses and operations. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to anticipate these risks and manage these difficulties, and the failure to do so could have a
material adverse effect on our brand, reputation, businesses, operating results and/or financial condition.
Our international operations require us to overcome logistical and other challenges based on differing languages, cultures, legal and regulatory schemes and time
zones. Our international operations encounter labor laws, standards and customs that can be difficult and make employee relationships less flexible than in our
domestic operations and expensive to modify or terminate. In some countries we are required to, or choose to, operate with local business associates, which
requires us to manage our relationships with these third parties and may reduce our operational flexibility and ability to quickly respond to business challenges.
In some countries we may be exposed to currency exchange controls or other restrictions that prevent us from transferring funds internationally or converting local
currencies into U.S. dollars or other currencies. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates may adversely affect our revenues, operating results and cash flows
from our international operations. Some of our operations are, and are increasingly likely to be, in emerging markets where these risks are heightened. Any
measures we may implement to reduce the effect of volatile currencies and other risks on our international operations may not be effective.
Risks Associated with Mergers, Acquisitions, and Divestitures
Risks Relating to Our Acquisition of Aetna
We expect to continue to incur significant non-recurring costs associated with combining the operations of CVS Health and Aetna. We may not achieve the net
benefit that we project of such expenditures associated with the elimination of duplicative costs, the realization of other efficiencies that we project related to the
integration of our businesses or the realization of the growth opportunities that we project from the Aetna Acquisition in the near term, or at all. In addition, the
post-closing integration of the operations of CVS Health and Aetna and related matters may require substantial commitments of management and other resources
and management time which could otherwise have been devoted to our ongoing businesses and operations and/or to other opportunities that may have been
beneficial to us.
Parties with which we do business may experience uncertainty associated with the Aetna Acquisition and/or the post-closing integration process, including with
respect to current or future business relationships with the combined business. Our business relationships (including business relationships of our Health Care
Benefits segment) may be subject to disruption as customers, members, manufacturers, providers, vendors and others may attempt to negotiate changes in existing
business relationships or consider entering into business relationships with parties other than the combined business.
42

We may be unable to successfully integrate companies we acquire.
Upon the closing of any acquisition we complete, we will need to successfully integrate the products, services and related assets, as well as internal controls into
our business operations. If an acquisition is consummated, the integration of the acquired business, its products, services and related assets into our company also
may be complex and time-consuming and, if the integration is not fully successful, we may not achieve the anticipated benefits, operating and cost synergies and/or
growth opportunities of an acquisition. Potential difficulties that may be encountered in the integration process include the following:
•
Integrating personnel, operations and systems (including internal control environments and compliance policies), while maintaining focus on producing and
delivering consistent, high quality products and services;
•
Coordinating geographically dispersed organizations;
•
Disrupting management’s attention from our ongoing business operations;
•
Retaining existing customers and attracting new customers; and
•
Managing inefficiencies associated with integrating our operations.
An inability to realize the full extent of the anticipated benefits, operating and cost synergies, innovations and operations efficiencies or growth opportunities of an
acquisition, as well as any delays or additional expenses encountered in the integration process, could have a material adverse effect on our businesses and
operating results. Furthermore, acquisitions, even if successfully integrated, may fail to further our business strategy as anticipated, expose us to increased
competition or challenges with respect to our products, services or service areas, and expose us to additional liabilities associated with an acquired business
including risks and liabilities associated with litigation involving the acquired business. Any one of these challenges or risks could impair our ability to realize any
benefit from our acquisitions after we have expended resources on them.
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities, which may be unsuccessful, cause us
to assume unanticipated liabilities, disrupt our existing businesses, be dilutive or lead us to assume significant debt, among other things.
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities as part of our growth strategy. In addition
to the integration risks noted above, some other risks we face with respect to acquisitions and other inorganic growth strategies include:
•
we frequently compete with other firms, some of which may have greater financial and other resources and a greater tolerance for risk, to acquire attractive
companies;
•
the acquired, alliance and/or joint venture businesses may not perform as projected;
•
the goodwill or other intangible assets established as a result of our acquisitions may be incorrectly valued or may become impaired; for example, in 2018 we
took $6.1 billion of goodwill impairment charges related to our LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment;
•
we may assume unanticipated liabilities, including those that were not disclosed to us or which we underestimated;
•
the acquired businesses, or the pursuit of other inorganic growth strategies, could disrupt or compete with our existing businesses, distract management, result
in the loss of key employees, divert resources, result in tax costs or inefficiencies and make it difficult to maintain our current business standards, controls,
information technology systems, policies, procedures and performance;
•
as we did in the Aetna Acquisition, we may finance future acquisitions and other inorganic growth strategies by issuing common stock for some or all of the
purchase price, which would dilute the ownership interests of our stockholders;
•
as we did in the Aetna Acquisition, we may incur significant debt in connection with acquisitions (whether to finance acquisitions or by assuming debt from
the businesses we acquire);
•
we may not have the expertise to manage and profitably grow the businesses we acquire, and we may need to rely on the retention of key personnel and other
suppliers of businesses we acquire, which may be difficult or impossible to accomplish;
•
we may enter into merger or purchase agreements but, due to reasons within or outside our control, fail to complete the related transactions, which could result
in termination fees or other penalties that could be material, cause material disruptions to our businesses and operations and adversely affect our brand and
reputation;
•
in order to complete a proposed acquisition, we may be required to divest certain portions of our business, for which we may not be able to obtain favorable
pricing;
43

•
as is the case with the Aetna Acquisition and our acquisition of Omnicare, Inc., we may be involved in litigation related to mergers or acquisitions, including
for matters that occurred prior to the applicable closing, which may be costly to defend and may result in adverse rulings against us that could be material; and
•
the integration into our businesses of the businesses and entities we acquire may affect the way in which existing laws and regulations apply to us, including
subjecting us to laws and regulations that did not previously apply to us.
In addition, joint ventures present risks that are different from acquisitions, including selection of appropriate joint venture parties, initial and ongoing governance
of the joint venture, joint venture compliance activities (including compliance with applicable CMS requirements), growing the joint venture’s business in a
manner acceptable to all the parties, including other providers in the networks that include joint ventures, maintaining positive relationships among the joint
venture parties and the joint venture’s customers, and member and business disruption that may occur upon joint venture termination.
Risks Related to Our Operations
Failure to meet customer expectations may harm our brand and reputation, our ability to retain and grow our customer base and membership and our
operating results and cash flows.
Our ability to attract and retain customers and members is dependent upon providing cost effective, quality customer service operations (such as call center
operations, PBM functions, retail pharmacy and LTC services, retail, mail order and specialty pharmacy prescription delivery, claims processing, customer case
installation and online access and tools) that meet or exceed our customers’ and members’ expectations, either directly or through vendors. As we seek to reduce
general and administrative expenses, we must balance the potential impact of cost-saving measures on our customer and other service and performance. If we
misjudge the effects of such measures, customer and other service may be adversely affected. We depend on third parties for certain of our customer service, PBM
and prescription delivery operations. If we or our vendors fail to provide service that meets our customers’ and members’ expectations, we may have difficulty
retaining or profitably growing our customer base and/or membership, which could adversely affect our operating results. For example, noncompliance with any
privacy or security laws or regulations or any security breach involving us or one of our third-party vendors could have a material adverse effect on our businesses,
operating results, brand and reputation.
We and our vendors have experienced and continue to experience cyber attacks. We can provide no assurance that we or our vendors will be able to detect,
prevent or contain the effects of such attacks or other information security (including cybersecurity) risks or threats in the future.
We and our vendors have experienced and continue to experience a variety of cyber attacks, and we and our vendors expect to continue to experience cyber attacks
going forward. Among other things, we and our vendors have experienced automated attempts to gain access to public facing networks, brute force, SYN flood and
distributed denial of service attacks, attempted malware infections, vulnerability scanning, ransomware attacks, spear-phishing campaigns, mass reconnaissance
attempts, injection attempts, phishing, PHP injection and cross-site scripting. We also have seen an increase in attacks designed to obtain access to consumers’
accounts using illegally obtained demographic information. Although the impact of such attacks has not been material to our operations or operating results
through December 31, 2019, we can provide no assurance that we or our vendors will be able to detect, prevent or contain the effects of such attacks or other
information security (including cybersecurity) risks or threats in the future. As we expand our consumer-oriented products and services, increase the amount and
types of data we acquire, generate and use, increase the amount of information we make available to members, consumers and providers on mobile devices, expand
our use of vendors, expand internationally and expand our use of social media, our exposure to these data security and related cybersecurity risks, including the risk
of undetected attacks, damage, loss or unauthorized disclosure or access to and/or disruption of our systems and the customer, member, provider, employee,
accountable care organization (“ACO”), joint venture, vendor and other third party information they contain, increases, and the cost of attempting to protect against
these risks also increases.
Although we deploy a layered approach to address information security (including cybersecurity) threats and vulnerabilities that is designed to protect confidential
information against data security breaches, a compromise of our information security controls or of those businesses with whom we interact, which results in
confidential information being accessed, obtained, damaged, or used by unauthorized or improper persons, could harm our reputation and expose us to regulatory
actions and claims from customers and clients, financial institutions, payment card associations and other persons, any of which could adversely affect our
businesses, operating results and financial condition. Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable or degrade service, or sabotage systems
change frequently and may not immediately produce signs of intrusion, we may be unable to anticipate these techniques or to implement adequate preventative
measures. Moreover, a data security breach could require that we expend significant resources related to our information systems and infrastructure, and could
44

distract management and other key personnel from performing their primary operational duties. We also could be adversely affected by any significant disruption
in the systems of third parties we interact with, including key payors and vendors.
The costs of attempting to protect against the foregoing risks and the costs of responding to a cyber-incident are significant. Large scale data breaches at other
entities increase the challenge we and our vendors face in maintaining the security of our information technology systems and proprietary information and of our
customers’, members’ and other constituents’ sensitive information. Following a cyber-incident, our and/or our vendors’ remediation efforts may not be successful,
and a cyber-incident could result in interruptions, delays or cessation of service, and loss of existing or potential customers and members. In addition, breaches of
our and/or our vendors’ security measures and the unauthorized dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary information or confidential
information about us, our customers, our members or other third-parties, could expose our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ private information and
our customers, members and other constituents to the risk of financial or medical identity theft, or expose us or other third parties to a risk of loss or misuse of this
information, and result in investigations, regulatory enforcement actions, material fines and penalties, loss of customers, litigation or other actions which could
have a material adverse effect on our brand, reputation, businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Data governance failures can adversely affect our reputation, businesses and prospects. Our use and disclosure of members’, customers’ and other
constituents’ sensitive information is subject to complex regulations at multiple levels. We would be adversely affected if we or our business associates or other
vendors fail to adequately protect members’, customers’ or other constituents’ sensitive information.
Our information systems are critical to the operation of our businesses. We collect, process, maintain, retain, evaluate, utilize and distribute large amounts of
personal health and financial information and other confidential and sensitive data about our customers, members and other constituents in the ordinary course of
our businesses. Some of our information systems rely upon third party systems to accomplish these tasks. The use and disclosure of such information is regulated at
the federal, state and international levels, and these laws, rules and regulations are subject to change and increased enforcement activity, such as the California
Consumer Privacy Act which went into effect January 1, 2020, the EU’s GDPR which began to apply across the EU during 2018 and the audit program
implemented by HHS under HIPAA. In some cases, such laws, rules and regulations also apply to our vendors and/or may hold us liable for any violations by our
vendors. International laws, rules and regulations governing the use and disclosure of such information are generally more stringent than U.S. laws and regulations,
and they vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Noncompliance with any privacy or security laws or regulations, or any security breach, cyber-attack or
cybersecurity breach, and any incident involving the theft, misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, sensitive or confidential
customer, member or other constituent information, whether by us, by one of our business associates or vendors or by another third party, could require us to
expend significant resources to remediate any damage, could interrupt our operations and could adversely affect our brand and reputation, membership and
operating results and also could expose and/or has exposed us to mandatory disclosure to the media, litigation (including class action litigation), governmental
investigations and enforcement proceedings, material fines, penalties and/or remediation costs, and compensatory, special, punitive and statutory damages, consent
orders, adverse actions against our licenses to do business and/or injunctive relief, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows
or financial condition.
Our businesses depend on our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ willingness to entrust us with their health related and other sensitive personal
information. Events that adversely affect that trust, including inadequate disclosure to our members or customers of our uses of their information, failing to keep
our information technology systems and our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ sensitive information secure from significant attack, theft, damage, loss
or unauthorized disclosure or access, whether as a result of our action or inaction (including human error) or that of our business associates, vendors or other third
parties, could adversely affect our brand and reputation, membership and operating results and also could expose and/or has exposed us to mandatory disclosure to
the media, litigation (including class action litigation), governmental investigations and enforcement proceedings, material fines, penalties and/or remediation
costs, and compensatory, special, punitive and statutory damages, consent orders, adverse actions against our licenses to do business and/or injunctive relief, any of
which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows or financial condition. Large scale data breaches at other entities increase the challenge
we and our vendors face in maintaining the security of our information technology systems and proprietary information and of our customers’, members’ and other
constituents’ sensitive information. There can be no assurance that additional such failures will not occur, or if any do occur, that we will detect them or that they
can be sufficiently remediated.
45

Product liability, product recall or personal injury issues could damage our reputation and have a significant adverse effect on our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
The products that we sell could become subject to contamination, product tampering, mislabeling, recall or other damage. In addition, errors in the dispensing and
packaging of drugs and consuming drugs in a manner that is not prescribed could lead to serious injury or death. Product liability or personal injury claims may be
asserted against us with respect to any of the drugs or other products we sell or services we provide. For example, we are a defendant in hundreds of litigation
proceedings relating to opioids and the sale of products containing talc. Our businesses involve the provision of professional services, including by pharmacists,
physician assistants, nurses and nurse practitioners, which exposes us to professional liability claims. Should a product or other liability issue arise, the coverage
available under our insurance programs and the indemnification amounts available to us from third parties may not be adequate to protect us against the financial
impact of the related claims. We also may not be able to maintain our existing levels of insurance on acceptable terms in the future. A product liability or personal
injury issue or judgment against us or a product recall could damage our reputation and have a significant adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and/or
financial condition.
We face significant competition in attracting and retaining talented employees. Further, managing succession for, and retention of, key executives is critical to
our success, and our failure to do so could adversely affect our businesses, operating results and/or future performance.
Our ability to attract and retain qualified and experienced employees is essential to meet our current and future goals and objectives. There is no guarantee we will
be able to attract and retain such employees or that competition among potential employers will not result in increased compensation and/or benefits costs. If we
are unable to retain existing employees or attract additional employees, or we experience an unexpected loss of leadership, we could experience a material adverse
effect on our businesses, operating results and/or future performance.
In addition, our failure to adequately plan for succession of senior management and other key management roles or the failure of key employees to successfully
transition into new roles could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and/or future performance. The succession plans we have in place
and our employment arrangements with certain key executives do not guarantee the services of these executives will continue to be available to us.
Sales of our products and services are dependent on our ability to attract and motivate internal sales personnel and independent third-party brokers,
consultants and agents. New distribution channels create new disintermediation risk. We may be subject to penalties or other regulatory actions as a result of
the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling our products.
Our products are sold primarily through our sales personnel, who frequently work with independent brokers, consultants and agents who assist in the production
and servicing of business. The independent brokers, consultants and agents generally are not dedicated to us exclusively and may frequently recommend and/or
market health care benefits products of our competitors. Accordingly, we must compete intensely for their services and allegiance. Our sales could be adversely
affected if we are unable to attract, retain or motivate sales personnel and third-party brokers, consultants and agents, or if we do not adequately provide support,
training and education to this sales network regarding our complex product portfolio, or if our sales strategy is not appropriately aligned across distribution
channels. This risk is heightened as we develop, operate and expand our consumer-oriented products and services and we expand in the health care space and our
business model evolves to include a greater focus on consumers and direct-to-consumer sales, such as competing for sales on Insurance Exchanges.
New distribution channels for our products and services continue to emerge, including Private Exchanges operated by health care consultants and technology
companies. These channels may make it more difficult for us to directly engage consumers and other customers in the selection and management of their health
care benefits, in health care utilization and in the effective navigation of the health care system. We also may be challenged by new technologies and marketplace
entrants that could interfere with our existing relationships with customers and health plan members in these areas.
In addition, there have been several investigations regarding the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling health care and other insurance products and the
payments they receive. These investigations have resulted in enforcement actions against companies in our industry and brokers and agents marketing and selling
those companies’ products. For example, CMS and state departments of insurance have increased their scrutiny of the marketing practices of brokers and agents
who market Medicare products. These investigations and enforcement actions could result in penalties and the imposition of corrective action plans and/or changes
to industry practices, which could adversely affect our ability to market our products.
46

Failure of our businesses to effectively collaborate could prevent us from maximizing our operating results.
To maximize our overall Enterprise value, our various businesses need to collaborate effectively. Our businesses need to be aligned in order to prioritize goals and
coordinate the design of new products intended to utilize the offerings of multiple businesses, including our transformation and Enterprise modernization programs.
In addition, misaligned incentives, information siloes, ineffective product development and failure of our corporate governance policies or procedures, for example
significant financial decisions being made at an inappropriate level in our organization, also could prevent us from maximizing our operating results and/or
achieving our financial and other projections.
The failure or disruption of our information technology systems or the failure of our information technology infrastructure to support our businesses could
adversely affect our reputation, businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Our information systems are subject to damage or interruption from power outages, facility damage, computer and telecommunications failures, computer viruses,
security breaches (including credit card or personally identifiable information breaches), cyber-attacks, vandalism, catastrophic events and human error. If our
information systems are damaged, fail to work properly or otherwise become unavailable, we may incur substantial costs to repair or replace them, and may
experience reputational damage, loss of critical information, customer disruption and interruptions or delays in our ability to perform essential functions and
implement new and innovative services. In addition, compliance with changes in U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including privacy and information security
laws and standards, may cause us to incur significant expense due to increased investment in technology and the development of new operational processes.
Our business success and operating results depend in part on effective information technology systems and on continuing to develop and implement
improvements in technology. Pursuing multiple initiatives simultaneously could make this continued development and implementation significantly more
challenging.
Many aspects of our operations are dependent on our information systems and the information collected, processed, stored, and handled by these systems. We rely
heavily on our computer systems to manage our ordering, pricing, point-of-sale, pharmacy fulfillment, inventory replenishment, claims processing, customer
loyalty and subscription programs, finance and other processes. Throughout our operations, we collect, process, maintain, retain, evaluate, utilize and distribute
large amounts of confidential and sensitive data and information, including personally identifiable information and protected health information, that our
customers, members and other constituents provide to purchase products or services, enroll in programs or services, register on our websites, interact with our
personnel, or otherwise communicate with us. In addition, for these operations, we depend in part on the secure transmission of confidential information over
public networks.
We have many different information and other technology systems supporting our businesses (including as a result of our acquisitions). Our businesses depend in
large part on these systems to adequately price our products and services; accurately establish reserves, process claims and report operating results; and interact
with providers, employer plan sponsors, customers, members, consumers and vendors in an efficient and uninterrupted fashion. In addition, recent trends toward
greater consumer engagement in health care require new and enhanced technologies, including more sophisticated applications for mobile devices. Certain of our
technology systems (including software) are older, legacy systems that are less flexible, less efficient and require a significant ongoing commitment of capital and
human resources to maintain, protect and enhance them and to integrate them with our other systems. We must re-engineer and reduce the number of these systems
to meet changing consumer and vendor preferences and needs, improve our productivity and reduce our operating expenses. We also need to develop or acquire
new technology systems, contract with new vendors or modify certain of our existing systems to support the consumer-oriented and transformation products and
services we are developing, operating and expanding and/or to meet current and developing industry and regulatory standards, including to keep pace with
continuing changes in information processing technology and emerging cybersecurity risks and threats. If we fail to achieve these objectives, our ability to
profitably grow our business and/or our operating results may be adversely affected.
In addition, information technology and other technology and process improvement projects, including our transformation and Enterprise modernization programs,
frequently are long-term in nature and may take longer to complete and cost more than we expect and may not deliver the benefits we project once they are
complete. If we do not effectively and efficiently secure, manage, integrate and enhance our technology portfolio (including vendor sourced systems), we could,
among other things, have problems determining health care and other benefit cost estimates and/or establishing appropriate pricing, meeting the needs of
customers, consumers, providers, members and vendors, developing and expanding our consumer-oriented products and services or keeping pace with industry and
regulatory standards, and our operating results may be adversely affected.
47

We are subject to payment-related risks that could increase our operating costs, expose us to fraud or theft, subject us to potential liability and disrupt our
business operations.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash, checks, credit cards, debit cards, gift cards, mobile payments and potentially other technologies in
the future. Acceptance of these payment methods subjects us to rules, regulations, contractual obligations and compliance requirements, including payment
network rules and operating guidelines, data security standards and certification requirements, and rules governing electronic funds transfers. These requirements
may change in the future, which could make compliance more difficult or costly. For certain payment options, including credit and debit cards, we pay interchange
and other fees, which could increase periodically thereby raising our operating costs. We rely on third parties to provide payment processing services, including the
processing of credit cards, debit cards, and various other forms of electronic payment. If these vendors are unable to provide these services to us, or if their systems
are compromised, our operations could be disrupted. The payment methods that we offer also expose us to potential fraud and theft by persons seeking to obtain
unauthorized access to, or exploit any weaknesses in, the payment systems we use. If we fail to abide by applicable rules or requirements, or if data relating to our
payment systems is compromised due to a breach or misuse, we may be responsible for any costs incurred by payment card issuing banks and other third parties or
subject to fines and higher transaction fees. In addition, our reputation and ability to accept certain types of payments could each be harmed resulting in reduced
sales and adverse effects on our operating results.
Both our and our vendors’ operations are subject to a variety of business continuity hazards and risks, any of which could interrupt our operations or
otherwise adversely affect our performance and operating results.
We and our vendors are subject to business continuity hazards and other risks, including natural disasters, utility and other mechanical failures, acts of war or
terrorism, disruption of communications, data security and preservation, disruption of supply or distribution, safety regulation and labor difficulties. The occurrence
of any of these or other events to us or our vendors might disrupt or shut down our operations or otherwise adversely affect our operations. We also may be subject
to certain liability claims in the event of an injury or loss of life, or damage to property, resulting from such events. Although we have developed procedures for
crisis management and disaster recovery and business continuity plans and maintain insurance policies that we believe are customary and adequate for our size and
industry, our insurance policies include limits and exclusions and, as a result, our coverage may be insufficient to protect against all potential hazards and risks
incident to our businesses. In addition, our crisis management and disaster recovery procedures and business continuity plans may not be effective. Should any
such hazards or risks occur, or should our insurance coverage be inadequate or unavailable, our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition
could be adversely affected.
Financial Risks
We would be adversely affected if we do not effectively deploy our capital. Downgrades or potential downgrades in our credit ratings, should they occur, could
adversely affect our brand and reputation, businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Our operations generate significant capital, and we have the ability to raise additional capital. The manner in which we deploy our capital, including investments in
our businesses, our operations (such as information technology and other strategic and capital projects), dividends, acquisitions, share and/or debt repurchases,
repayment of debt, reinsurance or other capital uses, impacts our financial strength, claims paying ability and credit ratings issued by nationally-recognized
statistical rating organizations. Credit ratings issued by nationally-recognized statistical rating organizations are broadly distributed and generally used throughout
our industries. Our ratings reflect each rating organization’s opinion of our financial strength, operating performance and ability to meet our debt obligations or
obligations to our insureds. We believe our credit ratings and the financial strength and claims paying ability of our principal insurance and HMO subsidiaries are
important factors in marketing our Health Care Benefits products to certain of our customers.
Each of the ratings organizations reviews our ratings periodically, and there can be no assurance that our current ratings will be maintained in the future. In
connection with the completion of the Aetna Acquisition, each of Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch downgraded certain of our debt, financial strength and/or
other credit ratings. Downgrades in our ratings could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Goodwill and other intangible assets could, in the future, become impaired.
As of December 31, 2019, we had $112.9 billion of goodwill and other intangible assets. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we took $6.1 billion of
goodwill impairment charges related to our LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment.
48

Goodwill and indefinitely-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that the
carrying value may not be recoverable. When evaluating goodwill for potential impairment, we compare the fair value of our reporting units to their respective
carrying amounts. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the
carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess to the extent of the
goodwill balance. Estimated fair values could change if, for example, there are changes in the business climate, industry-wide changes, changes in the competitive
environment, adverse legal or regulatory actions or developments, changes in capital structure, cost of debt, interest rates, capital expenditure levels, operating cash
flows or market capitalization. Because of the significance of our goodwill and intangible assets, any future impairment of these assets could require material
noncash charges to our operating results, which also could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and global capital markets can significantly and adversely affect the value of our investments in debt and equity securities,
mortgage loans, alternative investments and other investments, and our operating results and/or our financial condition.
The global capital markets, including credit markets, continue to experience volatility and uncertainty. As an insurer, we have a substantial investment portfolio
that supports our policy liabilities and surplus and is comprised largely of debt securities of issuers located in the U.S. As a result, the income we earn from our
investment portfolio is largely driven by the level of interest rates in the U.S., and to a lesser extent the international financial markets; and volatility, uncertainty
and/or disruptions in the global capital markets, particularly the U.S. credit markets, and governments’ monetary policy, particularly U.S. monetary policy, can
significantly and adversely affect the value of our investment portfolio, our operating results and/or our financial condition by:
•
significantly reducing the value and/or liquidity of the debt securities we hold in our investment portfolio and creating realized capital losses that reduce our
operating results and/or unrealized capital losses that reduce our shareholders’ equity;
•
keeping interest rates low on high-quality short-term or medium-term debt securities (such as we have experienced during recent years) and thereby materially
reducing our net investment income and operating results as the proceeds from securities in our investment portfolio that mature or are otherwise disposed of
continue to be reinvested in lower yielding securities;
•
reducing the fair values of our investments if interest rates rise;
•
causing non-performance of or defaults on their obligations to us by third parties, including customers, issuers of securities in our investment portfolio,
mortgage borrowers and/or reinsurance and/or derivatives counterparties;
•
making it more difficult to value certain of our investment securities, for example if trading becomes less frequent, which could lead to significant period-to-
period changes in our estimates of the fair values of those securities and cause period-to-period volatility in our net income and shareholders’ equity;
•
reducing our ability to issue short-term debt securities at attractive interest rates, thereby increasing our interest expense and decreasing our operating results;
and
•
reducing our ability to issue other securities.
Although we seek, within guidelines we deem appropriate, to match the duration of our assets and liabilities and to manage our credit and counterparty exposures, a
failure adequately to do so could adversely affect our net income and our financial condition and, in extreme circumstances, our cash flows.
We have incurred and assumed significant indebtedness which has increased our consolidated interest expense and could adversely affect our business
flexibility and increase our borrowing costs.
In order to complete the Aetna Acquisition, we incurred acquisition-related debt financing of approximately $45.0 billion and assumed Aetna’s existing
indebtedness with a fair value of approximately $8.1 billion. Our substantial indebtedness and elevated debt-to-equity ratio have the effect, among other things, of
reducing our flexibility to respond to changing business and economic conditions and increasing our interest expense compared to pre-Aetna Acquisition periods.
In addition, the amount of cash required to service our increased indebtedness levels and thus the demands on our cash resources are greater than the amount of
cash flows required to service our indebtedness prior to the Aetna Acquisition. We have suspended share repurchases until we reach our desired debt-to-equity
ratio. The increased levels of indebtedness also could reduce funds available to engage in investments in product development, capital expenditures, dividend
payments and other activities and may create competitive disadvantages for us relative to other companies with lower debt levels.
49

Risks Related to Our Relationships with Manufacturers, Providers, Suppliers and Vendors
We face risks relating to the market availability, pricing, suppliers and safety profiles of prescription drugs and other products that we purchase and sell.
Our Retail/LTC segment and our mail order and specialty pharmacy operations generate revenues in significant part by dispensing prescription drugs. Our PBM
business generates revenues primarily by contracting with clients to provide prescription drugs and related health care services to plan members. As a result, we are
dependent on our relationships with prescription drug manufacturers and suppliers. We acquire a substantial amount of our mail order and specialty pharmacies’
prescription drug supply from a limited number of suppliers. Certain of our agreements with such suppliers are short-term and cancelable by either party without
cause. In addition, these agreements may allow the supplier to distribute through channels other than us. Certain of these agreements also allow pricing and other
terms to be adjusted periodically for changing market conditions or required service levels. A termination or modification to any of these relationships could
adversely affect our prescription drug supply and have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and financial condition. Moreover, many
products distributed by our pharmacies are manufactured with ingredients that are susceptible to supply shortages. In some cases, we depend upon a single source
of supply. Any such supply shortages or loss of any such single source of supply could adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
Much of the branded and generic drug product that we sell in our pharmacies, and much of the other merchandise we sell, is manufactured in whole or in
substantial part outside of the United States. In most cases, the products or merchandise are imported by others and sold to us. As a result, significant changes in tax
or trade policies, tariffs or trade relations between the United States and other countries, such as the imposition of unilateral tariffs on imported products, could
result in significant increases in our costs, restrict our access to suppliers, depress economic activity, and have a material adverse effect on our businesses,
operating results and cash flows. In addition, other countries may change their business and trade policies and such changes, as well as any negative sentiments
towards the United States in response to increased import tariffs and other changes in U.S. trade regulations, could adversely affect our businesses.
Our suppliers are independent entities subject to their own operational and financial risks that are outside our control. If our current suppliers were to stop selling
prescription drugs to us or delay delivery, including as a result of supply shortages, supplier production disruptions, supplier quality issues, closing or bankruptcies
of our suppliers, or for other reasons, we may be unable to procure alternatives from other suppliers in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at
all.
Our operating results may be adversely affected if we are unable to contract with providers on competitive terms and develop and maintain attractive networks
with high quality providers.
We are seeking to enhance our health care provider networks by entering into joint ventures and other collaborative risk-sharing arrangements with health care
providers. Providers’ willingness to enter these arrangements with us depends upon, among other things, our ability to provide them with up to date quality of care
data to support these value-based contracts. These arrangements are designed to give providers incentives to engage in population health management and optimize
delivery of health care to our members. These arrangements also may allow us to expand into new geographies, target new customer groups, increase membership
and reduce medical costs and, if we provide technology or other services to the relevant health system or provider organization, may contribute to our revenue and
earnings from alternative sources. If such arrangements do not result in the lower medical costs that we project or if we fail to attract health care providers to such
arrangements, or are less successful at implementing such arrangements than our competitors, our medical costs may not be competitive and may be higher than we
project, our attractiveness to customers may be reduced, we may lose or be unable to grow medical membership, and our ability to profitably grow our business
and/or our operating results may be adversely affected.
While we believe joint ventures, ACOs and other non-traditional health care provider organizational structures present opportunities for us, the implementation of
our joint ventures and other non-traditional structure strategies may not achieve the intended results, which could adversely affect our operating results and cash
flows. Among other things, joint ventures require us to maintain collaborative relationships with our counterparties, continue to gain access to provider rates that
make the joint ventures economically sustainable and devote significant management time to the operation and management of the joint ventures. We may not be
able to achieve these objectives in one or more of our joint ventures, which could adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
50

If our service providers fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to comply with applicable laws or regulations, we may be exposed to brand and
reputational harm, litigation and/or regulatory action. This risk is particularly high in our Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs
plan programs.
We contract with various third parties to perform certain functions and services and provide us with certain information technology systems. Our arrangements
with these third parties may expose us to public scrutiny, adversely affect our brand and reputation, expose us to litigation or regulatory action, and otherwise make
our operations vulnerable if we fail to adequately oversee, monitor and regulate their performance or if they fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to
comply with applicable laws or regulations. For example, certain of our vendors have been responsible for releases of sensitive information of our members and
employees, which has caused us to incur additional expenses and given rise to regulatory actions and litigation against us.
These risks are particularly high in our Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs, where third parties perform PBM, medical
management and other member related services for us. Any failure of our or these third parties’ prevention, detection or control systems related to regulatory
compliance, compliance with our internal policies, data security and/or cybersecurity or any incident involving the theft, misappropriation, loss or other
unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, members’, customers’ or other constituents’ sensitive information could require us to expend significant resources to
remediate any damage, interrupt our operations and adversely affect our brand and reputation and also expose us to whistleblower, class action and other litigation,
other proceedings, prohibitions on marketing or active or passive enrollment of members, corrective actions, fines, sanctions and/or penalties, any of which could
adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
We may experience increased medical and other benefit costs, litigation risk and customer and member dissatisfaction when providers that do not have
contracts with us render services to our Health Care Benefits members.
Some providers that render services to our Health Care Benefits members do not have contracts with us. In those cases, we do not have a pre-established
understanding with these providers as to the amount of compensation that is due to them for services rendered to our members. In some states, the amount of
compensation due to these nonparticipating providers is defined by law or regulation, but in most instances it is either not defined or it is established by a standard
that is not clearly translatable into dollar terms. In such instances providers may believe that they are underpaid for their services and may either litigate or arbitrate
their dispute with us or try to recover the difference between what we have paid them and the amount they charged us from our members, which may result in
customer and member dissatisfaction. For example, in October 2018, an arbitrator awarded certain claimant hospitals approximately $150 million in a proceeding
relating to Aetna’s out-of-network benefit payment and administration practices, and in March 2019 that award was reduced to approximately $86 million. Such
disputes may cause us to pay higher medical or other benefit costs than we projected.
Continuing consolidation and integration among providers and other suppliers may increase our medical and other covered benefits costs, make it difficult for
us to compete in certain geographies and create new competitors.
Hospitals and other providers and health systems continue to consolidate across the health care industry. While this consolidation could increase efficiency and has
the potential to improve the delivery of health care services, it also reduces competition and the number of potential contracting parties in certain geographies.
These health systems also are increasingly forming and considering forming health plans to directly offer health insurance in competition with us, a process that
has been accelerated by the ACA. In addition, ACOs (including Commercial and Medicaid-only ACOs developed as a result of state Medicaid laws), practice
management companies, consolidation among and by integrated health systems and other changes in the organizational structures that physicians, hospitals and
other health care providers adopt continues to change the way these providers interact with us and the competitive landscape in which we operate. These changes
may increase our medical and other covered benefits costs, may affect the way we price our products and services and estimate our medical and other covered
benefits costs and may require us to change our operations, including by withdrawing from certain geographies where we do not have a significant presence across
our businesses or are unable to collaborate or contract with providers on acceptable terms. Each of these changes may adversely affect our businesses and operating
results.
51

Table of Contents
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
There are no unresolved SEC Staff Comments.
Item 2. Properties.
The Company’s principal office is an owned building complex located in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, which totals approximately one million square feet. The
Company also leases office space in other locations in the United States.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment includes owned or leased mail service dispensing pharmacies, call centers, on-site pharmacy stores, retail specialty pharmacy
stores, specialty mail service pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral services throughout the United States.
Retail/LTC Segment
As of December 31, 2019, the Retail/LTC segment operated the following properties:
•
Approximately 8,170 retail stores, of which approximately 5% were owned. Net selling space for retail stores was approximately 80.3 million square feet as of
December 31, 2019. Approximately 45% of the store base was opened or significantly remodeled within the last five years;
•
Approximately 1,725 retail pharmacies and approximately 80 clinics in Target stores;
•
Owned distribution centers and leased distribution facilities throughout the U.S. totaling approximately 10.5 million square feet; and
•
Owned and leased LTC pharmacies throughout the U.S. and an owned LTC repackaging facility.
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company continues to guarantee lease obligations for 79 former stores.
The Company is indemnified for these guarantee obligations by the respective initial purchasers. These guarantees generally remain in effect for the initial lease
term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. For additional information on these
guarantees, see “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment’s principal office is an owned building complex located in Hartford, Connecticut, which totals approximately 1.7 million square
feet. The Health Care Benefits segment also owns or leases office space in other locations in the United States and several other countries.
Management believes that the Company’s owned and leased facilities are suitable and adequate to meet the Company’s anticipated needs. At the end of the existing
lease terms, management believes the leases can be renewed or replaced by alternative space. For additional information on the amount of right-of-use assets and
lease liabilities for the Company’s leases, see Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
I. Legal Proceedings
The information contained in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
II. Environmental Matters
Item 103 of SEC Regulation S-K requires disclosure of environmental legal proceedings with a governmental authority if management reasonably believes that the
proceedings involve potential monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. The Company is in the process of negotiating with the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation to resolve claims of
52

Table of Contents
alleged historical noncompliance with hazardous waste regulations in connection with LTC pharmacies in the State of New York. These proceedings are not
material to the Company’s business or financial condition.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures.
Not applicable.
53

Table of Contents
Information about our Executive Officers
The following sets forth the name, age and biographical information for each of the Registrant’s executive officers as of February 18, 2020. In each case the
officer’s term of office extends to the date of the meeting of the CVS Health Board of Directors (the “Board”) following the next annual meeting of stockholders of
CVS Health. Previous positions and responsibilities held by each of the executive officers over the past five years or more are indicated below:
 
Lisa G. Bisaccia, age 63, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation since March 2016 and Chief Human Resources Officer of CVS Health
Corporation since January 2010; Senior Vice President of CVS Health Corporation from January 2010 through February 2016. Ms. Bisaccia is also a member of
the board of directors of Aramark, a leading global provider of food, facilities and uniform services.
 
Eva C. Boratto, age 53, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; Executive Vice
President - Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation from March 2017 through November 2018; Senior Vice President - Controller and
Chief Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation from July 2013 through February 2017.
 
Troyen A. Brennan, M.D., age 65, Executive Vice President and Chief Medical Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2008; Executive Vice
President and Chief Medical Officer of Aetna Inc. from February 2006 through November 2008.
 
James D. Clark, age 55, Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; Vice
President - Finance and Accounting of CVS Pharmacy, Inc. from September 2009 through October 2018.
 
Joshua M. Flum, age 50, Executive Vice President, Enterprise Strategy and Digital of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; Executive Vice
President, Corporate Strategy and Business Development of CVS Pharmacy, Inc. from June 2016 through October 2018; Executive Vice President - Pharmacy
Services of CVS Pharmacy, Inc. from March 2015 through May 2016; Senior Vice President of Retail Pharmacy of CVS Pharmacy, Inc. from December 2010
through February 2015. Mr. Flum is a member of the board of directors of CreditRiskMonitor.com, Inc., a company that facilitates the analysis of corporate
financial risk, mostly in the context of the extension of trade credit from one business to another.
 
Alan M. Lotvin, M.D., age 58, served as Executive Vice President - Transformation of CVS Health Corporation from June 2018 through February 2020,
and will serve as Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark following the departure of Mr. Rice. Dr. Lotvin served as
Executive Vice President - Specialty Pharmacy, CVS Caremark from November 2012 through May 2018.
 
Karen S. Lynch, age 57, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; President of Aetna since January 2015; Executive
Vice President, Local and Regional Businesses of Aetna from February 2013 through December 2014. Ms. Lynch is a member of the board of directors of U.S.
Bancorp, a banking and financial services company.
 
Larry J. Merlo, age 64, President and Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation since March 2011; and a director of CVS Health Corporation
since May 2010.
 
Thomas M. Moriarty, age 56, Executive Vice President and General Counsel of CVS Health Corporation since October 2012; Chief Policy and External
Affairs Officer since March 2017; Chief Strategy Officer from March 2014 through February 2017.
 
Derica W. Rice, age 54, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark since March 2018; Executive Vice
President of Global Services and Chief Financial Officer of Eli Lilly & Company from May 2006 through December 2017. Mr. Rice is a director of The Walt
Disney Company since March 2019 and was a director of Target Corporation from September 2007 until January 2018. Mr. Rice will be leaving the Company
effective March 1, 2020.
 
Jonathan C. Roberts, age 64, Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of CVS Health Corporation since March 2017 and Interim President
of CVS Pharmacy since January 2020; Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark from September 2012 through
February 2017.
54

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
On February 3, 2020, the Company announced that Richard J. Swift, Richard M. Bracken and Mark T. Bertolini would not stand for re-election at the Company’s
upcoming Annual Meeting of Stockholders (the “2020 Annual Meeting”). On February 7, 2020, Mr. Bertolini informed the Company of his decision to resign from
the Board, effective immediately. On February 10, 2020, the Board reduced the size of the Board from 16 to 15 members effective immediately and further reduced
the size of the Board to 13 members effective at the time of the 2020 Annual Meeting.
Market information
CVS Health’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CVS.”
Dividends
CVS Health has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a public company. Future dividends will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital
requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant by CVS Health’s Board of Directors.
See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for information regarding CVS Health’s dividends.
Holders of common stock
As of February 12, 2020, there were 26,656 registered holders of the registrant’s common stock according to the records maintained by the registrant’s transfer
agent.
Issuer purchases of equity securities
The following share repurchase programs have been authorized by the Board:
In billions
    
Remaining as of
Authorization Date
Authorized
December 31, 2019
November 2, 2016 (“2016 Repurchase Program”)
$
15.0
$
13.9
December 15, 2014 (“2014 Repurchase Program”)
10.0
—
Each of the share Repurchase Programs was effective immediately. The 2014 Repurchase Program has been completed. The 2016 Repurchase Program permits the
Company to effect repurchases from time to time through a combination of open market repurchases, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share
repurchase transactions, and/or other derivative transactions. The 2016 Repurchase Program can be modified or terminated by the Board at any time. During the
three months ended December 31, 2019, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock.
See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the Company’s share repurchases.
55

Stock Performance Graph
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return on CVS Health’s common stock (assuming reinvestment of dividends) with the cumulative
total return on the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 500 Food and Staples Retailing Industry Group Index and the S&P 500 Healthcare Sector Group Index from December
31, 2014 through December 31, 2019. The graph assumes a $100 investment in shares of CVS Health’s common stock on December 31, 2014.
December 31,
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
CVS Health Corporation
$
100
$
103
$
85
$
80
$
74
$
87
S&P 500 (1)
100
101
113
138
132
174
S&P 500 Food & Staples Retail Group Index (2)
100
98
98
111
112
143
S&P 500 Health Care Group Index (1) (3)
100
107
104
127
135
163
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Includes CVS Health.
(2)
Includes 5 companies (COST, KR, SYY, WBA, WMT).
(3)
Includes 61 companies.
The year-ended values of each investment shown in the preceding graph are based on share price appreciation plus dividends, with the dividends reinvested as of
the last business day of the month during which such dividends were ex-dividend. The calculations exclude trading commissions and taxes. Total shareholder
returns from each investment can be calculated from the year-end investment values shown beneath the graph.
56

Table of Contents
Item 6. Selected Financial Data.
The selected consolidated financial data of CVS Health Corporation as of and for the periods indicated in the five-year period ended December 31, 2019, has been
derived from the consolidated financial statements of CVS Health Corporation. The selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the
MD&A included in Item 7 of this 10-K and the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
In millions, except per share amounts
2019
2018 (1)
2017
2016
2015
Statement of operations data:
Total revenues
$
256,776
$
194,579
$
184,786
$
177,546
$
153,311
Operating income
11,987
4,021
9,538
10,386
9,496
Income (loss) from continuing operations
6,631
(596)
6,631
5,320
5,230
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
6,634
(594)
6,622
5,317
5,237
Per common share data:
Basic earnings (loss) per common share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS
Health
$
5.10
$
(0.57)
$
6.48
$
4.93
$
4.65
Income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to
CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
(0.01)
$
—
$
0.01
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
5.10
$
(0.57)
$
6.47
$
4.93
$
4.66
Diluted earnings (loss) per common share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS
Health
$
5.08
$
(0.57)
$
6.45
$
4.91
$
4.62
Income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to
CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
(0.01)
$
—
$
0.01
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
5.08
$
(0.57)
$
6.44
$
4.90
$
4.63
Dividends per common share
$
2.00
$
2.00
$
2.00
$
1.70
$
1.40
Balance sheet and other data:
Total assets
$
222,449
$
196,456
$
95,131
$
94,462
$
92,437
Long-term debt, less current portion
$
64,699
$
71,444
$
22,181
$
25,615
$
26,267
Total shareholders’ equity
$
64,170
$
58,543
$
37,695
$
36,834
$
37,203
Number of stores (at end of year)
9,941
9,967
9,846
9,750
9,681
_____________________________________________ 
(1) On November 28, 2018, the Company acquired Aetna. Aetna’s operations are included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date. See
Note 2 ‘‘Acquisitions and Divestitures’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
57

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. (“MD&A”)
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this
10-K, “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K and the “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward Looking Statements” in this 10-K.
Overview of Business
CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”), is the nation’s premier health
innovation company helping people on their path to better health. Whether in one of its pharmacies or through its health services and plans, CVS Health is
pioneering a bold new approach to total health by making quality care more affordable, accessible, simple and seamless. CVS Health is community-based and
locally focused, engaging consumers with the care they need when and where they need it. The Company has approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately
1,100 walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 105 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business
serving more than one million patients per year and expanding specialty pharmacy services. CVS Health also serves an estimated 37 million people through
traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading
standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better
health outcomes and lowers overall health care costs.
On November 28, 2018 (the “Aetna Acquisition Date”), the Company acquired Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”) for a combination of cash and CVS Health stock (the “Aetna
Acquisition”). The Company acquired Aetna to help improve the consumer health care experience by combining Aetna’s health care benefits products and services
with CVS Health’s retail locations, walk-in medical clinics and integrated pharmacy capabilities with the goal of becoming the new, trusted front door to health
care. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Aetna shareholders received $145.00 in cash and 0.8378 CVS Health shares for each Aetna share. The transaction
valued Aetna at approximately $212 per share or approximately $70 billion. Including the assumption of Aetna’s debt, the total value of the transaction was
approximately $78 billion. The Company financed the cash portion of the purchase price through a combination of cash on hand and by issuing approximately $45
billion of new debt, including senior notes and term loans (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” later in this MD&A). The consolidated financial statements
reflect Aetna’s results subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
On October 10, 2018, the Company and Aetna entered into a consent decree with the U.S. Department of Justice (the “DOJ”) that allowed the Company’s proposed
acquisition of Aetna to proceed, provided Aetna agreed to sell its individual standalone PDPs. As part of the agreement reached with the DOJ, Aetna entered into a
purchase agreement with a subsidiary of WellCare Health Plans, Inc. (“WellCare”) for the divestiture of Aetna’s standalone PDPs effective December 31, 2018. On
November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone PDPs. The Company provided administrative services to, and retained the financial
results of, the divested plans through 2019. Subsequent to 2019, the Company will no longer retain the financial results of the divested plans. Aetna’s standalone
PDPs had an aggregate of 2.5 million members as of December 31, 2019.
As a result of the Aetna Acquisition, the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment. Certain aspects of Aetna’s operations, including products for which the
Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products, are included in the Company’s
Corporate/Other segment.
Effective for the first quarter of 2019, the Company realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and reflect how its
Chief Operating Decision Maker (the “CODM”) reviews information and manages the business. As a result of this realignment, the Company’s SilverScript® PDP
moved from the Pharmacy Services segment to the Health Care Benefits segment. In addition, the Company moved Aetna’s mail order and specialty pharmacy
operations from the Health Care Benefits segment to the Pharmacy Services segment. Segment financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect
these changes. See Note 17 ‘‘Segment Reporting’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for segment financial information.
The Company has four reportable segments: Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC, Health Care Benefits and Corporate/Other, which are described below.
58

Overview of the Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease
management services and medical spend management. The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions,
government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care plans, plans offered on public health insurance exchanges and private health insurance
exchanges, other sponsors of health benefit plans and individuals throughout the United States. The Pharmacy Services segment operates retail specialty pharmacy
stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s PBM filled or managed 2.0 billion prescriptions on a 30-day equivalent basis.
Overview of the Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of general merchandise, including over-the-counter drugs, beauty products, cosmetics and
personal care products, provides health care services through its MinuteClinic® walk-in medical clinics and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations,
which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other ancillary services to chronic care facilities and other care settings. As of
December 31, 2019, the Retail/LTC segment operated approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic® locations as well as online retail
pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and onsite pharmacies. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Retail/LTC segment filled 1.4 billion prescriptions on
a 30-day equivalent basis. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company dispensed approximately 26.6% of the total retail pharmacy prescriptions in the
United States.
Overview of the Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment is one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers, serving an estimated 37 million people as of
December 31, 2019. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals,
make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare
Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care management services, workers’ compensation administrative services and health
information technology products and services. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and
hourly workers, health plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. The Company
refers to insurance products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services contract
products (where the plan sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” For periods prior to November 28, 2018 (the
Aetna Acquisition Date), the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business.
Overview of the Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the overall operations of the Company, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and Enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
59

Results of Operations
The following information summarizes the Company’s results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018. For discussion of the Company’s results of operations for
2018 compared to 2017, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations with Retrospective Application of
Segments” for the year ended December 31, 2018, which was revised to reflect the Company’s segment realignment and is included in Exhibit 99.2 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on August 8, 2019.
Summary of Consolidated Financial Results
Change
Year Ended December 31, 
2019 vs. 2018
2018 vs. 2017
In millions
2019
    
2018
    
2017
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
185,236
$
183,910
$
180,063
$
1,326
0.7 %
$
3,847
2.1 %
Premiums
63,122
8,184
3,558
54,938
671.3 %
4,626
130.0 %
Services
7,407
1,825
1,144
5,582
305.9 %
681
59.5 %
Net investment income
1,011
660
21
351
53.2 %
639
3,042.9 %
Total revenues
256,776
194,579
184,786
62,197
32.0 %
9,793
5.3 %
Operating costs:
Cost of products sold
158,719
156,447
153,448
2,272
1.5 %
2,999
2.0 %
Benefit costs
52,529
6,594
2,810
45,935
696.6 %
3,784
134.7 %
Goodwill impairments
—
6,149
181
(6,149)
(100.0)%
5,968
3,297.2 %
Operating expenses
33,541
21,368
18,809
12,173
57.0 %
2,559
13.6 %
Total operating costs
244,789
190,558
175,248
54,231
28.5 %
15,310
8.7 %
Operating income
11,987
4,021
9,538
7,966
198.1 %
(5,517)
(57.8)%
Interest expense
3,035
2,619
1,062
416
15.9 %
1,557
146.6 %
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
79
—
—
79
100.0 %
—
— %
Other expense (income)
(124)
(4)
208
(120)
(3,000.0)%
(212)
(101.9)%
Income before income tax provision
8,997
1,406
8,268
7,591
539.9 %
(6,862)
(83.0)%
Income tax provision
2,366
2,002
1,637
364
18.2 %
365
22.3 %
Income (loss) from continuing operations
6,631
(596)
6,631
7,227
1,212.6 %
(7,227)
(109.0)%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
—
—
(8)
—
— %
8
100.0 %
Net income (loss)
6,631
(596)
6,623
7,227
1,212.6 %
(7,219)
(109.0)%
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling
interests
3
2
(1)
1
50.0 %
3
300.0 %
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
6,634
$
(594)
$
6,622
$
7,228
1,216.8 %
$
(7,216)
(109.0)%
Commentary - 2019 compared to 2018
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $62.2 billion or 32.0% in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in total revenues was primarily due to the impact of the Aetna
Acquisition (primarily reflected in the Health Care Benefits segment) which occurred in November 2018, a 5.0% increase in Pharmacy Services segment
revenue and a 3.1% increase in Retail/LTC segment revenue.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the revenues of the Company’s segments.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses increased $12.2 billion or 57.0% in 2019 compared to 2018. Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues were 13.1% in 2019, an
increase of 210 basis points compared to 2018. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to the impact of the Aetna Acquisition (including
intangible asset amortization) and higher operating
60

expenses in the Retail/LTC segment, including $231 million of store rationalization charges and the $205 million pre-tax loss on the sale of the Company’s
Brazilian subsidiary, Drogaria Onofre Ltda. (“Onofre”), both recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the operating expenses of the Company’s segments.
Operating income
•
Operating income increased $8.0 billion in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to (i) the absence of the $6.1 billion of pre-tax goodwill
impairment charges related to the LTC reporting unit recorded within the Retail/LTC segment in 2018, (ii) the impact of the Aetna Acquisition and (iii)
increased prescription volume and improved purchasing economics in the Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC segments. The increase was partially offset by:
•
Continued reimbursement pressure in the Retail/LTC segment;
•
Continued price compression in the Pharmacy Services segment;
•
An increase in intangible asset amortization primarily related to the Aetna Acquisition;
•
Higher operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment, including $231 million of store rationalization charges and the $205 million pre-tax loss on the sale
of Onofre; and
•
The absence of $536 million in interest income on the proceeds from the financing for the Aetna Acquisition recorded in the year ended December 31,
2018.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the operating income of the Company’s segments.
Interest expense
•
Interest expense increased $416 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to financing activity associated with the Aetna Acquisition and the
assumption of Aetna’s debt as of the Aetna Acquisition Date. See Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional
information.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
•
During 2019, the loss on early extinguishment of debt relates to the Company’s repayment of $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes pursuant to its tender
offers for such senior notes in August 2019, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million. See Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit
Agreements’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Other income
•
Other income increased $120 million in 2019 compared to 2018. Other income represents pension plan asset returns in excess of interest cost on pension plan
obligations. The increase in other income in 2019 was primarily due to 2019 including a full year of income associated with the Aetna pension plan, as
compared to 2018 which only included the Aetna pension plan income for the period subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
Income tax provision
•
The Company’s effective income tax rate was 26.3% in 2019 compared to 142.4% in 2018. The decrease in the effective income tax rate was primarily due to
the absence of the $6.1 billion of pre-tax goodwill impairment charges recorded during 2018, the majority of which were not deductible for income tax
purposes.
Loss from discontinued operations
•
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company retained guarantees on store lease obligations for a number
of former subsidiaries, including Linens ‘n Things, which filed for bankruptcy in 2008, and Bob’s Stores, which filed for bankruptcy in 2016. The Company’s
loss from discontinued operations primarily includes lease-related costs required to satisfy its Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores lease guarantees.
•
See “Discontinued Operations” in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ and “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about the Company’s discontinued operations and the Company’s lease guarantees, respectively.
61

Outlook for 2020
With respect to 2020, the Company believes you should consider the following important information:
•
The Pharmacy Services segment is expected to benefit from continued improvements in purchasing economics and Enterprise modernization, partially offset
by net selling season losses during 2020 and continued price compression.
•
The Retail/LTC segment is expected to benefit from projected adjusted script growth driven by the continued successful execution of patient care programs,
partially offset by continued reimbursement pressure.
•
The Health Care Benefits segment is expected to benefit from Government Services membership growth including projected above-industry growth in its
Medicare Advantage products and new Medicaid contract wins, as well as integration synergies that will continue to disproportionately benefit the Health Care
Benefits segment.
•
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) imposes a significant
industry-wide fee known as the Health Insurer Fee (the “HIF”). The HIF is non-deductible for federal income tax purposes and is allocated to insurers based
on the ratio of the amount of an insurer’s net premium revenues written during the preceding calendar year to the amount of health insurance premium for all
U.S. health risk for certain lines of business during the preceding calendar year. The HIF was suspended for 2019, will be $15.5 billion for 2020 and has been
repealed for calendar years after 2020. While the Company expects the reintroduction of the HIF to result in a lower medical benefit ratio (“MBR”) in 2020
compared to 2019, all else being equal, the Company expects its 2020 consolidated net income will be negatively impacted due to an increase in its effective
income tax rate in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of the non-deductibility of the HIF.
•
The Company believes that it is on track to achieve its 2020 target of $800-900 million of synergies from the Aetna Acquisition.
•
The Company expects changes to its business environment to continue for the next several years as elected and other government officials at the national and
state levels continue to propose and enact significant modifications to public policy and existing laws and regulations that govern the Company’s businesses.
The Company’s current expectations described above are forward-looking statements. Please see “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this 10-K for information regarding
important factors that may cause the Company’s actual results to differ from those currently projected and/or otherwise materially affect the Company.
62

Segment Analysis
The following discussion of segment operating results is presented based on the Company’s reportable segments in accordance with the accounting guidance for
segment reporting and is consistent with the segment disclosure in Note 17 ‘‘Segment Reporting’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The Company has three operating segments, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits, as well as a Corporate/Other segment. The Company’s
segments maintain separate financial information, and the CODM evaluates the segments’ operating results on a regular basis in deciding how to allocate resources
among the segments and in assessing segment performance. The CODM evaluates the performance of the Company’s segments based on adjusted operating
income. Effective for the first quarter of 2019, adjusted operating income is defined as operating income (GAAP measure) excluding the impact of amortization of
intangible assets and other items, if any, that neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business
performance. Segment financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to conform with the current period presentation. See the reconciliations of operating
income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income below for further context regarding the items excluded from operating income in determining adjusted
operating income. The Company uses adjusted operating income as its principal measure of segment performance as it enhances the Company’s ability to compare
past financial performance with current performance and analyze underlying business performance and trends. Non-GAAP financial measures the Company
discloses, such as consolidated adjusted operating income, should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures determined or calculated in
accordance with GAAP.
Effective for the first quarter of 2019, the Company realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and reflect how
the CODM reviews information and manages the business. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for further discussion of
this realignment. Segment financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect these changes.
The following is a reconciliation of financial measures of the Company’s segments to the consolidated totals:
In millions
Pharmacy
Services (1)
Retail/
LTC
Health Care
Benefits
Corporate/
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations (2)
Consolidated
Totals
2019
Total revenues
$
141,491
$
86,608
$
69,604
$
512
$
(41,439)
$
256,776
Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,129
6,705
5,202
(1,000)
(697)
15,339
2018
Total revenues
134,736
83,989
8,962
606
(33,714)
194,579
Adjusted operating income (loss)
4,955
7,403
528
(856)
(769)
11,261
2017
Total revenues
130,822
79,398
3,587
16
(29,037)
184,786
Adjusted operating income (loss)
4,628
7,475
359
(896)
(741)
10,825
_____________________________________________ 
(1) Total revenues of the Pharmacy Services segment include approximately $11.5 billion, $11.4 billion and $10.8 billion of retail co-payments for 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. See Note
1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about retail co-payments.
(2) Intersegment eliminations relate to intersegment revenue generating activities that occur between the Pharmacy Services segment, the Retail/LTC segment and/or the Health Care Benefits
segment.
63

The following is a reconciliation of operating income to adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
Year Ended December 31, 2019
In millions
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/
LTC
Health Care
Benefits
Corporate/
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations
Consolidated
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
4,735
$
5,793
$
3,639
$
(1,483)
$
(697)
$
11,987
Non-GAAP adjustments:
Amortization of intangible assets (1)
394
476
1,563
3
—
2,436
Acquisition-related integration costs (2)
—
—
—
480
—
480
Store rationalization charges (3)
—
231
—
—
—
231
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary (4)
—
205
—
—
—
205
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
5,129
$
6,705
$
5,202
$
(1,000)
$
(697)
$
15,339
Year Ended December 31, 2018
In millions
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/
LTC
Health Care
Benefits
Corporate/
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations
Consolidated
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
4,607
$
620
$
368
$
(805)
$
(769)
$
4,021
Non-GAAP adjustments:
Amortization of intangible assets (1)
348
498
160
—
—
1,006
Acquisition-related transaction and integration
costs (2)
—
7
—
485
—
492
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary (4)
—
86
—
—
—
86
Goodwill impairments (5)
—
6,149
—
—
—
6,149
Impairment of long-lived assets (6)
—
43
—
—
—
43
Interest income on financing for the Aetna
Acquisition (7)
—
—
—
(536)
—
(536)
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
4,955
$
7,403
$
528
$
(856)
$
(769)
$
11,261
64

Year Ended December 31, 2017
In millions
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/
LTC
Health Care
Benefits
Corporate/
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations
Consolidated
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
4,300
$
6,558
$
357
$
(936)
$
(741)
$
9,538
Non-GAAP adjustments:
Amortization of intangible assets (1)
328
487
2
—
—
817
Acquisition-related transaction and integration
costs (2)
—
34
—
31
—
65
Store rationalization charges (3)
—
215
—
—
—
215
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary (4)
—
—
—
9
—
9
Goodwill impairments (5)
—
181
—
—
—
181
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
4,628
$
7,475
$
359
$
(896)
$
(741)
$
10,825
_____________________________________________ 
(1) The Company’s acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets as required under the acquisition method of accounting which consist primarily of trademarks,
customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology, provider networks and value of business acquired. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated
useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in the Company’s statements
of operations in operating expenses within each segment. Although intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the amortization of intangible assets does not directly
relate to the underwriting of the Company’s insurance products, the services performed for the Company’s customers or the sale of the Company’s products or services. Additionally,
intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of the Company’s acquisition activity. Accordingly, the Company believes excluding the amortization
of intangible assets enhances the Company’s and investors’ ability to compare the Company’s past financial performance with its current performance and to analyze underlying business
performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within the Company’s GAAP financial
statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset amortization is excluded from
the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an intangible asset becomes
impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised.
(2) In 2019, 2018 and 2017, acquisition-related transaction and integration costs relate to the Aetna Acquisition. In 2018 and 2017, acquisition-related transaction and integration costs also
relate to the acquisition of Omnicare, Inc. (“Omnicare”). The acquisition-related transaction and integration costs are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in
operating expenses within the Corporate/Other segment and the Retail/LTC segment.
(3) In 2019, the store rationalization charges relate to the planned closure of 46 underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the second quarter of 2019 and the planned closure of 22
underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the first quarter of 2020. In 2019, the store rationalization charges primarily relate to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges and
are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment. In 2017, the store rationalization charges related to the
Company’s enterprise streamlining initiative and are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(4) In 2019, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019. The loss on divestiture primarily relates to the elimination of
the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income. In 2018, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of the Company’s
RxCrossroads subsidiary for $725 million on January 2, 2018. In 2017, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents transaction costs associated with the sale of RxCrossroads. The loss on
divestiture of subsidiary costs are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment and Corporate/Other segment.
(5) In 2018, the goodwill impairments relate to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment. In 2017, the goodwill impairments relate to the RxCrossroads reporting unit within the
Retail/LTC segment.
(6) In 2018, impairment of long-lived assets primarily relates to the impairment of property and equipment within the Retail/LTC segment and is reflected in operating expenses in the
Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
(7) In 2018, the Company recorded interest income of $536 million on the proceeds of the $40 billion of unsecured senior notes it issued in March 2018 to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition.
All amounts are for the periods prior to the close of the Aetna Acquisition, which occurred on November 28, 2018, and were recorded within the Corporate/Other segment.
65

Pharmacy Services Segment
The following table summarizes the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2019 vs. 2018
2018 vs. 2017
In millions, except percentages
2019
2018
2017
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
140,946
$
134,285
$
130,578
$
6,661
5.0%
$
3,707
2.8%
Services
545
451
244
94
20.8%
207
84.8%
Total revenues
141,491
134,736
130,822
6,755
5.0%
3,914
3.0%
Cost of products sold
135,245
128,777
125,273
6,468
5.0%
3,504
2.8%
Operating expenses
1,511
1,352
1,249
159
11.8%
103
8.2%
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
1.1%
1.0%
1.0%
Operating income
$
4,735
$
4,607
$
4,300
$
128
2.8%
$
307
7.1%
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
3.3%
3.4%
3.3%
Adjusted operating income (1)
$
5,129
$
4,955
$
4,628
$
174
3.5%
$
327
7.1%
Adjusted operating income as a % of
total revenues
3.6%
3.7%
3.5%
Revenues (by distribution channel): 
Pharmacy network (2) (3)
$
88,755
$
87,167
$
84,677
$
1,588
1.8%
$
2,490
2.9%
Mail choice (3) (4)
52,141
47,049
45,731
5,092
10.8%
1,318
2.9%
Other
595
520
414
75
14.4%
106
25.6%
Pharmacy claims processed: (5)
Total
2,014.2
1,889.8
1,781.9
124.4
6.6%
107.9
6.1%
Pharmacy network (2)
1,704.0
1,601.4
1,516.7
102.6
6.4%
84.7
5.6%
Mail choice (4)
310.2
288.4
265.2
21.8
7.6%
23.2
8.7%
Generic dispensing rate: (5)
Total
88.2%
87.3%
87.0%
Pharmacy network (2)
88.7%
87.9%
87.7%
Mail choice (4)
85.1%
83.9%
83.1%
Mail choice penetration rate (4) (5)
15.4%
15.3%
14.9%
_____________________________________________ 
(1) See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Pharmacy Services segment.
(2) Pharmacy network revenues, pharmacy claims processed and generic dispensing rate do not include Maintenance Choice® activity, which is included within the mail choice category.
Pharmacy network is defined as claims filled at retail and specialty retail pharmacies, including the Company’s retail pharmacies and LTC pharmacies, but excluding Maintenance Choice
activity, which is included within the mail choice category. Maintenance choice permits eligible client plan members to fill their maintenance prescriptions through mail order delivery or at a
CVS pharmacy retail store for the same price as mail order.
(3) Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current period presentation.
(4) Mail choice is defined as claims filled at a Pharmacy Services mail order facility, which includes specialty mail claims inclusive of Specialty Connect® claims picked up at a retail pharmacy,
as well as prescriptions filled at the Company’s retail pharmacies under the Maintenance Choice program.
(5) Includes an adjustment to convert 90-day prescriptions to the equivalent of three 30-day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects the fact that these prescriptions include approximately three
times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
66

Commentary - 2019 compared to 2018
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $6.8 billion, or 5.0%, to $141.5 billion in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to brand inflation as well as
increased total pharmacy claims volume, partially offset by continued price compression and an increased generic dispensing rate.
•
As you review the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The Company’s mail choice claims processed, on a 30-day equivalent basis, increased 7.6% to 310.2 million claims in 2019 compared to 288.4 million
claims in 2018. The increase in mail choice claims was primarily driven by the continued adoption of Maintenance Choice offerings.
•
During 2019, the average revenue per mail choice claim, on a 30-day equivalent basis, increased by 3.0% compared to 2018 primarily due to growth in
specialty pharmacy claims processed.
•
The Company’s pharmacy network claims processed, on a 30-day equivalent basis, increased 6.4% to 1.7 billion claims in 2019 compared to 1.6 billion
claims in 2018. The increase in the pharmacy network claim volume was primarily due to net new business, including the onboarding of Anthem, Inc.’s
(“Anthem’s”) PBM, IngenioRx, during 2019.
•
During 2019, the average revenue per pharmacy network claim processed, on a 30-day equivalent basis, decreased 4.2% compared to 2018 as a result of
continued price compression.
•
The segment’s total generic dispensing rate increased to 88.2% in 2019 compared to 87.3% in 2018. The continued increase in the segment’s generic
dispensing rate was primarily due to the impact of new generic drug introductions and the Company’s ongoing efforts to encourage plan members to use
generic drugs when they are available and clinically appropriate. The Company believes its generic dispensing rate will continue to increase in future
periods, albeit at a slower pace. This increase will be affected by, among other things, the number of new brand and generic drug introductions and the
Company’s success at encouraging plan members to utilize generic drugs when they are available and clinically appropriate.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Pharmacy Services segment include selling, general and administrative expenses; depreciation and amortization related to
selling, general and administrative activities; and expenses related to specialty retail pharmacies, which include store and administrative payroll, employee
benefits and occupancy costs.
•
Operating expenses increased $159 million, or 11.8%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to growth in the
business, including operating expenses associated with Aetna’s mail order and specialty pharmacy operations (including intangible asset amortization) and
investments related to the Company’s agreement with Anthem’s PBM, IngenioRx, during 2019.
•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained relatively consistent at 1.1% and 1.0% in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Operating income and adjusted operating income
•
Operating income increased $128 million, or 2.8%, and adjusted operating income increased $174 million, or 3.5%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in
both operating income and adjusted operating income was primarily driven by increased claims volume, the addition of Aetna’s mail order and specialty
pharmacy operations and improved purchasing economics, partially offset by continued price compression. The increase in operating income also was partially
offset by increased intangible asset amortization related to Aetna’s mail order and specialty pharmacy operations.
•
As you review the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The Company’s efforts to (i) retain existing clients, (ii) obtain new business and (iii) maintain or improve the rebates and/or discounts the Company
receives from manufacturers, wholesalers and retail pharmacies continue to have an impact on operating income and adjusted operating income. In
particular, competitive pressures in the PBM industry have caused the Company and other PBMs to continue to share with clients a larger portion of
rebates and/or discounts received from pharmaceutical manufacturers. In addition, marketplace dynamics and regulatory changes have limited the
Company’s ability to offer plan sponsors pricing that includes retail network “differential” or “spread,” and the Company expects these trends to continue.
The “differential” or “spread” is any difference between the drug price charged to plan sponsors, including Medicare Part D plan sponsors, by a PBM and
the price paid for the drug by the PBM to the dispensing provider.
67

Retail/LTC Segment
The following table summarizes the Retail/LTC segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2019 vs. 2018
2018 vs. 2017
In millions, except percentages
2019
2018
2017
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
85,729
$
83,175
$
78,522
$
2,554
3.1 %
$
4,653
5.9 %
Services
879
814
876
65
8.0 %
(62)
(7.1)%
Total revenues
86,608
83,989
79,398
2,619
3.1 %
4,591
5.8 %
Cost of products sold
62,688
59,906
56,066
2,782
4.6 %
3,840
6.8 %
Goodwill impairments
—
6,149
181
(6,149)
(100.0)%
5,968
3,297.2 %
Operating expenses
18,127
17,314
16,593
813
4.7 %
721
4.3 %
Operating expenses as a % of total revenues
20.9%
20.6%
20.9 %
Operating income
$
5,793
$
620
$
6,558
$
5,173
834.4 %
$
(5,938)
(90.5)%
Operating income as a % of total revenues
6.7%
0.7%
8.3 %
Adjusted operating income (1)
$
6,705
$
7,403
$
7,475
$
(698)
(9.4)%
$
(72)
(1.0)%
Adjusted operating income as a % of total
revenues
7.7%
8.8%
9.4 %
Revenues (by major goods/service lines):
Pharmacy
$
66,442
$
64,179
$
59,528
$
2,263
3.5 %
$
4,651
7.8 %
Front Store
19,422
19,055
18,769
367
1.9 %
286
1.5 %
Other
744
755
1,101
(11)
(1.5)%
(346)
(31.4)%
Prescriptions filled (2)
1,417.2
1,339.1
1,230.5
78.1
5.8 %
108.6
8.8 %
Revenues increase (decrease):
Total
3.1%
5.8%
(2.1)%
Pharmacy
3.5%
7.8%
(2.2)%
Front Store
1.9%
1.5%
(1.9)%
Total prescription volume increase (2)
5.8%
8.8%
0.6 %
Same store sales increase (decrease): (3)
Total
3.7%
6.0%
(2.6)%
Pharmacy
4.5%
7.9%
(2.6)%
Front Store
1.1%
0.5%
(2.6)%
Prescription volume (2)
7.2%
9.1%
0.4 %
Generic dispensing rate (2)
88.3%
87.5%
87.3 %
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Retail/LTC segment.
(2)
Includes an adjustment to convert 90‑day prescriptions to the equivalent of three 30‑day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects the fact that these prescriptions include approximately
three times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
(3)
Same store sales and prescription volume exclude revenues from MinuteClinic, and revenue and prescriptions from stores in Brazil and LTC operations.
 
Commentary - 2019 compared to 2018
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased approximately $2.6 billion, or 3.1%, to $86.6 billion in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily driven by increased
prescription volume and brand inflation, partially offset by continued reimbursement pressure and an increased generic dispensing rate.
68

•
As you review the Retail/LTC segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
Front store same store sales increased 1.1% in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in front store sales in 2019 was primarily driven by increases in
health and beauty product sales.
•
Pharmacy same store sales increased 4.5% in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily driven by the 7.2% increase in pharmacy same
store prescription volumes on a 30-day equivalent basis driven mainly by (i) continued adoption of patient care programs, (ii) collaborations with
PBMs and (iii) the Company’s preferred status in a number of Medicare Part D networks.
•
Pharmacy revenue growth continues to be adversely affected by reimbursement pressure. Pharmacy revenue growth also continues to be adversely
affected by the conversion of brand name drugs to equivalent generic drugs, which typically have a lower selling price. The segment’s generic
dispensing rate grew to 88.3% in 2019 compared to 87.5% in 2018.
•
Pharmacy revenue growth also continues to be adversely affected by industry challenges in the LTC business, such as continuing lower occupancy
rates at skilled nursing facilities, as well as the deteriorating financial health of many skilled nursing facilities.
•
Pharmacy revenue in 2019 continued to benefit from the Company’s ability to attract and retain managed care customers and the increased use of
pharmaceuticals by an aging population as the first line of defense for health care.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment include store payroll, store employee benefits, store occupancy costs, selling expenses, advertising expenses,
depreciation and amortization expense and certain administrative expenses.
•
Operating expenses increased $813 million, or 4.7%, in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to the following:
•
Store rationalization charges of $231 million recorded in 2019 primarily related to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges in
connection with the planned closure of underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the second quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020;
•
The $205 million pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019;
•
The increased prescription volume described above; and
•
The investment of a portion of the savings from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”) in wages and benefits.
•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues were 20.9% in 2019 compared to 20.6% in 2018. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of
total revenues was primarily driven by the increases in operating expenses described above.
Operating income and adjusted operating income
•
Operating income increased $5.2 billion in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in operating income was primarily due to the absence of the $6.1 billion of
pre-tax goodwill impairment charges related to the LTC reporting unit recorded in the year ended December 31, 2018, partially offset by the decrease in
adjusted operating income described below, as well as the $231 million of store rationalization charges and the $205 million pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre,
both recorded in 2019.
•
Adjusted operating income decreased $698 million, or 9.4%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in adjusted operating income was primarily due to
continued reimbursement pressure and increased operating expenses primarily driven by the investment of a portion of the savings from the TCJA in wages
and benefits. The decrease was partially offset by increased prescription volume, an increased generic dispensing rate and improved purchasing economics.
•
As you review the Retail/LTC segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The segment’s pharmacy operating income and adjusted operating income has been adversely affected by the efforts of managed care organizations,
PBMs and governmental and other third-party payors to reduce their prescription drug costs, including the use of restrictive networks, as well as
changes in the mix of business within the pharmacy portion of the Retail/LTC segment. If the reimbursement pressure accelerates, the segment may
not be able grow revenues, and its operating income and adjusted operating income could be adversely affected.
•
The increased use of generic drugs has positively impacted the segment’s operating income and adjusted operating income but has resulted in third-
party payors augmenting their efforts to reduce reimbursement payments to retail pharmacies for prescriptions. This trend, which the Company
expects to continue, reduces the benefit the segment realizes from brand to generic drug conversions.
69

Health Care Benefits Segment
For periods prior to November 28, 2018 (the Aetna Acquisition Date), the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised of the Company’s SilverScript PDP
business. The following table summarizes the Health Care Benefits segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2019 vs. 2018
2018 vs. 2017
In millions, except percentages
2019
2018
2017
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
—
$
164
$
—
$
(164)
(100.0)%
$
164
100.0%
Premiums
63,031
8,180
3,558
54,851
670.6 %
4,622
129.9%
Services
5,974
560
24
5,414
966.8 %
536
2,233.3%
Net investment income
599
58
5
541
932.8 %
53
1,060.0%
Total revenues
69,604
8,962
3,587
60,642
676.7 %
5,375
149.8%
Cost of products sold
—
147
—
(147)
(100.0)%
147
100.0%
Benefit costs
53,092
6,678
2,810
46,414
695.0 %
3,868
137.7%
MBR (Benefit costs as a % of premium revenues) (1)
84.2%
NM
NM
Operating expenses
$
12,873
$
1,769
$
420
$
11,104
627.7 %
$
1,349
321.2%
Operating expenses as a % of total revenues
18.5%
19.7%
11.7%
Operating income
$
3,639
$
368
$
357
$
3,271
888.9 %
$
11
3.1%
Operating income as a % of total revenues
5.2%
4.1%
10.0%
Adjusted operating income (2)
$
5,202
$
528
$
359
$
4,674
885.2 %
$
169
47.1%
Adjusted operating income as a % of total revenues
7.5%
5.9%
10.0%
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
For periods prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business. Accordingly, the MBR for the years ended
December 31, 2018 and 2017 are not meaningful (“NM”) and are not directly comparable to the MBRs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(2)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Health Care Benefits segment.
Commentary - 2019 compared to 2018
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $60.6 billion in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to the Aetna Acquisition.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Health Care Benefits segment include selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization expenses.
•
Operating expenses increased $11.1 billion in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to the Aetna Acquisition (including the amortization of intangible assets).
Operating income and adjusted operating income
•
Operating income increased $3.3 billion and adjusted operating income increased $4.7 billion in 2019 compared to 2018. The increases were primarily due to
the Aetna Acquisition. The increase in operating income was partially offset by increased intangible asset amortization related to the Aetna Acquisition.
70

The following table summarizes the Health Care Benefits segment’s medical membership as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
2019
2018
In thousands
Insured
ASC 
Total
Insured
ASC
Total
Medical membership:
Commercial
3,591
14,159
17,750
3,871
13,888
17,759
Medicare Advantage
2,321
—
2,321
1,758
—
1,758
Medicare Supplement
881
—
881
793
—
793
Medicaid
1,398
558
1,956
1,128
663
1,791
Total medical membership
8,191
14,717
22,908
7,550
14,551
22,101
Supplemental membership information:
Medicare Prescription Drug Plan (standalone) (1)
5,994
6,134
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Represents the Company’s SilverScript PDP membership only. Excludes 2.5 million and 2.3 million members as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to Aetna’s
standalone PDPs that were sold effective December 31, 2018. The Company retained the financial results of the divested plans through 2019 through a reinsurance agreement. Subsequent
to 2019, the Company will no longer retain the financial results of the divested plans.
Medical Membership
Medical membership as of December 31, 2019 increased compared with December 31, 2018, reflecting increases in Medicare, Commercial ASC and Medicaid
products, partially offset by declines in Commercial Insured products.
Medicare Update
On April 1, 2019, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) issued its final notice detailing final 2020 Medicare Advantage benchmark
payment rates (the “Final Notice”). Overall the Company projects the benchmark rates in the Final Notice will increase funding for its Medicare Advantage
business, excluding the impact of the health insurer fee, by approximately 2.0% in 2020 compared to 2019.
The ACA ties a portion of each Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement to the plan’s “star ratings.” Plans must have a star rating of four or higher (out of five)
to qualify for bonus payments. CMS released the Company’s 2020 star ratings in October 2019. The Company’s 2020 star ratings will be used to determine which
of the Company’s Medicare Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2021. Based on the Company’s membership at
December 31, 2019, 83% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2020 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars, compared to 79% of the
Company’s Medicare Advantage members being in plans with 2019 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2018.
Corporate/Other Segment
Commentary - 2019 compared to 2018
Revenues
•
Total revenues decreased $94 million in 2019 compared to 2018.
•
In 2019, revenues relate to products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care
insurance products, that were acquired in the Aetna Acquisition. Revenues in 2019 include $104 million of net realized capital gains, primarily related to the
sale of debt securities and other invested assets that support these insurance products. In 2018, revenues relate to interest income on the proceeds from the
financing of the Aetna Acquisition.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses within the Corporate/Other segment include certain aspects of costs related to executive management and the corporate relations, legal,
compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s investments in its transformation and
Enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs. After the Aetna Acquisition Date, such operating expenses also
include operating costs to support the large case pensions and long-term care insurance products acquired in the Aetna Acquisition.
71

•
Operating expenses increased $321 million in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily driven by growth in the business, incremental operating
expenses associated with the Company’s investments in transformation and Enterprise modernization, legal costs and a $30 million charitable contribution to
the CVS Health Foundation in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The Company maintains a level of liquidity sufficient to allow it to meet its cash needs in the short-term. Over the long term, the Company manages its cash and
capital structure to maximize shareholder return, maintain its financial condition and maintain flexibility for future strategic initiatives. The Company continuously
assesses its regulatory capital requirements, working capital needs, debt and leverage levels, debt maturity schedule, capital expenditure requirements, dividend
payouts, potential share repurchases and future investments or acquisitions. The Company believes its operating cash flows, commercial paper program, credit
facilities, sale-leaseback program, as well as any potential future borrowings, will be sufficient to fund these future payments and long-term initiatives. As
of December 31, 2019, the Company had approximately $5.7 billion in cash and cash equivalents, approximately $1.7 billion of which was held by the parent
company or nonrestricted subsidiaries.
The net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 is as follows:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2019 vs. 2018
2018 vs. 2017
In millions
2019
2018
2017
$
%
$
%
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
12,848
$
8,865
$
8,007
$
3,983
44.9 %
$
858
10.7 %
Net cash used in investing activities
(3,339)
(43,285)
(2,877)
39,946
(92.3)%
(40,408)
1,404.5 %
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(7,850)
36,819
(6,751)
(44,669)
(121.3)%
43,570
(645.4)%
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash
equivalents and restricted cash
—
(4)
1
4
(100.0)%
(5)
(500.0)%
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and
restricted cash
$
1,659
$
2,395
$
(1,620)
$
(736)
(30.7)%
$
4,015
(247.8)%
Commentary - 2019 compared to 2018
•
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $4.0 billion in 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to the Aetna Acquisition as well as improvements
in working capital, including the timing of certain payables and receipts.
•
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $39.9 billion in 2019 compared to 2018 largely due to the Aetna Acquisition in November 2018. The
decrease was partially offset by the absence of the $725 million in proceeds from the sale of RxCrossroads in 2018 and net purchases of investments in 2019
compared to net sales of investments in 2018.
•
Net cash used in financing activities was $7.9 billion in 2019 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $36.8 billion in 2018. The decrease in
cash provided by financing activities primarily related to long-term borrowings during 2018 to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition, as well as debt repayments
during 2019 including (i) the repayment of $4.0 billion of outstanding senior notes pursuant to tender offers for such outstanding senior notes, (ii) the
repayment of the remaining $3.0 billion of the term loan used to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition and (iii) the repayment of $1.2 billion aggregate principal
amount of senior notes upon maturity. The decrease was partially offset by the issuance of $3.5 billion of senior notes in 2019.
72

Included in net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 was the following store development activity: (1) 
2019
2018
2017
Total stores (beginning of year)
9,967
 
9,846  
9,750
New and acquired stores (2)
102
 
148  
179
Closed stores (2)
(128)  
(27)  
(83)
Total stores (end of year)
9,941
 
9,967  
9,846
Relocated stores (2)
23
 
34  
30
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Includes retail drugstores, certain onsite pharmacy stores, retail specialty pharmacy stores and pharmacies within Target stores.
(2)
Relocated stores are not included in new and acquired stores or closed stores totals.
Short-term Borrowings
Commercial Paper and Back-up Credit Facilities
The Company did not have any commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2019. The Company had $720 million of commercial paper outstanding at a
weighted average interest rate of 2.8% as of December 31, 2018. In connection with its commercial paper program, the Company maintains a $1.0 billion 364-day
unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 14, 2020, a $1.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on
May 18, 2022, a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 17, 2023 and a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up
revolving credit facility, which expires on May 16, 2024. The credit facilities allow for borrowings at various rates that are dependent, in part, on the Company’s
public debt ratings and require the Company to pay a weighted average quarterly facility fee of approximately .03%, regardless of usage. As of December 31, 2019
and 2018, there were no borrowings outstanding under any of the Company’s back-up credit facilities.
Bridge Loan Facility
On December 3, 2017, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company entered into a $49.0 billion unsecured bridge loan facility commitment. The
Company paid $221 million in fees upon entering into the agreement. The fees were capitalized in other current assets and were amortized as interest expense over
the period the bridge loan facility commitment was outstanding. The bridge loan facility commitment was reduced to $44.0 billion on December 15, 2017 upon the
Company entering into a $5.0 billion term loan agreement. The Company recorded $56 million of amortization of the bridge loan facility fees during the year
ended December 31, 2017, which was recorded in interest expense in the consolidated statement of operations.
On March 9, 2018, the Company issued senior notes with an aggregate principal amount of $40.0 billion (see “Long-term Borrowings - 2018 Notes” below). At
that time, the bridge loan facility commitment was reduced to $4.0 billion, and the Company paid $8 million in fees to retain the bridge loan facility commitment
through the Aetna Acquisition Date. Those fees were capitalized in other current assets and were amortized as interest expense over the period the bridge loan
facility commitment was outstanding. The Company recorded $173 million of amortization of the bridge loan facility commitment fees during the year ended
December 31, 2018, which was recorded in interest expense in the consolidated statement of operations. On October 26, 2018, the Company entered into a $4.0
billion unsecured 364-day bridge term loan agreement to formalize the bridge loan facility discussed above. On November 28, 2018, in connection with the Aetna
Acquisition, the $4.0 billion unsecured 364-day bridge term loan agreement terminated.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston
Since the Aetna Acquisition Date, a subsidiary of the Company is a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (the “FHLBB”). As a member, the
subsidiary has the ability to obtain cash advances, subject to certain minimum collateral requirements. The maximum borrowing capacity available from the
FHLBB as of December 31, 2019 was approximately $850 million. At both December 31, 2019 and 2018, there were no outstanding advances from the FHLBB.
Long-term Borrowings
2019 Notes
On August 15, 2019, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.625% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2024, $750 million aggregate
principal amount of 3% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2026 and $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.25% unsecured senior notes due August 15,
2029 (collectively, the “2019 Notes”) for total
73

proceeds of approximately $3.5 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees. The net proceeds of the 2019 Notes were used to repay certain of the Company’s
outstanding debt.
Beginning in July 2019, the Company entered into several interest rate swap and treasury lock transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were
designated as cash flow hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the
anticipated issuance of the 2019 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The
Company paid a net amount of $25 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $18 million in accumulated
other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the 2019 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ included in
Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Early Extinguishment of Debt
In August 2019, the Company purchased $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$1.3 billion of its 3.125% senior notes due 2020, $723 million of its floating rate notes due 2020, $328 million of its 4.125% senior notes due 2021, $297 million of
4.125% senior notes due 2021 issued by Aetna, $413 million of 5.45% senior notes due 2021 issued by Coventry Health Care, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Aetna, and $962 million of its 3.35% senior notes due 2021. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $76 million in
excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, incurred $8 million in fees and recognized a net gain of $5 million on the write-
off of net unamortized deferred financing premiums, for a net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million.
2018 Notes
On March 9, 2018, the Company issued an aggregate of $40.0 billion in principal amount of unsecured floating rate notes and unsecured fixed rate senior notes
(collectively the “2018 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $39.4 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees. The net proceeds of the 2018 Notes were
used to fund a portion of the Aetna Acquisition. The 2018 Notes consisted of the following at the time of issuance:
In millions
3.125% senior notes due March 2020
$
2,000
Floating rate notes due March 2020
1,000
3.35% senior notes due March 2021
3,000
Floating rate notes due March 2021
1,000
3.7% senior notes due March 2023
6,000
4.1% senior notes due March 2025
5,000
4.3% senior notes due March 2028
9,000
4.78% senior notes due March 2038
5,000
5.05% senior notes due March 2048
8,000
Total debt principal
$
40,000
From December 2017 through March 2018, the Company entered into several interest rate swap and treasury lock transactions to manage interest rate risk. These
agreements were designated as cash flow hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates
related to the anticipated issuance of long-term debt to fund the Aetna Acquisition.
In connection with the issuance of the 2018 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. In connection with the hedge transactions, the
Company received a net amount of $446 million from the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a gain, net of tax, of $331 million in
accumulated other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as a reduction of interest expense over the life of the 2018 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other
Comprehensive Income’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Term Loan Agreement
On December 15, 2017, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company entered into a $5.0 billion term loan agreement. The term loan agreement allowed
for borrowings at various rates that were dependent, in part, on the Company’s debt ratings. In connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company borrowed $5.0
billion (a $3.0 billion three-year tranche and a $2.0 billion five-year tranche) under the term loan agreement in November 2018. The Company terminated the $2.0
billion five-year tranche in December 2018 with the repayment of the borrowing. The Company made principal payments of
74

$500 million in March 2019, $1.0 billion in May 2019 and $1.5 billion in July 2019 on the three-year tranche, and terminated the three-year tranche and the term
loan agreement with the final repayment of the borrowing in July 2019, at which time the Company had repaid all term loans.
Aetna Related Debt
Upon the closing of the Aetna Acquisition, the Company assumed long-term debt with a fair value of $8.1 billion, with stated interest rates ranging from 2.2% to
6.75%.
See Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ and Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about debt
issuances, debt repayments, share repurchases and dividend payments.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments in order to manage interest rate and foreign exchange risk and credit exposure. The Company’s use of these
derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, forward contracts, futures contracts,
warrants, put options and credit default swaps.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s back-up revolving credit facilities, unsecured senior notes and unsecured floating rate notes (see Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K) contain customary restrictive financial and operating covenants. These covenants do not include an acceleration of the Company’s
debt maturities in the event of a downgrade in the Company’s credit ratings. The Company does not believe the restrictions contained in these covenants materially
affect its financial or operating flexibility. As of December 31, 2019, the Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants.
Debt Ratings 
As of December 31, 2019, the Company’s long-term debt was rated “Baa2” by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. (“Moody’s) and “BBB” by Standard & Poor’s
Financial Services LLC (“S&P”), and its commercial paper program was rated “P-2” by Moody’s and “A-2” by S&P. In December 2017, subsequent to the
announcement of the proposed acquisition of Aetna, Moody’s changed the outlook on the Company’s long-term debt to “Under Review” from “Stable.” Similarly,
S&P placed the Company’s long-term debt outlook on “Watch Negative” from “Stable.” Upon the issuance of the 2018 Notes on March 9, 2018, S&P lowered its
corporate credit rating on the Company’s long-term debt to “BBB” from “BBB+” and changed the outlook from “Watch Negative” to “Stable.” On November 27,
2018, S&P lowered its rating on the long-term debt of Aetna to “BBB” from “A.” On November 28, 2018, upon the completion of the Aetna Acquisition, Moody’s
lowered its rating on CVS Health Corporation’s long-term debt to “Baa2” from “Baa1.” Additionally, Moody’s changed the outlook on CVS Health Corporation’s
long-term debt to “Negative” from “Under Review” and changed the outlook on the long-term debt of Aetna to “Negative” from “Stable.” In assessing the
Company’s credit strength, the Company believes that both Moody’s and S&P considered, among other things, the Company’s capital structure and financial
policies as well as its consolidated balance sheet, its historical acquisition activity and other financial information. Although the Company currently believes its
long-term debt ratings will remain investment grade, it cannot guarantee the future actions of Moody’s and/or S&P. The Company’s debt ratings have a direct
impact on its future borrowing costs, access to capital markets and new store operating lease costs.
Share Repurchase Programs
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock. See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included
in Item 8 of this 10-K for information about share repurchases for the year ended December 31, 2017.
Quarterly Cash Dividend
In December 2016, CVS Health’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) authorized an 18% increase in CVS Health’s quarterly common stock cash dividend to $0.50
per share effective in 2017. This increase equated to an annual dividend rate of $2.00 per share. During 2019 and 2018, CVS Health maintained its quarterly
dividend of $0.50 per share. CVS Health has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a public company and expects to maintain its quarterly dividend of
$0.50 per share throughout 2020. Future dividends will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered
relevant by the Board.
75

Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Between 1995 and 1997, the Company sold or spun off a number of subsidiaries, including Bob’s Stores and Linens ‘n Things, each of which subsequently filed
for bankruptcy, and Marshalls. In many cases, when a former subsidiary leased a store, the Company provided a guarantee of the former subsidiary’s lease
obligations for the initial lease term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. When the
subsidiaries were disposed of and accounted for as discontinued operations, the Company’s guarantees remained in place, although each initial purchaser agreed to
indemnify the Company for any lease obligations the Company was required to satisfy. If any of the purchasers or any of the former subsidiaries fail to make the
required payments under a store lease, the Company could be required to satisfy those obligations.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company guaranteed 79 such store leases (excluding the lease guarantees related to Linens ‘n Things, which have been recorded as a
liability on the consolidated balance sheets), with the maximum remaining lease term extending through 2030. Management believes the ultimate disposition of
any of the remaining lease guarantees will not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial condition or future cash flows. See “Lease
Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for further information regarding the Company’s guarantees of lease
obligations.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes certain estimated future obligations by period under the Company’s various contractual obligations at December 31, 2019. The
table below does not include future payments of claims to health care providers or pharmacies because certain terms of these payments are not determinable at
December 31, 2019 (for example, the timing and volume of future services provided under fee-for-service arrangements and future membership levels for capitated
arrangements).
Payments Due by Period
In millions
Total
    
2020
2021 to 2022
    
2023 to 2024
    
Thereafter
Operating lease liabilities
$
27,833
$
2,699
$
5,042
$
4,438
$
15,654
Finance lease liabilities
1,454
84
161
153
1,056
Contractual lease obligations with Target (1)
2,218
—
—
—
2,218
Lease obligations for discontinued operations
8
4
4
—
—
Long-term debt
68,438
3,754
9,557
11,258
43,869
Interest payments on long-term debt (2)
35,343
2,751
5,076
4,299
23,217
Other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets (3)
Future policy benefits (4)
6,127
508
937
809
3,873
Unpaid claims (4)
2,522
705
514
346
957
Policyholders’ funds (4) (5)
1,156
553
137
85
381
Other liabilities
1,540
426
801
89
224
Total
$
146,639
$
11,484
$
22,229
$
21,477
$
91,449
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
The Company leases pharmacy and clinic space from Target Corporation (“Target”). See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the lease
arrangements with Target. Amounts related to such operating and finance leases are reflected within the operating lease liabilities and finance lease liabilities in the table above. Pharmacy
lease amounts due in excess of the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings are reflected in the table above assuming equivalent stores continue to operate through the term of the
arrangements.
(2)
Interest payments on long-term debt are calculated using outstanding balances and interest rates in effect on December 31, 2019.
(3)
Payments of other long-term liabilities exclude Separate Accounts liabilities of approximately $4.5 billion because these liabilities are supported by assets that are legally segregated and
are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business.
(4)
Total payments of future policy benefits, unpaid claims and policyholders’ funds include $807 million, $2.5 billion and $291 million, respectively, of reserves for contracts subject to
reinsurance. The Company expects the assuming reinsurance carrier to fund these obligations and has reflected these amounts as reinsurance recoverable assets on the consolidated balance
sheets.
(5)
Customer funds associated with group life and health contracts of approximately $2.4 billion have been excluded from the table above because such funds may be used primarily at the
customer’s discretion to offset future premiums and/or for refunds, and the timing of the related cash flows cannot be determined. Additionally, net unrealized capital gains on debt
securities supporting experience-rated products of $83 million, before tax, have been excluded from the table above.
76

Restrictions on Certain Payments
In addition to general state law restrictions on payments of dividends and other distributions to stockholders applicable to all corporations, health maintenance
organizations (“HMOs”) and insurance companies are subject to further regulations that, among other things, may require those companies to maintain certain
levels of equity (referred to as surplus) and restrict the amount of dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their equity holders. These regulations are
not directly applicable to CVS Health as a holding company, since CVS Health is not an HMO or an insurance company. In addition, in connection with the Aetna
Acquisition, the Company made certain undertakings that require prior regulatory approval of dividends by certain of its HMOs and insurance companies. The
additional regulations and undertakings applicable to the Company’s HMO and insurance company subsidiaries are not expected to affect the Company’s ability to
service the Company’s debt, meet other financing obligations or pay dividends, or the ability of any of the Company’s subsidiaries to service their debt or other
financing obligations. Under applicable regulatory requirements and undertakings, at December 31, 2019, the maximum amount of dividends that may be paid by
the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries without prior approval by regulatory authorities was $366 million in the aggregate.
The Company maintains capital levels in its operating subsidiaries at or above targeted and/or required capital levels and dividends amounts in excess of these
levels to meet liquidity requirements, including the payment of interest on debt and stockholder dividends. In addition, at the Company’s discretion, it uses these
funds for other purposes such as funding share and debt repurchase programs, investments in new businesses and other purposes considered advisable.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company held investments of $537 million and $531 million, respectively, that are not accounted for as Separate Accounts
assets but are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business. See Note 3 ‘‘Investments’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K
for additional information on investments related to the 2012 conversion of an existing group annuity contract from a participating to a non-participating contract.
Solvency Regulation
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (the “NAIC”) utilizes risk-based capital (“RBC”) standards for insurance companies that are designed to
identify weakly-capitalized companies by comparing each company’s adjusted surplus to its required surplus (the “RBC Ratio”). The RBC Ratio is designed to
reflect the risk profile of insurance companies. Within certain ratio ranges, regulators have increasing authority to take action as the RBC Ratio decreases. There
are four levels of regulatory action, ranging from requiring an insurer to submit a comprehensive financial plan for increasing its RBC to the state insurance
commissioner to requiring the state insurance commissioner to place the insurer under regulatory control. At December 31, 2019, the RBC Ratio of each of the
Company’s primary insurance subsidiaries was above the level that would require regulatory action. The RBC framework described above for insurers has been
extended by the NAIC to health organizations, including HMOs. Although not all states had adopted these rules at December 31, 2019, at that date, each of the
Company’s active HMOs had a surplus that exceeded either the applicable state net worth requirements or, where adopted, the levels that would require regulatory
action under the NAIC’s RBC rules. External rating agencies use their own capital models and/or RBC standards when they determine a company’s rating.
77

Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares the consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, which require management to make
certain estimates and apply judgment. Estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be
important at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, the Company reviews its accounting policies and how they are applied
and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements. While the Company believes the historical experience, current trends and other factors considered by
management support the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, actual results could
differ from estimates, and such differences could be material.
Significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K. Management believes the following
accounting policies include a higher degree of judgment and/or complexity and, thus, are considered to be critical accounting policies. The Company has discussed
the development and selection of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board (the “Audit Committee”), and the Audit Committee has
reviewed the disclosures relating to them.
Revenue Recognition
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail
pharmacy network. The Company’s pharmacy benefit arrangements are accounted for in a manner consistent with a master supply arrangement as there are no
contractual minimum volumes and each prescription is considered a separate purchasing decision and distinct performance obligation transferred at a point in time.
PBM services performed in connection with each prescription claim are considered part of a single performance obligation which culminates in the dispensing of
prescription drugs.
The Company recognizes revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with its clients when the Company has concluded it controls the
prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. The Company controls prescriptions dispensed indirectly through its retail pharmacy network
because it has separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, has discretion in setting the price for the transaction and assumes primary responsibility
for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to its client plan members while also performing the related PBM services.
Revenues include (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Company, net of any discounts earned on brand name drugs or other discounts and
refunds paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” and “Guarantees” below), (ii) the price paid to the Company by client plan members for mail order
prescriptions and the price paid to retail network pharmacies by client plan members for retail prescriptions (“retail co-payments”), and (iii) claims based
administrative fees for retail pharmacy network contracts. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the prescription drugs is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company
expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those prescription drugs. The Company has established the following revenue recognition policies for the
Pharmacy Services segment:
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by mail service dispensing pharmacies are recognized when the prescription drug is delivered to the client
plan member. At the time of delivery, the Company has performed substantially all of its performance obligations under its client contracts and does not
experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Company’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are
recognized at the Company’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Company’s online claims processing system and the Company has
transferred control of the prescription drug and performed all of its performance obligations.
For contracts under which the Company acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client plan member, revenue is recognized
using the net method.
Drug Discounts
The Company records revenue net of manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients based on their plan members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. The
Company estimates these rebates at period-end based on actual and estimated claims data and its estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients. The
estimates are based on the best available data at period-end
78

and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates due to the client. The Company adjusts its rebates payable to clients to the actual
amounts paid when these rebates are paid or as significant events occur. Any cumulative effect of these adjustments is recorded against revenues at the time it is
identified. Adjustments generally result from contract changes with clients or manufacturers that have retroactive rebate adjustments, differences between the
estimated and actual product mix subject to rebates, or whether the brand name drug was included in the applicable formulary. The effect of adjustments between
estimated and actual manufacturers’ rebate amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Guarantees
The Company also adjusts revenues for refunds owed to clients resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined service and performance
metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual pricing
and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Retail/LTC Segment
Retail Pharmacy
The Company’s retail drugstores recognize revenue at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. For pharmacy sales, each prescription claim is its
own arrangement with the customer and is a performance obligation, separate and distinct from other prescription claims under other retail network arrangements.
Revenues are adjusted for refunds owed to third party payers resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined value-based service and
performance metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and
actual pricing and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Revenue from Company gift cards purchased by customers is deferred as a contract liability until goods or services are transferred. Any amounts not expected to be
redeemed by customers (i.e., breakage) are recognized based on historical redemption patterns.
Customer returns are not material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
Loyalty and Other Programs
The Company’s customer loyalty program, ExtraCare®, consists of two components, ExtraSavingsTM and ExtraBucks® Rewards. ExtraSavings are coupons that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue when redeemed as the Company concluded that they do not represent a promise to the customer to deliver additional goods or
services at the time of issuance because they are not tied to a specific transaction or spending level.
ExtraBucks Rewards are accumulated by customers based on their historical spending levels. Thus, the Company has determined that there is an additional
performance obligation to those customers at the time of the initial transaction. The Company allocates the transaction price to the initial transaction and the
ExtraBucks Rewards transaction based upon the relative standalone selling price, which considers historical redemption patterns for the rewards. Revenue allocated
to ExtraBucks Rewards is recognized as those rewards are redeemed. At the end of each period, unredeemed ExtraBucks Rewards are reflected as a contract
liability.
The Company also offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass®, under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course
of the subscription period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. Subscriptions are paid for on a monthly or annual
basis at the time of or in advance of the Company delivering the goods and services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as the performance
obligations are satisfied.
Long-term Care
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects
to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Each prescription claim represents a separate performance obligation of the Company, separate
and distinct from other prescription claims under customer arrangements. A significant portion of Long-term Care revenue from sales of pharmaceutical and
medical products is reimbursed by the federal Medicare Part D program and, to a lesser extent, state Medicaid programs. The Company monitors its revenues and
receivables from these reimbursement sources, as well as long-term care facilities and other third party insurance payors, and reduces revenue at the revenue
recognition date to properly account for the variable consideration due to anticipated
79

differences between billed and reimbursed amounts. Accordingly, the total revenues and receivables reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements
are recorded at the amount expected to be ultimately received from these payors.
Patient co-payments associated with Medicare Part D, certain state Medicaid programs, Medicare Part B and certain third party payors typically are not collected at
the time products are delivered or services are rendered, but are billed to the individuals as part of normal billing procedures and subject to normal accounts
receivable collections procedures.
Walk-In Medical Clinics
For services provided by the Company’s walk-in medical clinics, revenue recognition occurs for completed services provided to patients, with adjustments taken
for third party payor contractual obligations and patient direct bill historical collection rates.
Health Care Benefits Segment
Health Care Benefits revenue is principally derived from insurance premiums and fees billed to customers. Revenue is recognized based on customer billings,
which reflect contracted rates per employee and the number of covered employees recorded in the Company’s records at the time the billings are prepared. Billings
are generally sent monthly for coverage during the following month.
The Company’s billings may be subsequently adjusted to reflect enrollment changes due to member terminations or other factors. These adjustments are known as
retroactivity adjustments. In each period, the Company estimates the amount of future retroactivity and adjusts the recorded revenue accordingly. As information
regarding actual retroactivity amounts becomes known, the Company refines its estimates and records any required adjustments to revenues in the period in which
they arise. A significant difference in the actual level of retroactivity compared to estimated levels would have a significant effect on the Company’s operating
results.
Premium Revenue
Premiums are recognized as revenue in the month in which the enrollee is entitled to receive health care services. Premiums are reported net of an allowance for
estimated terminations and uncollectible amounts. Additionally, premium revenue subject to the ACA’s minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rebate requirements
is recorded net of the estimated minimum MLR rebates for the current calendar year. Premiums related to unexpired contractual coverage periods (unearned
premiums) are reported as other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue when earned.
Some of the Company’s contracts allow for premiums to be adjusted to reflect actual experience or the relative health status of Insured members. Such adjustments
are reasonably estimable at the outset of the contract, and adjustments to those estimates are made based on actual experience of the customer emerging under the
contract and the terms of the underlying contract.
Services Revenue
Services revenue relates to contracts that can include various combinations of services or series of services which generally are capable of being distinct and
accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Health Care Benefits segment’s services revenue primarily consists of the following components:
•
ASC fees are received in exchange for performing certain claim processing and member services for ASC members. ASC fee revenue is recognized over the
period the service is provided. Some of the Company’s administrative services contracts include guarantees with respect to certain functions, such as customer
service response time, claim processing accuracy and claim processing turnaround time, as well as certain guarantees that a plan sponsor’s benefit claim
experience will fall within a certain range. With any of these guarantees, the Company is financially at risk if the conditions of the arrangements are not met,
although the maximum amount at risk typically is limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company by the customer involved. Each period
the Company estimates its obligations under the terms of these guarantees and records its estimate as an offset to services revenues.
•
Workers’ compensation administrative services consist of fee-based managed care services. Workers’ compensation administrative services revenue is
recognized once the service is provided.
Accounting for Medicare Part D
Revenues include insurance premiums earned by the Company’s PDPs, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements
with CMS. The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP member, and can be subsidized by CMS in the case of
low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially recorded within other insurance liabilities and are then
recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
80

Revenues also include a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design referred to as the risk corridor. The Company estimates variable consideration
in the form of amounts payable to, or receivable from, CMS under the risk corridor, and adjusts revenue based on calculations of additional subsidies to be received
from or owed to CMS at the end of the reporting year.
In addition to Medicare Part D premiums, the Company receives additional payments each month from CMS related to catastrophic reinsurance, low-income cost
sharing subsidies and coverage gap benefits. If the subsidies received differ from the amounts earned from actual prescriptions transferred, the difference is
recorded in either accounts receivable, net or accrued expenses.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairments of Debt Securities
The Company regularly reviews its debt securities to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value is other-than-temporary. If a
decline in the fair value of a debt security is considered other-than-temporary, the cost basis or carrying value of the debt security is written down. The write-down
is then bifurcated into its credit and non-credit related components. The amount of the credit-related component is included in the Company’s net income (loss),
and the amount of the non-credit related component is included in other comprehensive income (loss), unless the Company intends to sell the debt security or it is
more likely than not that the Company will be required to sell the debt security prior to its anticipated recovery of the debt security’s amortized cost basis. The
Company analyzes all facts and circumstances believed to be relevant for each investment when performing this analysis, in accordance with applicable accounting
guidance.
Among the factors considered in evaluating whether a decline in fair value is other-than-temporary are whether the decline results from a change in the quality of
the debt security itself, whether the decline results from a downward movement in the market as a whole, and the prospects for realizing the carrying value of the
debt security based on the investment’s current and short-term prospects for recovery. For unrealized losses determined to be the result of market conditions (for
example, increasing interest rates and volatility due to conditions in the overall market) or industry-related events, the Company determines whether it intends to
sell the debt security or if it is more likely than not that the Company will be required to sell the debt security prior to its anticipated recovery of the debt security’s
amortized cost basis. If either case is true, the Company recognizes an other-than-temporary impairment, and the cost basis/carrying amount of the debt security is
written down to fair value.
The risks inherent in assessing the impairment of a debt security include the risk that market factors may differ from projections and the risk that the facts and
circumstances factored into the Company’s assessment may change with the passage of time. Unexpected changes to market factors and circumstances that were
not present in past reporting periods are among the factors that may result in a current period decision to sell debt securities that were not impaired in prior
reporting periods.
Vendor Allowances and Purchase Discounts
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers
and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of
the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase, (ii) a discount for the prompt payment of invoices or (iii) when products are purchased indirectly
from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy), a discount (or rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recognized when
prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of
adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts billed and collected has not been material to the Company’s operating results or
financial condition. The Company accounts for the effect of any such differences as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed.
The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its wholesaler contracts if it exceeds contractually defined purchase volumes. In addition,
the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees
are recorded as a reduction of cost of products sold.
Retail/LTC Segment
Vendor allowances received by the Retail/LTC segment reduce the carrying cost of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related
inventory is sold, unless they are specifically identified as a reimbursement of incremental costs for promotional programs and/or other services provided. Amounts
that are directly linked to advertising commitments are recognized as a reduction of advertising expense (included in operating expenses) when the related
advertising commitment is
81

satisfied. Any such allowances received in excess of the actual cost incurred also reduce the carrying cost of inventory. The total value of any upfront payments
received from vendors that are linked to purchase commitments is initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold over
the life of the contract based upon purchase volume. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are not linked to purchase commitments is
also initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold on a straight-line basis over the life of the related contract.
There have not been any material changes in the way the Company accounts for vendor allowances or purchase discounts during the past three years.
Inventory
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method.
The value of ending inventory is reduced for estimated inventory losses that have occurred during the interim period between physical inventory counts. Physical
inventory counts are taken on a regular basis in each retail store and LTC pharmacy, and a continuous cycle count process is the primary procedure used to validate
the inventory balances on hand in each distribution center and mail facility to ensure that the amounts reflected in the consolidated financial statements are properly
stated. The Company’s accounting for inventory contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate the inventory losses that have occurred
during the interim period between physical inventory counts. When estimating these losses, a number of factors are considered which include historical physical
inventory results on a location-by-location basis and current physical inventory loss trends.
The total reserve for estimated inventory losses covered by this critical accounting policy was $401 million as of December 31, 2019. Although management
believes there is sufficient current and historical information available to record reasonable estimates for estimated inventory losses, it is possible that actual results
could differ. In order to help investors assess the aggregate risk, if any, associated with the inventory-related uncertainties discussed above, a ten percent
(10%) pre-tax change in estimated inventory losses, which is a reasonably likely change, would increase or decrease the total reserve for estimated inventory losses
by approximately $40 million as of December 31, 2019.
Although management believes that the estimates discussed above are reasonable and the related calculations conform to generally accepted accounting principles,
actual results could differ from such estimates, and such differences could be material.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
The Company determines if an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of a contract. Right-of-use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying
asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of
the remaining future minimum lease payments. As the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its
incremental borrowing rate, determined by class of underlying asset, to discount the lease payments. The operating lease right-of-use assets also include lease
payments made before commencement and are reduced by lease incentives.
The Company’s real estate leases typically contain options that permit renewals for additional periods of up to five years each. For real estate leases, the options to
extend are not considered reasonably certain at lease commencement because the Company reevaluates each lease on a regular basis to consider the economic and
strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options and regularly opens or closes stores to align with its operating strategy. Generally, the renewal option periods
are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability. Similarly,
renewal options are not included in the lease term for non-real estate leases because they are not considered reasonably certain of being exercised at lease
commencement. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheets, and lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the term of the short-term lease.
For real estate leases, the Company accounts for lease components and nonlease components as a single lease component. Certain real estate leases require
additional payments based on sales volume, as well as reimbursement for real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance, which are expensed as
incurred as variable lease costs. Other real estate leases contain one fixed lease payment that includes real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance.
These fixed payments are considered part of the lease payment and included in the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
82

Long-Lived Asset Impairment
Recoverability of Definite-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets, excluding goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are tested for impairment using
separate tests described below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such an asset may not be recoverable. The
Company groups and evaluates these long-lived assets for impairment at the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. If indicators of
impairment are present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group
(undiscounted and without interest charges). If the estimated future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an
impairment loss calculation is prepared. The impairment loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash
flows (discounted and with interest charges). If required, an impairment loss is recorded for the portion of the asset group’s carrying value that exceeds the asset
group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted and with interest charges).
The long-lived asset impairment loss calculation contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate each asset group’s future sales, profitability
and cash flows. When preparing these estimates, the Company considers historical results and current operating trends and consolidated sales, profitability and cash
flow results and forecasts. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors including general economic and regulatory conditions, efforts of third party
organizations to reduce their prescription drug costs and/or increased member co-payments, the continued efforts of competitors to gain market share and consumer
spending patterns.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded store rationalization charges of $231 million, primarily related to operating lease right-of-use
asset impairment charges. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recognized a $43 million long-lived asset impairment charge, primarily related
to the impairment of property and equipment. There were no material impairment charges recognized on long-lived assets in the year ended December 31, 2017.
Recoverability of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid for acquisitions over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired. Goodwill is subject to annual impairment
reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment on a
reporting unit basis. The impairment test is performed by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value with its net book value (or carrying amount), including
goodwill. The fair value of the reporting units is estimated using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the net book
value (carrying amount) of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the reporting unit’s goodwill is considered to be impaired, and an impairment is recognized in
an amount equal to the excess.
The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires the Company to make significant assumptions and estimates. These assumptions and estimates
primarily include the selection of appropriate peer group companies; control premiums and valuation multiples appropriate for acquisitions in the industries in
which the Company competes; discount rates; terminal growth rates; and forecasts of revenue, operating income, depreciation and amortization, income taxes,
capital expenditures and future working capital requirements. When determining these assumptions and preparing these estimates, the Company considers each
reporting unit’s historical results and current operating trends; consolidated revenues, profitability and cash flow results and forecasts; and industry trends. The
Company’s estimates can be affected by a number of factors, including general economic and regulatory conditions; the risk-free interest rate environment; the
Company’s market capitalization; efforts of customers and payers to reduce costs, including their prescription drug costs, and/or increase member co-payments; the
continued efforts of competitors to gain market share and consumer spending patterns.
2019 Goodwill Impairment Test
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company performed its required annual impairment test of goodwill. The results of this impairment test indicated that there
was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date. The goodwill impairment test resulted in the fair values of all of the Company’s reporting units exceeding
their carrying values by significant margins, with the exception of the Commercial Business and LTC reporting units, which exceeded their carrying values by
approximately 4% and 9%, respectively.
As of the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment which included the Commercial Business reporting unit. The transaction
was accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires, among other things, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be recognized at
their fair values at the date of acquisition. As a result, at the time of the acquisition the fair value of the Commercial Business reporting unit was equal to its
carrying value. Given the close proximity of the Aetna Acquisition Date to the 2019 annual impairment test of goodwill, as expected, the fair
83

value of the Commercial Business reporting unit remained relatively in line with the carrying value of the reporting unit. In addition, this fair value estimate is
sensitive to significant assumptions including changes in the revenue growth rate, operating income and the discount rate.
Although the Company believes the financial projections used to determine the fair value of the LTC reporting unit in the third quarter of 2019 were reasonable and
achievable, the LTC reporting unit may continue to face challenges that may affect the Company’s ability to grow the LTC reporting unit’s business at the rate
estimated when such goodwill impairment test was performed. These challenges and some of the key assumptions included in the Company’s financial projections
to determine the estimated fair value of the LTC reporting unit include client retention rates; occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities; the financial health of
skilled nursing facility customers; facility reimbursement pressures; the Company’s ability to execute its senior living initiative; the Company’s ability to make
acquisitions and integrate those businesses into its LTC operations in an orderly manner; and the Company’s ability to extract cost savings from labor productivity
and other initiatives. The fair value of the LTC reporting unit also is dependent on market multiples of peer group companies and the risk-free interest rate
environment, which impacts the discount rate used in the discounted cash flow valuation method. If the Company does not achieve its forecasts, it is reasonably
possible in the near term that the goodwill of the LTC reporting unit could be deemed to be impaired by a material amount. As of December 31, 2019, the
remaining goodwill balance in the LTC reporting unit was $431 million.
2018 Goodwill Impairment Tests
As discussed in Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K, during 2018, the LTC reporting unit continued to experience industry-
wide challenges that impacted management’s ability to grow the business at the rate that was originally estimated when the Company acquired Omnicare and when
the 2017 annual goodwill impairment test was performed. Those challenges included lower client retention rates, lower occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities,
the deteriorating financial health of numerous skilled nursing facility customers which resulted in a number of customer bankruptcies in 2018, and continued
facility reimbursement pressures. In June 2018, LTC management submitted its initial budget for 2019 and updated the 2018 annual forecast which showed a
deterioration in the projected financial results for the remainder of 2018 and in 2019, which also caused management to update its long-term forecast beyond 2019.
Based on these updated projections, management determined that there were indicators that the LTC reporting unit’s goodwill may be impaired and, accordingly,
management performed an interim goodwill impairment test as of June 30, 2018. The results of that interim impairment test showed that the fair value of the LTC
reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in a $3.9 billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the second quarter of 2018.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill and concluded there was no impairment of goodwill.
The goodwill impairment tests showed that the fair values of the Pharmacy Services and Retail Pharmacy reporting units exceeded their carrying values by
significant margins and the fair value of the LTC reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 2%.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, the LTC reporting unit missed its forecast primarily due to operational issues and customer liquidity issues, including one
significant customer bankruptcy. Additionally, LTC management submitted an updated final budget for 2019 which showed significant additional deterioration in
the projected financial results for 2019 compared to the analyses performed in the second and third quarters of 2018 primarily due to continued industry and
operational challenges, which also caused management to make further updates to its long-term forecast beyond 2019. Based on these updated projections,
management determined that there were indicators that the LTC reporting unit’s goodwill may be further impaired and, accordingly, management performed an
interim goodwill impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2018. The results of that interim impairment test showed that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit
was lower than the carrying value, resulting in an additional $2.2 billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2018.
In 2018, the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was determined using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. In addition
to the lower financial projections, changes in risk-free interest rates and lower market multiples of peer group companies also contributed to the amount of the 2018
goodwill impairment charges.
2017 Goodwill Impairment Tests
The Company recorded $181 million in goodwill impairment charges in 2017 related to the RxCrossroads reporting unit. During the third quarter of 2017, the
Company performed its required annual impairment test of goodwill. The goodwill impairment test showed that the fair values of the Pharmacy Services and Retail
Pharmacy reporting units exceeded their carrying values by significant margins and the fair values of the LTC and RxCrossroads reporting units exceeded their
carrying values by approximately 1% and 6%, respectively. On January 2, 2018, the Company sold its RxCrossroads reporting unit to McKesson Corporation for
$725 million.
84

Recoverability of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value
may not be recoverable. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. If the carrying value of
the asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value.
The indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment loss calculation contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate fair value based on the
assumption that, in lieu of ownership of an intangible asset, the Company would be willing to pay a royalty in order to utilize the benefits of the asset. Fair value is
estimated by discounting the hypothetical royalty payments to their present value over the estimated economic life of the asset. These estimates can be affected by
a number of factors including general economic conditions, availability of market information and the profitability of the Company. There were no impairment
losses recognized on indefinite-lived intangible assets in any of the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 or 2017.
Health Care Costs Payable
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, 73% and 67% respectively, of health care costs payable are estimates of the ultimate cost of (i) services rendered to the
Company’s Insured members but not yet reported to the Company and (ii) claims which have been reported to the Company but not yet paid (collectively,
“IBNR”). Health care costs payable also include an estimate of the cost of services that will continue to be rendered after the financial statement date if the
Company is obligated to pay for such services in accordance with contractual or regulatory requirements. The remainder of health care costs payable is primarily
comprised of pharmacy and capitation payables, other amounts due to providers pursuant to risk sharing agreements and accruals for state assessments. The
Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions that consider numerous factors. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on the Company’s reserving methodology.
During 2019, the Company observed an increase in completion factors relative to those assumed at the prior year end. After considering the claims paid in 2019
with dates of service prior to the fourth quarter of the previous year, the Company observed assumed incurred claim weighted average completion factors that were
27 basis points higher than previously estimated, resulting in a decrease of $240 million in 2019, in health care costs payable that related to the prior year. The
Company has considered the pattern of changes in its completion factors when determining the completion factors used in its estimates of IBNR as of
December 31, 2019. However, based on historical claim experience, it is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimated weighted average completion factors
may vary by plus or minus 19 basis points from the Company’s assumed rates, which could impact health care costs payable by approximately plus or minus $227
million pretax.
Also during 2019, the Company observed that health care costs for claims with claim incurred dates of three months or less before the financial statement date were
lower than previously estimated. Specifically, after considering the claims paid in 2019 with claim incurred dates for the fourth quarter of the previous year, the
Company observed health care costs that were approximately 3.2% lower than previously estimated during the fourth quarter of 2018, resulting in a reduction of
$284 million in 2019 in health care costs payable that related to prior year.
Management considers historical health care cost trend rates together with its knowledge of recent events that may impact current trends when developing
estimates of current health care cost trend rates. When establishing reserves as of December 31, 2019, the Company increased its assumed health care cost trend
rates for the most recent three months by 3.4% from health care cost trend rates recently observed. However, based on historical claim experience, it is reasonably
possible that the Company’s estimated health care cost trend rates may vary by plus or minus 3.5% from the assumed rates, which could impact health care costs
payable by plus or minus $349 million pretax.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for any temporary differences
between financial and tax reporting bases and are adjusted as needed to reflect changes in the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary
differences reverse. Such adjustments are recorded in the period in which changes in tax laws are enacted, regardless of when they are effective. Deferred tax assets
are reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance to the extent future realization of those losses, deductions or other tax benefits is sufficiently uncertain.
Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes and the related taxes payable and deferred tax assets and liabilities since, in the
ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Additionally, the Company’s tax returns are
subject to audit by various domestic and foreign tax
85

authorities that could result in material adjustments based on differing interpretations of the tax laws. Although management believes that its estimates are
reasonable and are based on the best available information at the time the provision is prepared, actual results could differ from these estimates resulting in a final
tax outcome that may be materially different from that which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
The tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing
authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such positions are then
measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with the related tax authority. Interest and/or
penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the income tax provision. Significant judgment is required in determining uncertain tax positions. The
Company has established accruals for uncertain tax positions using its judgment and adjusts these accruals, as warranted, due to changing facts and circumstances.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for a description of new accounting pronouncements applicable to the Company.
86

Table of Contents
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
The Company’s earnings and financial condition are exposed to interest rate risk, credit quality risk, market valuation risk, foreign currency risk, commodity risk
and operational risk.
Evaluation of Interest Rate and Credit Quality Risk
The Company manages interest rate risk by seeking to maintain a tight match between the durations of assets and liabilities when appropriate. The Company
manages credit quality risk by seeking to maintain high average credit quality ratings and diversified sector exposure within its debt securities portfolio. In
connection with its investment and risk management objectives, the Company also uses derivative financial instruments whose market value is at least partially
determined by, among other things, levels of or changes in interest rates (short-term or long-term), duration, prepayment rates, equity markets or credit
ratings/spreads. The Company’s use of these derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate
locks, forward contracts, futures contracts, warrants, put options and credit default swaps. These instruments, viewed separately, subject the Company to varying
degrees of interest rate, equity price and credit risk. However, when used for hedging, the Company expects these instruments to reduce overall risk.
Investments
The Company’s investment portfolio supported the following products at December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
2018
Experience-rated products
$
1,100
$
1,063
Remaining products
18,587
17,191
Total investments
$
19,687
$
18,254
Investment risks associated with experience-rated products generally do not impact the Company’s operating results. The risks associated with investments
supporting experience-rated pension and annuity products in the large case pensions business in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment are assumed by the
contract holders and not by the Company (subject to, among other things, certain minimum guarantees). Assets supporting experience-rated products may be
subject to contract holder or participant withdrawals.
The debt securities in the Company’s investment portfolio had an average credit quality rating of A at both December 31, 2019 and 2018 with approximately $4.4
billion and $3.9 billion rated AAA at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.  The debt securities that were rated below investment grade (that is, having a
credit quality rating below BBB-/Baa3) were $1.2 billion and $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively (of which 4% and 6% at December 31,
2019 and 2018, respectively, supported experience-rated products).
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company held $333 million and $373 million, respectively, of municipal debt securities that were guaranteed by third parties,
representing 2% of total investments at both December 31, 2019 and 2018. These securities had an average credit quality rating of AA and AA- at December 31,
2019 and 2018, respectively, with the guarantee. These securities had an average credit quality rating of A+ and A- at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively,
without the guarantee. The Company does not have any significant concentration of investments with third party guarantors (either direct or indirect).
The Company generally classifies debt securities as available for sale, and carries them at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. At both December 31, 2019
and 2018, less than 1% of debt securities were valued using inputs that reflect the Company’s assumptions (categorized as Level 3 inputs in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America). See Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K, for additional information on
the methodologies and key assumptions used to determine the fair value of investments. For additional information related to investments, see Note 3
‘‘Investments’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The Company regularly reviews debt securities in its portfolio to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value is other-than-
temporary. When a debt security is in an unrealized capital loss position, the Company monitors the duration and severity of the loss to determine if sufficient
market recovery can occur within a reasonable period of time. If a decline in fair value is considered other-than-temporary, the cost basis or carrying value of the
debt security is written down. The write down is then bifurcated into its credit and non-credit related components. The amount of the credit-related component
87

is included in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related component is included in other comprehensive income (loss), unless the Company intends to
sell the debt security or it is more likely than not that the Company will be required to sell the debt security prior to its anticipated recovery of the debt security’s
amortized cost basis. Accounting for other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) of debt securities is considered a critical accounting policy. See “Critical
Accounting Policies - Other-Than-Temporary Impairment of Debt Securities” in the MD&A included in Item 7 of this 10-K for additional information.
Evaluation of Market Valuation Risks
The Company regularly evaluates its risk from market-sensitive instruments by examining, among other things, levels of or changes in interest rates (short-term or
long-term), duration, prepayment rates, equity markets and/or credit ratings/spreads. The Company also regularly evaluates the appropriateness of investments
relative to management-approved investment guidelines (and operates within those guidelines) and the business objectives of its portfolios.
On a quarterly basis, the Company reviews the impact of hypothetical net losses in its investment portfolio on the Company’s consolidated near-term financial
condition, operating results and cash flows assuming the occurrence of certain reasonably possible changes in near-term market rates and prices. Interest rate
changes (whether resulting from changes in treasury yields or credit spreads or other factors) represent the most material risk exposure category for the
Company. The Company has estimated the impact on the fair value of market sensitive instruments based on the net present value of cash flows using a
representative set of likely future interest rate scenarios. The assumptions used were as follows: an immediate increase of 100 basis points in interest rates (which
the Company believes represents a moderately adverse scenario and is approximately equal to the historical annual volatility of interest rate movements for
intermediate-term available-for-sale debt securities) and an immediate decrease of 15% in prices for domestic equity securities.
Assuming an immediate increase of 100 basis points in interest rates and an immediate decrease of 15% in the prices for domestic equity securities, the theoretical
decline in the fair values of market sensitive instruments at December 31, 2019 is as follows:
•
The fair value of long-term debt would decline by approximately $4.5 billion ($5.7 billion pretax). Changes in the fair value of long-term debt do not impact
the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
•
The theoretical reduction in the fair value of investment securities partially offset by the theoretical reduction in the fair value of interest rate sensitive
liabilities would result in a net decline in fair value of approximately $420 million ($530 million pretax) related to continuing non-experience-rated products.
Reductions in the fair value of investment securities would be reflected as an unrealized loss in equity, as the Company classifies these securities as available
for sale. The Company does not record liabilities at fair value.
Based on overall exposure to interest rate risk and equity price risk, the Company believes that these changes in market rates and prices would not materially affect
consolidated near-term financial condition, operating results or cash flows as of December 31, 2019.
Evaluation of Foreign Currency and Commodity Risk
As of each of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company did not have any material foreign currency exchange rate or commodity derivative instruments in place
and believes its exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk and commodity price risk is not material.
88

Evaluation of Operational Risks
The Company also faces certain operational risks, including risks related to information security, including cybersecurity. The Company and its vendors have
experienced and continue to experience a variety of cyber attacks, and the Company and its vendors expect to continue to experience cyber attacks going forward.
Among other things, the Company and its vendors have experienced automated attempts to gain access to public facing networks, brute force, SYN flood and
distributed denial of service attacks, attempted malware infections, vulnerability scanning, ransomware attacks, spear-phishing campaigns, mass reconnaissance
attempts, injection attempts, phishing, PHP injection and cross-site scripting. The Company also has seen an increase in attacks designed to obtain access to
consumers’ accounts using illegally obtained demographic information. The Company is dedicating and will continue to dedicate significant resources and incur
significant expenses to maintain and update on an ongoing basis the systems and processes that are designed to mitigate the information security risks it faces and
protect the security of its computer systems, software, networks and other technology assets against attempts by unauthorized parties to obtain access to
confidential information, destroy data, disrupt or degrade service, sabotage systems or cause other damage. The impact of cyber attacks has not been material to the
Company’s operations or operating results through December 31, 2019. The Board and its Audit Committee (the “Audit Committee”) and Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee are regularly informed regarding the Company’s information security policies, practices and status.
89

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
91
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
92
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018
93
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
94
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
96
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
97
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
164
Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)
168
90

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions, except per share amounts
2019
2018
2017
Revenues:
 
 
 
Products
$
185,236
$
183,910
$
180,063
Premiums
63,122
8,184
3,558
Services
7,407
1,825
1,144
Net investment income
1,011
660
21
Total revenues
256,776
194,579
184,786
Operating costs:
Cost of products sold
158,719
156,447
153,448
Benefit costs
52,529
6,594
2,810
Goodwill impairments
—
6,149
181
Operating expenses
33,541
21,368
18,809
Total operating costs
244,789
190,558
175,248
Operating income
11,987
4,021
9,538
Interest expense
3,035
2,619
1,062
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
79
—
—
Other expense (income)
(124)
(4)
208
Income before income tax provision
8,997
1,406
8,268
Income tax provision
2,366
2,002
1,637
Income (loss) from continuing operations
6,631
(596)
6,631
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
—
—
(8)
Net income (loss)
6,631
(596)
6,623
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
3
2
(1)
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
6,634
$
(594)
$
6,622
Basic earnings (loss) per share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
5.10
$
(0.57)
$
6.48
Loss from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
(0.01)
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
5.10
$
(0.57)
$
6.47
Weighted average basic shares outstanding
1,301
1,044
1,020
Diluted earnings (loss) per share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
5.08
$
(0.57)
$
6.45
Loss from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
(0.01)
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
5.08
$
(0.57)
$
6.44
Weighted average diluted shares outstanding
1,305
1,044
1,024
Dividends declared per share
$
2.00
$
2.00
$
2.00
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
91

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Net income (loss)
$
6,631
$
(596)
$
6,623
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
Net unrealized investment gains
677
97
—
Foreign currency translation adjustments
162
(29)
(2)
Net cash flow hedges
(33)
330
(10)
Pension and other postretirement benefits
111
(124)
152
Other comprehensive income
917
274
140
Comprehensive income (loss)
7,548
(322)
6,763
Comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
3
2
(1)
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
7,551
$
(320)
$
6,762
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
92

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Balance Sheets
At December 31,
In millions, except per share amounts
2019
2018
Assets:
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
5,683
$
4,059
Investments
2,373
2,522
Accounts receivable, net
19,617
17,631
Inventories
17,516
16,450
Other current assets
5,113
4,581
Total current assets
50,302
45,243
Long-term investments
17,314
15,732
Property and equipment, net
12,044
11,349
Operating lease right-of-use assets
20,860
—
Goodwill
79,749
78,678
Intangible assets, net
33,121
36,524
Separate accounts assets
4,459
3,884
Other assets
4,600
5,046
Total assets
$
222,449
$
196,456
Liabilities:
Accounts payable
$
10,492
$
8,925
Pharmacy claims and discounts payable
13,601
11,365
Health care costs payable
6,879
6,147
Policyholders’ funds
2,991
2,939
Accrued expenses
12,133
10,711
Other insurance liabilities
1,830
1,937
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
1,596
—
Short-term debt
—
720
Current portion of long-term debt
3,781
1,265
Total current liabilities
53,303
44,009
Long-term operating lease liabilities
18,926
—
Long-term debt
64,699
71,444
Deferred income taxes
7,294
7,677
Separate accounts liabilities
4,459
3,884
Other long-term insurance liabilities
7,436
8,119
Other long-term liabilities
2,162
2,780
Total liabilities
158,279
137,913
Commitments and contingencies (Note 16)
Shareholders’ equity:
Preferred stock, par value $0.01: 0.1 shares authorized; none issued or outstanding
—
—
Common stock, par value $0.01: 3,200 shares authorized; 1,727 shares issued and 1,302 shares outstanding at
December 31, 2019 and 1,720 shares issued and 1,295 shares outstanding at December 31, 2018 and capital
surplus
45,972
45,440
Treasury stock, at cost: 425 shares at both December 31, 2019 and 2018
(28,235)
(28,228)
Retained earnings
45,108
40,911
Accumulated other comprehensive income
1,019
102
Total CVS Health shareholders’ equity
63,864
58,225
Noncontrolling interests
306
318
Total shareholders’ equity
64,170
58,543
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$
222,449
$
196,456
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.

93

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Cash receipts from customers
$
248,393
$
186,519
$
176,594
Cash paid for inventory and prescriptions dispensed by retail network pharmacies
(149,655)
(148,981)
(146,469)
Insurance benefits paid
(52,242)
(6,897)
(2,810)
Cash paid to other suppliers and employees
(28,932)
(17,234)
(15,348)
Interest and investment income received
955
644
21
Interest paid
(2,954)
(2,803)
(1,072)
Income taxes paid
(2,717)
(2,383)
(2,909)
Net cash provided by operating activities
12,848
8,865
8,007
Cash flows from investing activities:
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
7,049
817
61
Purchases of investments
(7,534)
(692)
(137)
Purchases of property and equipment
(2,457)
(2,037)
(1,918)
Proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions
5
—
265
Acquisitions (net of cash acquired)
(444)
(42,226)
(1,181)
Proceeds from sale of subsidiary and other assets
—
832
—
Other
42
21
33
Net cash used in investing activities
(3,339)
(43,285)
(2,877)
Cash flows from financing activities:
Net repayments of short-term debt
(720)
(556)
(598)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
3,736
44,343
—
Repayments of long-term debt
(8,336)
(5,522)
—
Derivative settlements
(25)
446
—
Repurchase of common stock
—
—
(4,361)
Dividends paid
(2,603)
(2,038)
(2,049)
Proceeds from exercise of stock options
210
242
329
Payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards
(112)
(97)
(71)
Other
—
1
(1)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(7,850)
36,819
(6,751)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
—
(4)
1
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
1,659
2,395
(1,620)
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the beginning of the period
4,295
1,900
3,520
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the end of the period
$
5,954
$
4,295
$
1,900
94

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Reconciliation of net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities:
Net income (loss)
$
6,631
$
(596)
$
6,623
Adjustments required to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
4,371
2,718
2,479
Goodwill impairments
—
6,149
181
Loss on settlement of defined benefit pension plans
—
—
187
Stock-based compensation
453
280
234
Loss on sale of subsidiary
205
86
—
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
79
—
—
Deferred income taxes
(654)
87
(1,334)
Other noncash items
264
253
53
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions:
Accounts receivable, net
(2,158)
(1,139)
(941)
Inventories
(1,075)
(1,153)
(514)
Other assets
(614)
(3)
(338)
Accounts payable and pharmacy claims and discounts payable
3,550
2,329
1,710
Health care costs payable and other insurance liabilities
320
(311)
—
Other liabilities
1,476
165
(333)
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
12,848
$
8,865
$
8,007
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
95

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
Attributable to CVS Health
Number of shares
outstanding
Common
Stock and
Capital
Surplus (2)
Accumulated
Other Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
Total
CVS Health
Shareholders’
Equity
Total
Shareholders’
Equity
In millions
Common
Shares
Treasury
Shares (1)
Treasury
Stock (1)
Retained
Earnings
Noncontrolling
Interests
Balance at December 31,
2016
1,705
(644)
$
31,635
$ (33,483) $
38,983
$
(305)
$
36,830
$
4
$
36,834
Net income
—
—
—
—
6,622
—
6,622
1
6,623
Other comprehensive
income (Note 13)
—
—
—
—
—
140
140
—
140
Stock option activity, stock
awards and other
7
—
461
—
—
—
461
—
461
Purchase of treasury shares,
net of ESPP issuances
—
(54)
—
(4,313)
—
—
(4,313)
—
(4,313)
Common stock dividends
—
—
—
—
(2,049)
—
(2,049)
—
(2,049)
Other decreases in
noncontrolling interests
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(1)
(1)
Balance at December 31,
2017
1,712
(698)
32,096
(37,796)
43,556
(165)
37,691
4
37,695
Adoption of new accounting
standards (3)
—
—
—
—
(6)
(7)
(13)
—
(13)
Net loss
—
—
—
—
(594)
—
(594)
(2)
(596)
Other comprehensive
income (Note 13)
—
—
—
—
—
274
274
—
274
Common shares issued to
acquire Aetna
—
274
12,923
9,561
—
—
22,484
—
22,484
Stock option activity, stock
awards and other
8
—
421
—
—
—
421
—
421
Purchase of treasury shares,
net of ESPP issuances
—
(1)
—
7
—
—
7
—
7
Common stock dividends
—
—
—
—
(2,045)
—
(2,045)
—
(2,045)
Acquisition of
noncontrolling interests
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
329
329
Other decreases in
noncontrolling interests
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(13)
(13)
Balance at December 31,
2018
1,720
(425)
45,440
(28,228)
40,911
102
58,225
318
58,543
Adoption of new accounting
standards (Note 1)
—
—
—
—
178
—
178
—
178
Net income (loss)
—
—
—
—
6,634
—
6,634
(3)
6,631
Other comprehensive
income (Note 13)
—
—
—
—
—
917
917
—
917
Stock option activity, stock
awards and other
7
2
532
—
—
—
532
—
532
Purchase of treasury shares,
net of ESPP issuances
—
(2)
—
(7)
—
—
(7)
—
(7)
Common stock dividends
—
—
—
—
(2,615)
—
(2,615)
—
(2,615)
Other decreases in
noncontrolling interests
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(9)
(9)
Balance at December 31,
2019
1,727
(425)
$
45,972
$ (28,235) $
45,108
$
1,019
$
63,864
$
306
$
64,170
_____________________________________________ 
(1) Treasury shares include 1 million shares held in trust for each of the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017. Treasury stock includes $29 million related to shares held in trust for
each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 and $31 million related to shares held in trust for the year ended December 31, 2017. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for
additional information.
(2) Common stock and capital surplus includes the par value of common stock of $17 million as of December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
(3) Reflects the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which resulted in a reduction to retained earnings of $13 million and the
adoption of ASU 2018-02, Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income,
which resulted in a reduction to accumulated other comprehensive income of $7 million and an increase to retained earnings of $7 million, each during the year ended December 31, 2018.
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
96

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
1.
Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business 
CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, “Company”), has approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100
walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 105 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving
more than one million patients per year and expanding specialty pharmacy services. CVS Health also serves an estimated 37 million people through traditional,
voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone
Medicare Part D prescription drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health
outcomes and lowers overall health care costs.
On November 28, 2018 (the “Aetna Acquisition Date”), the Company acquired Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”). As a result of the acquisition of Aetna (the “Aetna
Acquisition”), the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment. Certain aspects of Aetna’s operations, including products for which the Company no longer
solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products, are included in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment. The
consolidated financial statements reflect Aetna’s results subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
Effective for the first quarter of 2019, the Company realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and reflect how its
Chief Operating Decision Maker (the “CODM”) reviews information and manages the business. As a result of this realignment, the Company’s SilverScript® PDP
moved from the Pharmacy Services segment to the Health Care Benefits segment. In addition, the Company moved Aetna’s mail order and specialty pharmacy
operations from the Health Care Benefits segment to the Pharmacy Services segment. Segment financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect
these changes.
The Company has four reportable segments: Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC, Health Care Benefits and Corporate/Other, which are described below.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease
management services and medical spend management. The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions,
government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care plans, plans offered on public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) and
private health insurance exchanges, other sponsors of health benefit plans and individuals throughout the United States. The Pharmacy Services segment operates
retail specialty pharmacy stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and branches for infusion and
enteral nutrition services.
Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of general merchandise, including over-the-counter drugs, beauty products, cosmetics and
personal care products, provides health care services through its MinuteClinic® walk-in medical clinics and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations,
which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other ancillary services to chronic care facilities and other care settings. As of
December 31, 2019, the Retail/LTC segment operated approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic® locations as well as online retail
pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and onsite pharmacies.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment is one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers, serving an estimated 37 million people as of
December 31, 2019. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals,
make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare
Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care management services, workers’ compensation administrative services and health
information technology products and services. The Health Care Benefit segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and
hourly workers, health plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. The Company
refers to insurance
97

products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services contract products (where the plan
sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” For periods prior to November 28, 2018 (the Aetna Acquisition Date), the
Health Care Benefits segment was comprised of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business.
Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the overall operations of the Company, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and Enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as its large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of CVS Health and its subsidiaries have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its majority-owned
subsidiaries and variable interest entities (“VIEs”) for which the Company is the primary beneficiary. All material intercompany balances and transactions have
been eliminated.
Reclassifications
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the
consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and temporary investments with maturities of three months or less when purchased. The Company invests in short-term
money market funds, commercial paper and time deposits, as well as other debt securities that are classified as cash equivalents within the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets, as these funds are highly liquid and readily convertible to known amounts of cash.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash included in other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets represents amounts held in escrow accounts in connection with certain recent
acquisitions. Restricted cash included in other assets on the consolidated balance sheets represents amounts held in a trust in one of the Company’s captive
insurance companies to satisfy collateral requirements associated with the assignment of certain insurance policies. All restricted cash is invested in time deposits,
money market funds or commercial paper.
The following is a reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents on the consolidated balance sheets to total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash on the
consolidated statements of cash flows as of December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Cash and cash equivalents
$
5,683
$
4,059
$
1,696
Restricted cash (included in other current assets)
—
6
14
Restricted cash (included in other assets)
271
230
190
Total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the end of the period in the consolidated statements of
cash flows
$
5,954
$
4,295
$
1,900
98

Investments
Debt Securities
Debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Treasury and agency securities, mortgage-backed securities, corporate and foreign bonds and other debt securities. Debt
securities are classified as either current or long-term investments based on their contractual maturities unless the Company intends to sell an investment within the
next twelve months, in which case it is classified as current on the consolidated balance sheets. Debt securities are classified as available for sale and are carried at
fair value. See Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value’’ for additional information on how the Company estimates the fair value of these investments.
The cost for mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities is adjusted for unamortized premiums and discounts, which are amortized using the interest method
over the estimated remaining term of the securities, adjusted for anticipated prepayments.
The Company regularly reviews its debt securities to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value is other-than-temporary.
When a debt security is in an unrealized capital loss position, the Company monitors the duration and severity of the loss to determine if sufficient market recovery
can occur within a reasonable period of time. If a decline in the fair value of a debt security is considered other-than-temporary, the cost basis or carrying value of
the debt security is written down. The write-down is then bifurcated into its credit and non-credit related components. The amount of the credit-related component
is included in the Company’s net income (loss), and the amount of the non-credit related component is included in other comprehensive income (loss), unless the
Company intends to sell the debt security or it is more likely than not that the Company will be required to sell the debt security prior to its anticipated recovery of
the debt security’s amortized cost basis. Interest is not accrued on debt securities when management believes the collection of interest is unlikely.
Equity Securities
Equity securities with readily available fair values are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in net income (loss).
Mortgage Loans
Mortgage loan investments on the consolidated balance sheets are valued at the unpaid principal balance, net of impairment reserves. A mortgage loan may be
impaired when it is a problem loan (i.e., more than 60 days delinquent, in bankruptcy or in process of foreclosure), a potential problem loan (i.e., high probability
of default) or a restructured loan. For impaired loans, a specific impairment reserve is established for the difference between the recorded investment in the loan
and the estimated fair value of the collateral. The Company applies its loan impairment policy individually to all loans in its portfolio.
The impairment evaluation described above also considers characteristics and risk factors attributable to the aggregate portfolio. An additional allowance for loan
losses is established if it is probable that there will be a credit loss on a group of similar mortgage loans. The following characteristics and risk factors are
considered when evaluating if a credit loss is probable on a group of similar mortgage loans: loan-to-value ratios, property type (e.g., office, retail, apartment,
industrial), geographic location, vacancy rates and property condition.
Full or partial impairments of loans are recorded at the time an event occurs affecting the legal status of the loan, typically at the time of foreclosure or upon a loan
modification giving rise to forgiveness of debt. Interest income on a potential problem loan or restructured loan is accrued to the extent it is deemed to be
collectible and the loan continues to perform under its original or restructured terms. Interest income on problem loans is recognized on a cash basis. Cash
payments on loans in the process of foreclosure are treated as a return of principal. Mortgage loans with a maturity date or a committed prepayment date within
twelve months are classified as current on the consolidated balance sheets.
Other Investments
Other investments consist primarily of the following:
•
Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships, which are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. Under this method, the carrying value of
the investment is based on the value of the Company’s equity ownership of the underlying investment funds provided by the general partner or manager of the
investments, the financial statements of which generally are audited. As a result of the timing of the receipt of the valuation information provided by the fund
managers, these investments are generally reported on up to a three month lag. The Company reviews investments for impairment at least quarterly and
monitors their performance throughout the year through discussions with the administrators, managers and/or general partners. If the Company becomes aware
of an impairment of a limited partnership’s investments through its review or prior to receiving the limited partnership’s financial statements at the
99

financial statement date, an impairment will be recognized by recording a reduction in the carrying value of the limited partnership with a corresponding
charge to net investment income.
•
Investment real estate, which is carried on the consolidated balance sheets at depreciated cost, including capital additions, net of write-downs for other-than-
temporary declines in fair value. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful life of each asset. If any real estate
investment is considered held-for-sale, it is carried at the lower of its carrying value or fair value less estimated selling costs. The Company generally estimates
fair value using a discounted future cash flow analysis in conjunction with comparable sales information. At the time of the sale, the difference between the
sales price and the carrying value is recorded as a realized capital gain or loss.
•
Privately-placed equity securities, which are carried on the consolidated balance sheets at cost less impairments, plus or minus subsequent adjustments for
observable price changes. Additionally, as a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”), a subsidiary of the Company is required to
purchase and hold shares of the FHLBB. These shares are restricted and carried at cost.
Net Investment Income
Net investment income on the Company’s investments is recorded when earned and is reflected in the Company’s net income (loss) (other than net investment
income on assets supporting experience-rated products). Experience-rated products are products in the large case pensions business where the contract holder, not
the Company, assumes investment and other risks, subject to, among other things, minimum guarantees provided by the Company. The effect of investment
performance on experience-rated products is allocated to contract holders’ accounts daily, based on the underlying investment experience and, therefore, does not
impact the Company’s net income (loss) (as long as the contract’s minimum guarantees are not triggered). Net investment income on assets supporting large case
pensions’ experience-rated products is included in net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations and is credited to contract holders’ accounts
through a charge to benefit costs.
Realized capital gains and losses on investments (other than realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting experience-rated products) are included as
a component of net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations. Realized capital gains and losses are determined on a specific identification
basis. Purchases and sales of debt and equity securities and alternative investments are reflected on the trade date. Purchases and sales of mortgage loans and
investment real estate are reflected on the closing date.
Realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting large case pensions’ experience-rated products are not included in realized capital gains and losses in
the consolidated statements of operations and instead are credited directly to contract holders’ accounts. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in
policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Unrealized capital gains and losses on investments (other than unrealized capital gains and losses on investments supporting experience-rated products) are
reflected in shareholders’ equity, net of tax, as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. Unrealized capital gains and losses on investments
supporting large case pensions’ experience-rated products are credited directly to contract holders’ accounts. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in
policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments in order to manage interest rate and foreign exchange risk and credit exposure. The Company’s use of these
derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, forward contracts, futures contracts,
warrants, put options and credit default swaps.
100

Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated net of allowances for doubtful accounts, customer credit allowances, contractual allowances and estimated terminations. Accounts
receivable, net is composed of the following at December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
    
2018
Trade receivables
$
6,717
$
6,497
Vendor and manufacturer receivables
7,856
7,315
Premium receivables
2,663
2,259
Other receivables
2,381
1,560
   Total accounts receivable, net
$
19,617
$
17,631
The activity in the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 is as follows:
In millions
2019
    
2018
2017
Beginning balance
$
287
$
162
$
158
Additions charged to bad debt expense
111
162
139
Write-offs charged to allowance
(79)
(37)
(135)
Ending balance
$
319
$
287
$
162
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method. Physical inventory counts are taken on a regular basis in
each retail store and LTC pharmacy, and a continuous cycle count process is the primary procedure used to validate the inventory balances on hand in each
distribution center and mail facility to ensure that the amounts reflected in the consolidated financial statements are properly stated. During the interim period
between physical inventory counts, the Company accrues for anticipated physical inventory losses on a location-by-location basis based on historical results and
current physical inventory trends.
Reinsurance Recoverables
The Company utilizes reinsurance agreements primarily to: (a) reduce required capital and (b) facilitate the acquisition or disposition of certain insurance contracts.
Ceded reinsurance agreements permit the Company to recover a portion of its losses from reinsurers, although they do not discharge the Company’s primary
liability as the direct insurer of the risks reinsured. Failure of reinsurers to indemnify the Company could result in losses; however, the Company does not expect
charges for unrecoverable reinsurance to have a material effect on its consolidated operating results or financial condition. The Company evaluates the financial
condition of its reinsurers and monitors concentrations of credit risk arising from similar geographic regions, activities or economic characteristics of its reinsurers.
At December 31, 2019, the Company’s reinsurance recoverables consisted primarily of amounts due from third parties that are rated consistent with companies that
are considered to have the ability to meet their obligations. Reinsurance recoverables are recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance
sheets.
Health Care Contract Acquisition Costs
Insurance products included in the Health Care Benefits segment are cancelable by either the customer or the member monthly upon written notice. Acquisition
costs related to prepaid health care and health indemnity contracts are generally expensed as incurred. Acquisition costs for certain long-duration insurance
contracts are deferred and are recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance sheets and are amortized over the estimated life of the
contracts. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs is recorded in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. At December 31, 2019 and
2018, the balance of deferred acquisition costs was $271 million and $22 million, respectively, comprised primarily of commissions paid on Medicare Supplement
products within the Health Care Benefits segment.
101

Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is reported at historical cost, net of accumulated depreciation. Property, equipment and improvements to leased premises are depreciated
using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, or when applicable, the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. Estimated useful lives
generally range from 1 to 40 years for buildings, building improvements and leasehold improvements and 3 to 10 years for fixtures, equipment and internally
developed software. Repair and maintenance costs are charged directly to expense as incurred. Major renewals or replacements that substantially extend the useful
life of an asset are capitalized and depreciated. Application development stage costs for significant internally developed software projects are capitalized and
depreciated.
Property and equipment consists of the following at December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
    
2018
Land
$
1,981
$
1,872
Building and improvements
4,068
3,785
Fixtures and equipment
13,807
13,028
Leasehold improvements
5,611
5,384
Software
3,467
2,800
Total property and equipment
28,934
26,869
Accumulated depreciation and amortization
(16,890)
(15,520)
Property and equipment, net
$
12,044
$
11,349
Depreciation expense (which includes the amortization of property and equipment under finance or capital leases) totaled $1.9 billion in the year ended December
31, 2019 and $1.7 billion in each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about finance and capital
leases.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
The Company determines if an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of a contract. Right-of-use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying
asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of
the remaining future minimum lease payments. As the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its
incremental borrowing rate, determined by class of underlying asset, to discount the lease payments. The operating lease right-of-use assets also include lease
payments made before commencement and are reduced by lease incentives.
The Company’s real estate leases typically contain options that permit renewals for additional periods of up to five years each. For real estate leases, the options to
extend are not considered reasonably certain at lease commencement because the Company reevaluates each lease on a regular basis to consider the economic and
strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options and regularly opens or closes stores to align with its operating strategy. Generally, the renewal option periods
are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability. Similarly,
renewal options are not included in the lease term for non-real estate leases because they are not considered reasonably certain of being exercised at lease
commencement. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheets, and lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the term of the short-term lease.
For real estate leases, the Company accounts for lease components and nonlease components as a single lease component. Certain real estate leases require
additional payments based on sales volume, as well as reimbursement for real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance, which are expensed as
incurred as variable lease costs. Other real estate leases contain one fixed lease payment that includes real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance.
These fixed payments are considered part of the lease payment and included in the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
102

Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the excess cost of an acquisition over the fair value
of net assets acquired and identifiable intangible assets to be recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to impairment reviews annually, or
more frequently if necessary, as further described below. See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about goodwill.
Intangible Assets
The Company’s identifiable intangible assets consist primarily of trademarks, trade names, customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology,
provider networks and value of business acquired (“VOBA”). These intangible assets arise primarily from the determination of their respective fair market values
at the date of acquisition. Amounts assigned to identifiable intangible assets, and their related useful lives, are derived from established valuation techniques and
management estimates.
The Company’s definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the pattern of future cash flows attributable to the asset.
Other than VOBA, definite-lived intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method. VOBA is amortized over the expected life of the acquired contracts
in proportion to estimated premiums. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if necessary, as
further described in “Long-Lived Asset Impairment” below.
See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about intangible assets.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets, excluding goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are tested for impairment using
separate tests described below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such asset may not be recoverable. The Company
groups and evaluates these long-lived assets for impairment at the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. If indicators of impairment are
present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group (undiscounted and
without interest charges). If the estimated future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment loss calculation
is prepared. The impairment loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted and with
interest charges). If required, an impairment loss is recorded for the portion of the asset group’s carrying value that exceeds the asset group’s estimated future cash
flows (discounted and with interest charges). During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded store rationalization charges of $231 million,
primarily related to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about the right-of-use asset impairment
charges. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recognized a $43 million long-lived asset impairment charge, primarily related to the impairment
of property and equipment. There were no material impairment charges recognized on long-lived assets in the year ended December 31, 2017.
When evaluating goodwill for potential impairment, the Company compares the fair value of its reporting units to their respective carrying amounts. The Company
estimates the fair value of its reporting units using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the carrying amount of a
reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. During the third quarter of 2019, the Company
performed its required annual goodwill impairment tests and concluded there were no goodwill impairments as of the testing date. See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other
Intangibles’’ for additional information about goodwill impairment charges recorded during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. The Company estimates the fair
value of its indefinite-lived trademarks using the relief from royalty method under the income approach. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds its estimated fair
value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. There were no impairment losses recognized on indefinite-lived
intangible assets in any of the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 or 2017.
103

Separate Accounts
Separate Accounts assets and liabilities related to large case pensions products represent funds maintained to meet specific objectives of contract holders who bear
the investment risk. These assets and liabilities are carried at fair value. Net investment income (including net realized capital gains and losses) accrue directly to
such contract holders. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims arising from the Company’s other businesses. Deposits,
withdrawals and net investment income (including net realized and net unrealized capital gains and losses) on Separate Accounts assets are not reflected in the
consolidated statements of operations or cash flows. Management fees charged to contract holders are included in services revenue and recognized over the period
earned.
Health Care Costs Payable
Health care costs payable consist principally of unpaid fee-for-service medical, dental and pharmacy claims, capitation costs, other amounts due to health care
providers pursuant to risk-sharing arrangements related to the Health Care Benefits segment’s Insured Commercial, Medicare and Medicaid products and accruals
for state assessments. Unpaid health care claims include an estimate of payments the Company will make for (i) services rendered to the Company’s Insured
members but not yet reported to the Company and (ii) claims which have been reported to the Company but not yet paid, each as of the financial statement date
(collectively, “IBNR”). Health care costs payable also include an estimate of the cost of services that will continue to be rendered after the financial statement date
if the Company is obligated to pay for such services in accordance with contractual or regulatory requirements. Such estimates are developed using actuarial
principles and assumptions which consider, among other things, historical and projected claim submission and processing patterns, assumed and historical medical
cost trends, historical utilization of medical services, claim inventory levels, changes in Insured membership and product mix, seasonality and other relevant
factors. The Company reflects changes in these estimates in benefit costs in the Company’s consolidated operating results in the period they are determined.
Capitation costs represent contractual monthly fees paid to participating physicians and other medical providers for providing medical care, regardless of the
volume of medical services provided to the Insured member. Amounts due under risk-sharing arrangements are based on the terms of the underlying contracts with
the providers and consider claims experience under the contracts through the financial statement date.
The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions that consider numerous factors. Of those factors, the Company considers
the analysis of historical and projected claim payment patterns (including claims submission and processing patterns) and the assumed health care cost trend rate
(the year-over-year change in per member per month health care costs) to be the most critical assumptions. In developing its IBNR estimate, the Company
consistently applies these actuarial principles and assumptions each period, with consideration to the variability of related factors. There have been no significant
changes to the methodologies or assumptions used to develop the Company’s estimate of IBNR in 2019.
The Company analyzes historical claim payment patterns by comparing claim incurred dates (i.e., the date services were provided) to claim payment dates to
estimate “completion factors.” The Company uses completion factors predominantly to estimate the ultimate cost of claims incurred more than three months before
the financial statement date. The Company estimates completion factors by aggregating claim data based on the month of service and month of claim payment and
estimating the percentage of claims incurred for a given month that are complete by each month thereafter. For any given month, substantially all claims are paid
within six months of the date of service, but it can take up to 48 months or longer after the date of service before all of the claims are completely resolved and paid.
These historically-derived completion factors are then applied to claims paid through the financial statement date to estimate the ultimate claim cost for a given
month’s incurred claim activity. The difference between the estimated ultimate claim cost and the claims paid through the financial statement date represents the
Company’s estimate of claims remaining to be paid as of the financial statement date and is included in the Company’s health care costs payable. The completion
factors the Company uses reflect judgments and possible adjustments based on data such as claim inventory levels, claim submission and processing patterns and,
to a lesser extent, other factors such as changes in health care cost trend rates, changes in Insured membership and changes in product mix. If claims are submitted
or processed on a faster (slower) pace than prior periods, the actual claims may be more (less) complete than originally estimated using the Company’s completion
factors, which may result in reserves that are higher (lower) than the ultimate cost of claims.
Because claims incurred within three months before the financial statement date are less mature, the Company uses a combination of historically-derived
completion factors and the assumed health care cost trend rate to estimate the ultimate cost of claims incurred for these months. The Company applies its actuarial
judgment and places a greater emphasis on the assumed health care cost trend rate for the most recent claim incurred dates as these months may be influenced by
seasonal patterns and changes in membership and product mix.
104

The Company’s health care cost trend rate is affected by changes in per member utilization of medical services as well as changes in the unit cost of such services.
Many factors influence the health care cost trend rate, including the Company’s ability to manage benefit costs through product design, negotiation of favorable
provider contracts and medical management programs, as well as the mix of the Company’s business. The health status of the Company’s Insured members, aging
of the population and other demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology and other factors continue to contribute to rising per member utilization
and unit costs. Changes in health care practices, inflation, new technologies, increases in the cost of prescription drugs (including specialty pharmacy drugs),
direct-to-consumer marketing by pharmaceutical companies, clusters of high-cost cases, claim intensity, changes in the regulatory environment, health care
provider or member fraud and numerous other factors also contribute to the cost of health care and the Company’s health care cost trend rate.
For each reporting period, the Company uses an extensive degree of judgment in the process of estimating its health care costs payable. As a result, considerable
variability and uncertainty is inherent in such estimates, particularly with respect to claims with claim incurred dates of three months or less before the financial
statement date; and the adequacy of such estimates is highly sensitive to changes in assumed completion factors and the assumed health care cost trend rates. For
each reporting period the Company recognizes the actuarial best estimate of health care costs payable considering the potential volatility in assumed completion
factors and health care cost trend rates, as well as other factors. The Company believes its estimate of health care costs payable is reasonable and adequate to cover
its obligations at December 31, 2019; however, actual claim payments may differ from the Company’s estimates. A worsening (or improvement) of the Company’s
health care cost trend rates or changes in completion factors from those that the Company assumed in estimating health care costs payable at December 31, 2019
would cause these estimates to change in the near term, and such a change could be material.
Each quarter, the Company re-examines previously established health care costs payable estimates based on actual claim payments for prior periods and other
changes in facts and circumstances. Given the extensive degree of judgment in this estimate, it is possible that the Company’s estimates of health care costs
payable could develop either favorably (that is, its actual benefit costs for the period were less than estimated) or unfavorably. The changes in the Company’s
estimate of health care costs payable may relate to a prior quarter, prior year or earlier periods. For a roll forward of the Company’s health care costs payable, see
Note 7 ‘‘Health Care Costs Payable.’’ The Company’s reserving practice is to consistently recognize the actuarial best estimate of its ultimate liability for health
care costs payable.
Other Insurance Liabilities
Unpaid Claims
Unpaid claims consist primarily of reserves associated with certain short-duration group disability and term life insurance contracts, including an estimate for
IBNR as of the financial statement date. Reserves associated with certain short-duration group disability and term life insurance contracts are based upon the
Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits, which is based on assumed investment yields and assumptions regarding mortality, morbidity and
recoveries from the U.S. Social Security Administration. The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions which consider,
among other things, contractual requirements, claim incidence rates, claim recovery rates, seasonality and other relevant factors. The Company discounts certain
claim liabilities related to group long-term disability and life insurance waiver of premium contracts. The discount rates generally reflect the Company’s expected
investment returns for the investments supporting all incurral years of these liabilities. The discount rates for retrospectively-rated contracts are set at contractually
specified levels. The Company’s estimates of unpaid claims are subject to change due to changes in the underlying experience of the insurance contracts, changes
in investment yields or other factors, and these changes are recorded in current and future benefits in the consolidated statements of operations in the period they
are determined. The Company estimates its reserve for claims IBNR for life products largely based on completion factors. The completion factors used are based
on the Company’s historical experience and reflect judgments and possible adjustments based on data such as claim inventory levels, claim payment patterns,
changes in business volume and other factors. If claims are submitted or processed on a faster (slower) pace than historical periods, the actual claims may be more
(less) complete than originally estimated using completion factors, which may result in reserves that are higher (lower) than required to cover future life benefit
payments. There have been no significant changes to the methodologies or assumptions used to develop the Company’s estimate of unpaid claims IBNR in 2019.
As of December 31, 2019, unpaid claims balances of $704 million and $1.8 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term insurance
liabilities, respectively. As of December 31, 2018, unpaid claims balances of $816 million and $1.9 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other
long-term insurance liabilities, respectively.
Substantially all life and disability insurance liabilities have been fully ceded to unrelated third parties through indemnity reinsurance agreements; however, the
Company remains directly obligated to the policyholders.
105

Future Policy Benefits
Future policy benefits consist primarily of reserves for limited payment pension and annuity contracts and long-term care insurance contracts. Reserves for limited
payment pension and annuity contracts are computed using actuarial principles that consider, among other things, assumptions reflecting anticipated mortality,
retirement, expense and interest rate experience. Such assumptions generally vary by plan, year of issue and policy duration. Assumed interest rates on such
contracts ranged from 3.5% to 11.3% in the year ended December 31, 2019 and from the Aetna Acquisition Date through December 31, 2018. The Company
periodically reviews mortality assumptions against both industry standards and its experience. Reserves for long-duration long-term care contracts represent the
Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits to be paid to or on behalf of policyholders less the present value of future net premiums. The assumed
interest rate on such contracts was 5.1% in the year ended December 31, 2019 and from the Aetna Acquisition Date through December 31, 2018. The Company’s
estimate of the present value of future benefits under such contracts is based upon mortality, morbidity and interest rate assumptions. As of December 31, 2019,
future policy benefits balances of $508 million and $5.6 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term insurance liabilities, respectively.
As of December 31, 2018, future policy benefits balances of $536 million and $6.2 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term
insurance liabilities, respectively.
Premium Deficiency Reserves
The Company evaluates its insurance contracts to determine if it is probable that a loss will be incurred. A premium deficiency loss is recognized when it is
probable that expected future claims, including maintenance costs (for example, direct costs such as claim processing costs), will exceed existing reserves plus
anticipated future premiums and reinsurance recoveries. Anticipated investment income is considered in the calculation of premium deficiency losses for short-
duration contracts. For purposes of determining premium deficiency losses, contracts are grouped consistent with the Company’s method of acquiring, servicing
and measuring the profitability of such contracts. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company established a premium deficiency reserve of $4 million and
$16 million, respectively, related to Medicaid products in the Health Care Benefits segment.
Policyholders’ Funds
Policyholders’ funds consist primarily of reserves for pension and annuity investment contracts and customer funds associated with certain health contracts.
Reserves for such contracts are equal to cumulative deposits less withdrawals and charges plus interest credited thereon, net of experience-rated adjustments. In
2019, interest rates for pension and annuity investment contracts ranged from 3.5% to 15.0%. From the Aetna Acquisition Date through December 31, 2018,
interest rates for pension and annuity investment contracts ranged from 3.5% to 13.4%. Reserves for contracts subject to experience rating reflect the Company’s
rights as well as the rights of policyholders and plan participants. The Company also holds funds for health savings accounts (“HSAs”) on behalf of members
associated with high deductible health plans. These amounts are held to pay for qualified health care expenses incurred by these members. The HSA balances were
approximately $2.2 billion and $2.1 billion at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and are reflected in other current assets with a corresponding liability in
policyholders’ funds.
Policyholders’ funds liabilities that are expected to be paid within twelve months from the balance sheet date are classified as current on the consolidated balance
sheets. Policyholders’ funds liabilities that are expected to be paid greater than twelve months from the balance sheet date are included in other long-term liabilities
on the consolidated balance sheets.
Self-Insurance Liabilities
The Company is self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, workers’ compensation and auto liability. The Company obtains third party insurance
coverage to limit exposure from these claims. The Company is also self-insured for certain losses related to health and medical liabilities. The Company’s self-
insurance accruals, which include reported claims and claims incurred but not reported, are calculated using standard insurance industry actuarial assumptions and
the Company’s historical claims experience. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, self-insurance liabilities totaled $856 million and $865 million, respectively, and
were recorded as accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
For non-U.S. dollar functional currency locations, (i) assets and liabilities are translated at end-of-period exchange rates, (ii) revenues and expenses are translated at
average exchange rates in effect during the period and (iii) equity is translated at historical exchange rates. The resulting cumulative translation adjustments are
included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
106

For U.S. dollar functional currency locations, foreign currency assets and liabilities are remeasured into U.S. dollars at end-of-period exchange rates, except for
nonmonetary balance sheet accounts which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Revenues and expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect
during each period, except for those expenses related to the nonmonetary balance sheet amounts which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Gains or losses
from foreign currency remeasurement are included in net income (loss).
On July 1, 2019, the Company sold its Brazilian subsidiary, Drogaria Onofre Ltda. (“Onofre”) for an immaterial amount. The Company recorded a loss on the
divestiture, which included the elimination of the subsidiary’s $154 million cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income.
Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and the effects of foreign currency remeasurements were not material in 2018 or 2017.
Revenue Recognition
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail
pharmacy network. The Company’s pharmacy benefit arrangements are accounted for in a manner consistent with a master supply arrangement as there are no
contractual minimum volumes and each prescription is considered a separate purchasing decision and distinct performance obligation transferred at a point in time.
PBM services performed in connection with each prescription claim are considered part of a single performance obligation which culminates in the dispensing of
prescription drugs.
The Company recognizes revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with its clients when the Company has concluded it controls the
prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. The Company controls prescriptions dispensed indirectly through its retail pharmacy network
because it has separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, has discretion in setting the price for the transaction and assumes primary responsibility
for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to its client plan members while also performing the related PBM services.
Revenues include (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Company, net of any discounts earned on brand name drugs or other discounts and
refunds paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” and “Guarantees” below), (ii) the price paid to the Company by client plan members for mail order
prescriptions and the price paid to retail network pharmacies by client plan members for retail prescriptions (“retail co-payments”), and (iii) claims based
administrative fees for retail pharmacy network contracts. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the prescription drugs is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company
expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those prescription drugs. The Company has established the following revenue recognition policies for the
Pharmacy Services segment:
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by mail service dispensing pharmacies are recognized when the prescription drug is delivered to the client
plan member. At the time of delivery, the Company has performed substantially all of its performance obligations under its client contracts and does not
experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Company’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are
recognized at the Company’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Company’s online claims processing system and the Company has
transferred control of the prescription drug and performed all of its performance obligations.
For contracts under which the Company acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client plan member, revenue is recognized
using the net method.
Drug Discounts
The Company records revenue net of manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients based on their plan members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. The
Company estimates these rebates at period-end based on actual and estimated claims data and its estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients. The
estimates are based on the best available data at period-end and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates due to the client. The
Company adjusts its rebates payable to clients to the actual amounts paid when these rebates are paid or as significant events occur. Any cumulative effect of these
adjustments is recorded against revenues at the time it is identified. Adjustments generally result from contract changes with clients or manufacturers that have
retroactive rebate adjustments, differences between the estimated and actual product mix subject to rebates, or whether the brand name drug was included in the
applicable formulary. The effect of adjustments
107

between estimated and actual manufacturers’ rebate amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Guarantees
The Company also adjusts revenues for refunds owed to clients resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined service and performance
metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual pricing
and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Retail/LTC Segment
Retail Pharmacy
The Company’s retail drugstores recognize revenue at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. For pharmacy sales, each prescription claim is its
own arrangement with the customer and is a performance obligation, separate and distinct from other prescription claims under other retail network arrangements.
Revenues are adjusted for refunds owed to third party payers resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined value-based service and
performance metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and
actual pricing and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Revenue from Company gift cards purchased by customers is deferred as a contract liability until goods or services are transferred. Any amounts not expected to be
redeemed by customers (i.e., breakage) are recognized based on historical redemption patterns.
Customer returns are not material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
Loyalty and Other Programs
The Company’s customer loyalty program, ExtraCare®, consists of two components, ExtraSavingsTM and ExtraBucks® Rewards. ExtraSavings are coupons that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue when redeemed as the Company concluded that they do not represent a promise to the customer to deliver additional goods or
services at the time of issuance because they are not tied to a specific transaction or spending level.
ExtraBucks Rewards are accumulated by customers based on their historical spending levels. Thus, the Company has determined that there is an additional
performance obligation to those customers at the time of the initial transaction. The Company allocates the transaction price to the initial transaction and the
ExtraBucks Rewards transaction based upon the relative standalone selling price, which considers historical redemption patterns for the rewards. Revenue allocated
to ExtraBucks Rewards is recognized as those rewards are redeemed. At the end of each period, unredeemed ExtraBucks Rewards are reflected as a contract
liability.
The Company also offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass®, under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course
of the subscription period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. Subscriptions are paid for on a monthly or annual
basis at the time of or in advance of the Company delivering the goods and services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as the performance
obligations are satisfied.
Long-term Care
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects
to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Each prescription claim represents a separate performance obligation of the Company, separate
and distinct from other prescription claims under customer arrangements. A significant portion of Long-term Care revenue from sales of pharmaceutical and
medical products is reimbursed by the federal Medicare Part D program and, to a lesser extent, state Medicaid programs. The Company monitors its revenues and
receivables from these reimbursement sources, as well as long-term care facilities and other third party insurance payors, and reduces revenue at the revenue
recognition date to properly account for the variable consideration due to anticipated differences between billed and reimbursed amounts. Accordingly, the total
revenues and receivables reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements are recorded at the amount expected to be ultimately received from these
payors.
Patient co-payments associated with Medicare Part D, certain state Medicaid programs, Medicare Part B and certain third party payors typically are not collected at
the time products are delivered or services are rendered, but are billed to the individuals as part of normal billing procedures and subject to normal accounts
receivable collections procedures.
108

Walk-In Medical Clinics
For services provided by the Company’s walk-in medical clinics, revenue recognition occurs for completed services provided to patients, with adjustments taken
for third party payor contractual obligations and patient direct bill historical collection rates.
Health Care Benefits Segment
Health Care Benefits revenue is principally derived from insurance premiums and fees billed to customers. Revenue is recognized based on customer billings,
which reflect contracted rates per employee and the number of covered employees recorded in the Company’s records at the time the billings are prepared. Billings
are generally sent monthly for coverage during the following month.
The Company’s billings may be subsequently adjusted to reflect enrollment changes due to member terminations or other factors. These adjustments are known as
retroactivity adjustments. In each period, the Company estimates the amount of future retroactivity and adjusts the recorded revenue accordingly. As information
regarding actual retroactivity amounts becomes known, the Company refines its estimates and records any required adjustments to revenues in the period in which
they arise.
Premium Revenue
Premiums are recognized as revenue in the month in which the enrollee is entitled to receive health care services. Premiums are reported net of an allowance for
estimated terminations and uncollectible amounts. Additionally, premium revenue subject to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care
and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010’s (as amended, collectively, the “ACA’s”) minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rebate requirements is recorded net of
the estimated minimum MLR rebates for the current calendar year. Premiums related to unexpired contractual coverage periods (unearned premiums) are reported
as other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue when earned.
Some of the Company’s contracts allow for premiums to be adjusted to reflect actual experience or the relative health status of Insured members. Such adjustments
are reasonably estimable at the outset of the contract, and adjustments to those estimates are made based on actual experience of the customer emerging under the
contract and the terms of the underlying contract.
Services Revenue
Services revenue relates to contracts that can include various combinations of services or series of services which generally are capable of being distinct and
accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Health Care Benefits segment’s services revenue primarily consists of the following components:
•
ASC fees are received in exchange for performing certain claim processing and member services for ASC members. ASC fee revenue is recognized over the
period the service is provided. Some of the Company’s administrative services contracts include guarantees with respect to certain functions, such as customer
service response time, claim processing accuracy and claim processing turnaround time, as well as certain guarantees that a plan sponsor’s benefit claim
experience will fall within a certain range. With any of these guarantees, the Company is financially at risk if the conditions of the arrangements are not met,
although the maximum amount at risk typically is limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company by the customer involved. Each period
the Company estimates its obligations under the terms of these guarantees and records its estimate as an offset to services revenues.
•
Workers’ compensation administrative services consist of fee-based managed care services. Workers’ compensation administrative services revenue is
recognized once the service is provided.
Accounting for Medicare Part D
Revenues include insurance premiums earned by the Company’s PDPs, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements
with the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”). The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP
member, and can be subsidized by CMS in the case of low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially
recorded within other insurance liabilities and are then recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
Revenues also include a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design referred to as the risk corridor. The Company estimates variable consideration
in the form of amounts payable to, or receivable from, CMS under the risk corridor, and adjusts revenue based on calculations of additional subsidies to be received
from or owed to CMS at the end of the reporting year.
In addition to Medicare Part D premiums, the Company receives additional payments each month from CMS related to catastrophic reinsurance, low-income cost
sharing subsidies and coverage gap benefits. If the subsidies received differ from the
109

amounts earned from actual prescriptions transferred, the difference is recorded in either accounts receivable, net or accrued expenses.
Disaggregation of Revenue
The following table disaggregates the Company’s revenue by major source in each segment for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
Pharmacy
Services
    
Retail/
LTC
    
Health Care
Benefits
Corporate/
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations
    
Consolidated
Totals
2019
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
140,896
$
66,442
$
—
$
—
$
(41,439)
$
165,899
Front Store
—
19,422
—
—
—
19,422
Premiums
—
—
63,031
91
—
63,122
Net investment income
—
—
599
412
—
1,011
Other
595
744
5,974
9
—
7,322
Total
$
141,491
$
86,608
$
69,604
$
512
$
(41,439)
$
256,776
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network (1)
$
88,755
Mail choice (2)
52,141
Other
595
Total
$
141,491
2018
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
134,216
$
64,179
$
164
$
—
$
(33,714)
$
164,845
Front Store
—
19,055
—
—
—
19,055
Premiums
—
—
8,180
4
—
8,184
Net investment income
—
—
58
602
—
660
Other
520
755
560
—
—
1,835
Total
$
134,736
$
83,989
$
8,962
$
606
$
(33,714)
$
194,579
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network (1) (3)
$
87,167
Mail choice (2) (3)
47,049
Other
520
Total
$
134,736
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Pharmacy Services pharmacy network is defined as claims filled at retail and specialty retail pharmacies, including the Company’s retail pharmacies and LTC pharmacies, but excluding
Maintenance Choice® activity, which is included within the mail choice category. Maintenance choice permits eligible client plan members to fill their maintenance prescriptions through
mail order delivery or at a CVS pharmacy retail store for the same price as mail order.
(2)
Pharmacy Services mail choice is defined as claims filled at a Pharmacy Services mail order facility, which includes specialty mail claims inclusive of Specialty Connect® claims picked up
at a retail pharmacy, as well as prescriptions filled at the Company’s retail pharmacies under the Maintenance Choice program.
(3)
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current period presentation.
Contract Balances
Contract liabilities primarily represent the Company’s obligation to transfer additional goods or services to a customer for which the Company has received
consideration, and include ExtraBucks Rewards and unredeemed Company gift cards. The consideration received remains a contract liability until goods or
services have been provided to the customer. In addition, the Company recognizes breakage on Company gift cards based on historical redemption patterns.
110

The following table provides information about receivables and contract liabilities from contracts with customers as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
    
2018
Trade receivables (included in accounts receivable, net)
$
6,717
$
6,497
Contract liabilities (included in accrued expenses)
73
67
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the contract liabilities balance includes increases related to customers’ earnings in ExtraBucks Rewards or issuances of
Company gift cards and decreases for revenues recognized during the period as a result of the redemption of ExtraBucks Rewards or Company gift cards and
breakage of Company gift cards. Below is a summary of such changes:
In millions
2019
    
2018
Balance at December 31, 2018
$
67
$
53
Adoption of ASU 2014-09
—
17
Rewards earnings and gift card issuances
365
332
Redemption and breakage
(359)
(335)
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
73
$
67
Cost of Products Sold
The Company accounts for cost of products sold as follows:
Pharmacy Services Segment
Cost of products sold includes: (i) the cost of prescription drugs sold during the reporting period directly through the Company’s mail service dispensing
pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail pharmacy network, (ii) shipping and handling costs, and (iii) the operating costs of the Company’s mail
service dispensing pharmacies and client service operations and related information technology support costs including depreciation and amortization. The cost of
prescription drugs sold component of cost of products sold includes: (i) the cost of the prescription drugs purchased from manufacturers or distributors and shipped
to members in clients’ benefit plans from the Company’s mail service dispensing pharmacies, net of any volume-related or other discounts (see “Vendor
Allowances and Purchase Discounts” below) and (ii) the cost of prescription drugs sold (including retail co-payments) through the Company’s retail pharmacy
network under contracts where the Company is the principal, net of any volume-related or other discounts.
Retail/LTC Segment
Cost of products sold includes: the cost of merchandise sold during the reporting period, including prescription drug costs, and the related purchasing costs,
warehousing and delivery costs (including depreciation and amortization) and actual and estimated inventory losses.
Vendor Allowances and Purchase Discounts
The Company accounts for vendor allowances and purchase discounts as follows:
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers
and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of
the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase, (ii) a discount for the prompt payment of invoices or (iii) when products are purchased indirectly
from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy), a discount (or rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recognized when
prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of
adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts billed and collected has not been material to the Company’s operating results or
financial condition. The Company accounts for the effect of any such differences as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed.
The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its wholesaler contracts if it exceeds contractually defined purchase volumes. In addition,
the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical
111

manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees are recorded as a reduction of cost of products sold.
Retail/LTC Segment
Vendor allowances received by the Retail/LTC segment reduce the carrying cost of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related
inventory is sold, unless they are specifically identified as a reimbursement of incremental costs for promotional programs and/or other services provided. Amounts
that are directly linked to advertising commitments are recognized as a reduction of advertising expense (included in operating expenses) when the related
advertising commitment is satisfied. Any such allowances received in excess of the actual cost incurred also reduce the carrying cost of inventory. The total value
of any upfront payments received from vendors that are linked to purchase commitments is initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce
cost of products sold over the life of the contract based upon purchase volume. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are not linked to
purchase commitments is also initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold on a straight-line basis over the life of the
related contract. The total amortization of these upfront payments was not material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements in any of the periods
presented.
Health Care Reform
Health Insurer Fee
Since January 1, 2014, the ACA imposes an annual premium-based health insurer fee (“HIF”) for each calendar year payable in September which is not deductible
for tax purposes. The Company is required to estimate a liability for the HIF at the beginning of the calendar year in which the fee is payable with a corresponding
deferred asset that is amortized ratably to operating expenses over the calendar year. The Company records the liability for the HIF in accrued expenses and records
the deferred asset in other current assets. There was no expense related to the HIF in 2019 and 2017, since the HIF was temporarily suspended for each of those
periods. In 2018, operating expenses included $157 million related to the Company’s share of the HIF. The HIF applies for 2020, and in December 2019, the HIF
was repealed for calendar years after 2020.
Risk Adjustment
The ACA established a permanent risk adjustment program to transfer funds from qualified individual and small group insurance plans with below average risk
scores to plans with above average risk scores. Based on the risk of the Company’s qualified plan members relative to the average risk of members of other
qualified plans in comparable markets, as defined by the ACA, the Company estimates its ultimate risk adjustment receivable (recorded in accounts receivable) or
payable (recorded in accrued expenses) for the current calendar year and reflects the pro-rata year-to-date impact as an adjustment to premium revenue.
Advertising Costs
Advertising costs, which are reduced by the portion funded by vendors, are expensed when the related advertising takes place. Net advertising costs, which are
included in operating expenses, were $396 million, $364 million and $230 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as an expense over the applicable requisite service
period of the stock award (generally 3 to 5 years) using the straight-line method.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected
future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are
determined on the basis of the differences between the consolidated financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for
the year or years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in the tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in
income in the period that includes the enactment date of such change.
 
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”) was enacted on December 22, 2017. Among numerous changes to existing tax laws, the TCJA permanently reduced the
federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018. The effects of changes in tax rates on deferred tax balances are required to be taken
into consideration in the period in which the changes are
112

enacted, regardless of when they are effective. As a result of the reduction of the corporate income tax rate under the TCJA, the Company estimated the revaluation
of its net deferred tax liabilities and recorded a provisional income tax benefit of approximately $1.5 billion for year ended December 31, 2017. In 2018, the
Company completed its process of determining the TCJA’s final impact and recorded an additional income tax benefit of $100 million.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that it believes these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, the
Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable
income, tax planning strategies, and the Company’s recent operating results. The Company establishes a valuation allowance when it does not consider it more
likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered.
The Company records uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process whereby (1) the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax
positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition
threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax
authority.
Interest and/or penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the income tax provision.
Measurement of Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Employee Benefit Plans
The Company sponsors defined benefit pension plans (“pension plans”) and other postretirement employee benefit plans (“OPEB plans”) for its employees and
retirees. The Company recognizes the funded status of its pension and OPEB plans on the consolidated balance sheets based on the year-end measurements of plan
assets and benefit obligations. When the fair value of plan assets are in excess of the plan benefit obligations, the amounts are reported in other current assets and
other assets. When the fair value of plan benefit obligations are in excess of plan assets, the amounts are reported in accrued expenses and other long-term
liabilities based on the amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits payable in the next twelve months included in the benefit obligation exceeds the fair
value of plan assets. The net periodic benefit costs for the Company’s pension and OPEB plans do not contain a service cost component as these plans have been
frozen for an extended period of time. Non-service cost components of pension and postretirement benefit cost are included in other expense (income) in the
consolidated statements of operations.
Earnings (Loss) per Common Share
Earnings (loss) per share is computed using the two-class method. The Company calculates basic earnings (loss) per share based on the weighted average number
of common shares outstanding for the period. See Note 14 ‘‘Earnings (Loss) Per Share’’ for additional information.
Shares Held in Trust
The Company maintains grantor trusts, which held approximately one million shares of its common stock at both December 31, 2019 and 2018. These shares are
designated for use under various employee compensation plans. Since the Company holds these shares, they are excluded from the computation of basic and
diluted shares outstanding.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company has investments in (i) a generic pharmaceutical sourcing entity, (ii) certain hedge fund and private equity investments and (iii) certain real estate
partnerships that are considered VIE’s. The Company does not have a future obligation to fund losses or debts on behalf of these investments; however, it may
voluntarily contribute funds. In evaluating whether the Company is the primary beneficiary of a VIE, the Company considers several factors, including whether the
Company has (a) the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses and the
right to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Variable Interest Entities - Primary Beneficiary
In 2014, the Company and Cardinal Health, Inc. (“Cardinal”) established Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (“Red Oak”), a generic pharmaceutical sourcing entity in which
the Company and Cardinal each own 50%. The Red Oak arrangement has an initial term of 10 years. Under this arrangement, the Company and Cardinal
contributed their sourcing and supply chain expertise to Red Oak and agreed to source and negotiate generic pharmaceutical supply contracts for both companies
through Red Oak; however, Red Oak does not own or hold inventory on behalf of either company. No physical assets (e.g., property and
113

equipment) were contributed to Red Oak by either company, and minimal funding was provided to capitalize Red Oak. The Company has determined that it is the
primary beneficiary of this VIE because it has the ability to direct the activities of Red Oak. Consequently, the Company consolidates Red Oak in its consolidated
financial statements within the Retail/LTC segment.
Cardinal is required to pay the Company 39 quarterly payments beginning in October 2014. As milestones are met, the quarterly payments increase. The Company
received from Cardinal $183 million during each of the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017. The payments reduce the Company’s carrying value of
inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related inventory is sold. Revenues associated with Red Oak expenses reimbursed by Cardinal for
the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, and amounts due to or due from Cardinal at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were immaterial.
Variable Interest Entities - Other Variable Interest Holder
The Company has invested in certain VIEs for which it has determined that it is not the primary beneficiary, consisting of the following:
•
Hedge fund and private equity investments - The Company invests in hedge fund and private equity investments in order to generate investment returns for its
investment portfolio supporting its insurance businesses.
•
Real estate partnerships - The Company invests in various real estate partnerships, including those that construct, own and manage low-income housing
developments. For the low income housing development investments, substantially all of the projected benefits to the Company are from tax credits and other
tax benefits.
The Company is not the primary beneficiary of these VIEs because the nature of the Company’s involvement with the activities of these VIEs does not give the
Company the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact their economic performance. The Company records the amount of its investment in these
VIEs as long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets and recognizes its share of each VIE’s income or losses in net income (loss). The Company’s
maximum exposure to loss from these VIEs is limited to its investment balances as disclosed below and the risk of recapture of previously recognized tax credits
related to the real estate partnerships, which the Company does not consider significant.
The total amount of other variable interest holder VIE assets included in long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2019 and 2018
was as follows:
In millions
2019
    
2018
Hedge fund investments
$
271
$
270
Private equity investments
538
524
Real estate partnerships
212
275
Total
$
1,021
$
1,069
Related Party Transactions
The Company has an equity method investment in SureScripts, LLC (“SureScripts”), which operates a clinical health information network. The Company utilizes
this clinical health information network in providing services to its client plan members and retail customers. The Company expensed fees for the use of this
network of $32 million, $45 million and $35 million in the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The Company’s investment in and equity
in the earnings of SureScripts for all periods presented is immaterial.
The Company has an equity method investment in Heartland Healthcare Services (“Heartland”). Heartland operates several LTC pharmacies in four states.
Heartland paid the Company $96 million, $135 million and $139 million for pharmaceutical inventory purchases during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018
and 2017, respectively. Additionally, the Company performs certain collection functions for Heartland and then passes those customer cash collections back to
Heartland. The Company’s investment in and equity in the earnings of Heartland for all periods presented is immaterial.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company made a charitable contribution of $30 million to the CVS Health Foundation, a non-profit entity that
focuses on health, education and community involvement programs. The charitable contribution will fund future charitable giving and was recorded as an operating
expense in the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
114

Discontinued Operations
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company retained guarantees on store lease obligations for a number of
former subsidiaries, including Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores, each of which subsequently filed for bankruptcy. The Company’s loss from discontinued
operations primarily includes lease-related costs that the Company believes it will likely be required to satisfy pursuant to its Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores
lease guarantees. See “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ for more information.
Results from discontinued operations were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Below is a summary of the results of discontinued
operations for the year ended December 31, 2017:
In millions
2017
Loss from discontinued operations
$
(13)
Income tax benefit
5
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$
(8)
New Accounting Pronouncements Recently Adopted
Leases
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). Under this accounting standard, lessees are
required to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for virtually all of their leases (other than leases that meet the definition of a short-term lease). The
liability is equal to the present value of lease payments. The asset is based on the liability, subject to certain adjustments, such as for initial direct costs. For income
statement purposes, a dual model was retained, requiring leases to be classified as either operating or finance leases. Operating leases result in straight-line expense
(similar to operating leases under the prior accounting standard), while finance leases result in a front-loaded expense pattern (similar to capital leases under the
prior accounting standard). Lessor accounting is similar to the prior model, but updated to align with certain changes to the lessee model (e.g., certain definitions,
such as initial direct costs, have been updated) and the new revenue recognition standard that was adopted in 2018.
The Company adopted this new accounting standard on January 1, 2019 on a modified retrospective basis and applied the new standard to all leases through a
cumulative-effect adjustment to beginning retained earnings. As a result, comparative financial information has not been restated and continues to be reported
under the accounting standards in effect for those periods. The Company elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within
the new standard, which includes, among other things, the ability to carry forward the existing lease classification. On January 1, 2019, the Company recorded an
after-tax transition adjustment to increase retained earnings by approximately $178 million ($241 million prior to tax effect). The new standard had a material
impact on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet, but did not materially impact the Company’s consolidated operating results and had no impact on the
Company’s cash flows.
115

Impact of New Lease Standard on Balance Sheet Line Items
As a result of applying the new lease accounting standard using a modified retrospective method, the following adjustments were made to accounts on the
consolidated balance sheet as of January 1, 2019:
Impact of Change in Accounting Policy
In millions
As Reported
December 31, 2018
Adjustments
As Adjusted
January 1, 2019
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
Other current assets
$
4,581
$
(48)
$
4,533
Total current assets
45,243
(48)
45,195
Property and equipment, net
11,349
11
11,360
Operating lease right-of-use assets
—
20,987
20,987
Intangible assets, net
36,524
(217)
36,307
Other assets
5,046
(521)
4,525
Total assets
196,456
20,212
216,668
Accrued expenses
10,711
(52)
10,659
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
—
1,803
1,803
Current portion of long-term debt
1,265
2
1,267
Total current liabilities
44,009
1,753
45,762
Long-term operating lease liabilities
—
18,832
18,832
Long-term debt
71,444
(96)
71,348
Deferred income taxes
7,677
63
7,740
Other long-term liabilities
2,780
(518)
2,262
Total liabilities
137,913
20,034
157,947
Retained earnings
40,911
178
41,089
Total CVS Health shareholders’ equity
58,225
178
58,403
Total shareholders’ equity
58,543
178
58,721
Accounting for Interest Associated with the Purchase of Callable Debt Securities
In March 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-08, Accounting for Interest Associated with the Purchase of Callable Debt Securities (Topic 310). Under this standard,
premiums on callable debt securities are amortized to the earliest call date rather than to the contractual maturity date. Callable debt securities held at a discount
will continue to be amortized to the contractual maturity date. The Company adopted this new accounting standard on January 1, 2019 on a modified retrospective
basis and recorded an immaterial cumulative effect adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income to retained earnings on the consolidated balance
sheet.
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). This standard requires the use of a forward-looking expected
credit loss impairment model for trade and other receivables, held-to-maturity debt securities, loans and other instruments. This standard also requires impairments
and recoveries for available-for-sale debt securities to be recorded through an allowance account and revises certain disclosure requirements. The Company
adopted this new accounting standard on January 1, 2020. The Company adopted the credit loss impairment model on a modified retrospective basis and recorded
an immaterial cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the adoption date. The Company adopted the available-for-sale debt security impairment
model on a prospective basis. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated operating results, cash flows or financial
condition.
Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement that is a Service Contract
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and other - Internal-Use Software (Topic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for
Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement that is a Service Contract. This standard requires a customer in a cloud computing arrangement
that is a service contract to follow the internal-use software guidance in Topic 350-40 to determine which implementation costs to capitalize as assets. The
Company adopted this new
116

accounting guidance on January 1, 2020 on a prospective basis. The implementation of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s
consolidated operating results, cash flows, financial condition or related disclosures.
Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Insurance Contracts
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-12, Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Contracts (Topic 944). This standard requires the
Company to review cash flow assumptions for its long-duration insurance contracts at least annually and recognize the effect of changes in future cash flow
assumptions in net income (loss). This standard also requires the Company to update discount rate assumptions quarterly and recognize the effect of changes in
these assumptions in other comprehensive income. The rate used to discount the Company’s liability for future policy benefits will be based on an estimate of the
yield for an upper-medium grade fixed-income instrument with a duration profile matching that of the Company’s liabilities. In addition, this standard changes the
amortization method for deferred acquisition costs and requires additional disclosures regarding the long duration insurance contract liabilities in the Company’s
interim and annual financial statements. The standard is effective for public companies for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning
after December 15, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating the effect that implementation of this standard will have on the Company’s consolidated operating
results, cash flows, financial condition and related disclosures.
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740). This standard simplifies the accounting for income
taxes by eliminating certain exceptions to the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740 related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation,
the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. The standard also
simplifies aspects of the accounting for franchise taxes and enacted changes in tax laws or rates and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up
in the tax basis of goodwill. The standard is effective for public companies for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December
15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the effect that implementation of this standard will have on the Company’s
consolidated operating results, cash flows, financial condition and related disclosures.
117

2.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
Acquisition of Aetna
On the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding shares and voting interests of Aetna for a combination of cash and stock. Under the
terms of the merger agreement, Aetna shareholders received $145.00 in cash and 0.8378 CVS Health shares for each Aetna share. The transaction valued Aetna at
approximately $212 per share or approximately $70 billion. Including the assumption of Aetna’s debt, the total value of the transaction was approximately $78
billion. The Company financed the cash portion of the purchase price through a combination of cash on hand and by issuing approximately $45 billion of new debt,
including senior notes and term loans. The Company acquired Aetna to help improve the consumer health care experience by combining Aetna’s health care
benefits products and services with CVS Health’s approximately 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 walk-in medical clinics and integrated pharmacy
capabilities with the goal of becoming the new, trusted front door to health care.
The transaction has been accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires, among other things, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed
to be recognized at their fair values at the date of acquisition. The following table summarizes the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the
date of acquisition:
In millions
Cash and cash equivalents
$
6,565
Accounts receivable
4,094
Other current assets
3,894
Investments (current and long-term)
17,984
Goodwill
47,755
Intangible assets
22,571
Other assets
8,249
Total assets acquired
111,112
Health care costs payable
5,302
Other current liabilities
9,940
Debt (current and long-term)
8,098
Deferred income taxes
4,608
Other long-term liabilities
13,078
Total liabilities assumed
41,026
Noncontrolling interests
320
Total consideration transferred
$
69,766
The Company’s assessment of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed was finalized during the fourth quarter of 2019. Measurement period
adjustments to assets acquired and liabilities assumed during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily were due to additional information received related to
certain intangible asset valuations and contingencies and the related impact on the accounting for income taxes and goodwill. There were no material income
statement measurement period adjustments recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The Company’s consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2018, included $5.6 billion of revenues and $146 million of income before income
tax provision associated with the operating results of Aetna from the Aetna Acquisition Date to December 31, 2018.
During the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, the Company incurred transaction costs of $147 million and $34 million, respectively, associated with the
Aetna Acquisition that were recorded within operating expenses.
Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Information
The following unaudited pro forma information presents a summary of the Company’s combined operating results for the years ended December 31, 2018 and
2017 as if the Aetna acquisition and the related financing transactions had occurred on January 1, 2017. The following pro forma financial information is not
necessarily indicative of the Company’s operating results as they
118

would have been had the acquisition been effected on the assumed date, nor is it necessarily an indication of trends in future results for a number of reasons,
including differences between the assumptions used to prepare the pro forma financial information, basic shares outstanding and dilutive equivalents, cost savings
from operating efficiencies, potential synergies, and the impact of incremental costs incurred in integrating the businesses.
 
Year Ended December 31,
In millions, except per share data
2018
2017
Total revenues
$
243,232
$
236,000
Income from continuing operations
1,152
6,813
Basic earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
0.89
$
5.25
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
0.88
$
5.21
The pro forma results for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 include adjustments related to the following purchase accounting and acquisition-related
items:
•
Elimination of intercompany transactions between CVS Health and Aetna;
•
Elimination of estimated foregone interest income associated with (i) cash assumed to have been used to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition and (ii)
adjusting the amortized cost of Aetna’s investment portfolio to fair value as of the completion of the Aetna Acquisition;
•
Elimination of historical intangible asset, deferred acquisition cost and capitalized software amortization expense and addition of amortization expense
based on the values of identified intangible assets;
•
Additional interest expense from (i) the long-term debt issued to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition and (ii) the amortization of the fair value adjustment
to assumed long-term debt.
•
Additional depreciation expense related to the adjustment of Aetna’s property and equipment to fair value;
•
Adjustments to align CVS Health’s and Aetna’s accounting policies;
•
Elimination of transaction related costs; and
•
Tax effects of the adjustments noted above.
Divestiture of Brazilian Subsidiary
 
On July 1, 2019, the Company sold its Brazilian subsidiary, Onofre, for an immaterial amount. Onofre operated 50 retail pharmacy stores, the results of which
historically had been reported within the Retail/LTC segment. The Company recorded a pre-tax loss on the divestiture of $205 million in the year ended December
31, 2019, which primarily relates to the elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income and is reflected in
operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
Divestiture of RxCrossroads Subsidiary
On January 2, 2018, the Company sold its RxCrossroads subsidiary, the results of which had historically been reported within the Retail/LTC segment, to
McKesson Corporation for $725 million. The Company recorded a pre-tax loss on the divestiture of $86 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 and
transaction costs associated with the sale of $9 million in the year ended December 31, 2017, each of which were reflected in operating expenses in the Company’s
consolidated statements of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
3.
Investments
Total investments at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
2019
2018
In millions
Current
Long-term
Total
Current
Long-term
Total
Debt securities available for sale
$
2,251
$
14,671
$
16,922
$
2,359
$
12,896
$
15,255
Mortgage loans
122
1,091
1,213
145
1,216
1,361
Other investments
—
1,552
1,552
18
1,620
1,638
Total investments
$
2,373
$
17,314
$
19,687
$
2,522
$
15,732
$
18,254
119

At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company held investments of $537 million and $531 million, respectively, related to the 2012 conversion of an existing
group annuity contract from a participating to a non-participating contract. The conversion occurred prior to the Aetna Acquisition. These investments are included
in the total investments of large case pensions supporting non-experience-rated products. Although these investments are not accounted for as Separate Accounts
assets, they are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business and only support future policy benefits obligations under
that group annuity contract.
Debt Securities
Debt securities available for sale at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
Amortized
Cost
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
Fair
Value
December 31, 2019
 
 
 
   
Debt securities:
 
 
 
   
U.S. government securities
$
1,791
$
62
$
(1)
$
1,852
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
2,202
108
(1)
2,309
U.S. corporate securities
7,167
573
(3)
7,737
Foreign securities
2,149
200
(1)
2,348
Residential mortgage-backed securities
508
25
—
533
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
654
46
—
700
Other asset-backed securities
1,397
13
(5)
1,405
Redeemable preferred securities
30
8
—
38
Total debt securities (1)
$
15,898
$
1,035
$
(11)
$
16,922
December 31, 2018
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
$
1,662
$
26
$
—
$
1,688
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
2,370
30
(1)
2,399
U.S. corporate securities
6,444
61
(16)
6,489
Foreign securities
2,355
31
(3)
2,383
Residential mortgage-backed securities
567
10
—
577
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
594
11
—
605
Other asset-backed securities
1,097
3
(15)
1,085
Redeemable preferred securities
30
—
(1)
29
Total debt securities (1)
$
15,119
$
172
$
(36)
$
15,255
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Investment risks associated with the Company’s experience-rated products generally do not impact the Company’s consolidated operating results. At December 31, 2019, debt securities
with a fair value of $965 million, gross unrealized capital gains of $83 million and no gross unrealized capital losses, and at December 31, 2018, debt securities with a fair value of $916
million, gross unrealized capital gains of $12 million and gross unrealized capital losses of $2 million were included in total debt securities, but support experience-rated products. Changes
in net unrealized capital gains (losses) on these securities are not reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income.
120

The amortized cost and fair value of debt securities at December 31, 2019 are shown below by contractual maturity.  Actual maturities may differ from contractual
maturities because securities may be restructured, called or prepaid, or the Company intends to sell a security prior to maturity.
In millions
Amortized Cost
Fair
Value
Due to mature:
 
Less than one year
$
1,028
$
1,034
One year through five years
5,507
5,702
After five years through ten years
3,081
3,296
Greater than ten years
3,723
4,252
Residential mortgage-backed securities
508
533
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
654
700
Other asset-backed securities
1,397
1,405
Total
$
15,898
$
16,922
Mortgage-Backed and Other Asset-Backed Securities
All of the Company’s residential mortgage-backed securities at December 31, 2019 were issued by the Government National Mortgage Association, the Federal
National Mortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and carry agency guarantees and explicit or implicit guarantees by the U.S.
Government. At December 31, 2019, the Company’s residential mortgage-backed securities had an average credit quality rating of AAA and a weighted average
duration of 3.3 years.
The Company’s commercial mortgage-backed securities have underlying loans that are dispersed throughout the United States. Significant market observable
inputs used to value these securities include loss severity and probability of default. At December 31, 2019, these securities had an average credit quality rating of
AAA and a weighted average duration of 6.1 years.
The Company’s other asset-backed securities have a variety of underlying collateral (e.g., automobile loans, credit card receivables, home equity loans and
commercial loans). Significant market observable inputs used to value these securities include the unemployment rate, loss severity and probability of default. At
December 31, 2019, these securities had an average credit quality rating of AA and a weighted average duration of 1.2 years.
121

Summarized below are the debt securities the Company held at December 31, 2019 and 2018 that were in an unrealized capital loss position, aggregated by the
length of time the investments have been in that position:
Less than 12 months
Greater than 12 months
Total
In millions, except number of
securities
Number of
Securities
Fair
Value
Unrealized
Losses
Number of
Securities
Fair
Value
Unrealized
Losses
Number of
Securities
Fair
Value
Unrealized
Losses
December 31, 2019
Debt securities:
 
 
U.S. government securities
52
$
168
$
1
—
$
—
$
—
52
$
168
$
1
States, municipalities and
political subdivisions
66
115
1
2
5
—
68
120
1
U.S. corporate securities
181
305
2
2
—
1
183
305
3
Foreign securities
39
75
1
—
—
—
39
75
1
Residential mortgage-
backed securities
30
16
—
9
—
—
39
16
—
Commercial mortgage-
backed securities
16
49
—
—
—
—
16
49
—
Other asset-backed
securities
138
254
1
187
182
4
325
436
5
Total debt securities
522
$
982
$
6
200
$
187
$
5
722
$
1,169
$
11
December 31, 2018
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
8
$
26
$
—
—
$
—
$
—
8
$
26
$
—
States, municipalities and
political subdivisions
54
86
1
—
—
—
54
86
1
U.S. corporate securities
1,399
1,431
16
—
—
—
1,399
1,431
16
Foreign securities
243
314
3
—
—
—
243
314
3
Residential mortgage-
backed securities
45
1
—
—
—
—
45
1
—
Other asset-backed
securities
516
528
15
—
—
—
516
528
15
Redeemable preferred
securities
14
23
1
—
—
—
14
23
1
Total debt securities
2,279
$
2,409
$
36
—
$
—
$
—
2,279
$
2,409
$
36
The Company reviewed the securities in the tables above and concluded that they are performing assets generating investment income to support the needs of the
Company’s business. In performing this review, the Company considered factors such as the quality of the investment security based on research performed by the
Company’s internal credit analysts and external rating agencies and the prospects of realizing the carrying value of the security based on the investment’s current
prospects for recovery. As of December 31, 2019, the Company did not intend to sell these securities, and did not believe it was more likely than not that it would
be required to sell these securities prior to the anticipated recovery of their amortized cost basis. Since Aetna’s investment portfolio was measured at fair value as
of the Aetna Acquisition Date, each of the securities as of December 31, 2018 were in an unrealized loss position for less than 12 months.
122

The maturity dates for debt securities in an unrealized capital loss position at December 31, 2019 were as follows:
 
Supporting experience-rated products
Supporting remaining
products
Total
In millions
Fair
Value
Unrealized
Losses
Fair
Value
Unrealized
Losses
Fair
Value
Unrealized
Losses
Due to mature:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less than one year
$
—
$
—
$
12
$
—
$
12
$
—
One year through five years
3
—
285
1
288
1
After five years through ten years
9
—
151
2
160
2
Greater than ten years
11
—
197
3
208
3
Residential mortgage-backed securities
—
—
16
—
16
—
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
—
—
49
—
49
—
Other asset-backed securities
10
—
426
5
436
5
Total
$
33
$
—
$
1,136
$
11
$
1,169
$
11
Mortgage Loans
The Company’s mortgage loans are collateralized by commercial real estate. During 2019 and subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date in 2018, the Company had
the following activity in its mortgage loan portfolio:
In millions
2019
2018
New mortgage loans
$
131
$
4
Mortgage loans fully-repaid
234
27
Mortgage loans foreclosed
—
—
The Company assesses mortgage loans on a regular basis for credit impairments, and annually assigns a credit quality indicator to each loan. The Company’s credit
quality indicator is internally developed and categorizes its portfolio on a scale from 1 to 7. These indicators are based upon several factors, including current loan-
to-value ratios, property condition, market trends, creditworthiness of the borrower and deal structure.
•
Category 1 - Represents loans of superior quality.
•
Categories 2 to 4 - Represent loans where credit risk is minimal to acceptable; however, these loans may display some susceptibility to economic changes.
•
Categories 5 and 6 - Represent loans where credit risk is not substantial, but these loans warrant management’s close attention.
•
Category 7 - Represents loans where collections are potentially at risk; if necessary, an impairment is recorded.
Based upon the Company’s assessments at December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s mortgage loans were given the following credit quality indicators:
In millions, except credit ratings indicator
2019
2018
1
$
58
$
42
2 to 4
1,143
1,301
5 and 6
12
18
7
—
—
Total
$
1,213
$
1,361
123

At December 31, 2019 scheduled mortgage loan principal repayments were as follows:
In millions
2020
$
122
2021
235
2022
200
2023
81
2024
193
Thereafter
382
Total
$
1,213
Net Investment Income
Sources of net investment income for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2019
2018
Debt securities
$
589
$
61
Mortgage loans
71
6
Other investments
194
593
Gross investment income
854
660
Investment expenses
(42)
(3)
Net investment income (excluding net realized capital gains or losses)
812
657
Net realized capital gains (1)
199
3
Net investment income (2)
$
1,011
$
660
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Net realized capital gains are net of other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) losses on debt securities recognized in the consolidated statements of operations of $24 million for the year
ended December 31, 2019. There were no material OTTI losses on debt securities for the year ended December 31, 2018.
(2)
Net investment income includes $44 million and $4 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to investments supporting experience-rated products.
The Company’s net investment income was $21 million in 2017, relating to interest income on cash equivalents and debt securities. The Company did not have any
material realized capital gains or losses during 2017.
Capital gains and losses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to investments in equity securities held as of December 31, 2019 were not
material.
Excluding amounts related to experience-rated products, proceeds from the sale of available for sale debt securities and the related gross realized capital gains and
losses in the year ended December 31, 2019 and subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date in 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2019
2018
Proceeds from sales
$
4,773
$
389
Gross realized capital gains
146
2
Gross realized capital losses
(17)
(2)
4.
Fair Value
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires certain assets and liabilities to be reflected at their fair
value and others to be reflected on another basis, such as an adjusted historical cost basis. In this note, the Company provides details on the fair value of financial
assets and liabilities and how it determines those fair values. The Company presents this information for those financial instruments that are measured at fair value
for which the change in fair value impacts net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health or other comprehensive income separately from other financial assets and
liabilities.
124

Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
Certain of the Company’s financial instruments are measured at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. The fair values of these instruments are based on
valuations that include inputs that can be classified within one of three levels of a hierarchy established by GAAP.  The following are the levels of the hierarchy
and a brief description of the type of valuation information (“valuation inputs”) that qualifies a financial asset or liability for each level:
•
Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
•
Level 2 – Valuation inputs other than Level 1 that are based on observable market data.  These include: quoted prices for similar assets in active markets,
quoted prices for identical assets in inactive markets, valuation inputs that are observable that are not prices (such as interest rates and credit risks) and
valuation inputs that are derived from or corroborated by observable markets.
•
Level 3 – Developed from unobservable data, reflecting the Company’s assumptions.
Financial assets and liabilities are classified based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the valuation. When quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets and liabilities are available, the Company uses these quoted market prices to determine the fair value of financial assets and liabilities and classifies
these assets and liabilities in Level 1. In other cases where a quoted market price for identical assets and liabilities in an active market is either not available or not
observable, the Company estimates fair value using valuation methodologies based on available and observable market information or by using a matrix pricing
model. These financial assets and liabilities are classified in Level 2. If quoted market prices are not available, the Company determines fair value using broker
quotes or an internal analysis of each investment’s financial performance and cash flow projections. Thus, financial assets and liabilities may be classified in Level
3 even though there may be some significant inputs that may be observable.
The following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for the Company’s financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value, including the
general classification of such assets and liabilities pursuant to the valuation hierarchy.
Cash and Cash Equivalents – The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents approximates fair value as maturities are less than three months. When
quoted prices are available in an active market, cash equivalents are classified in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. Fair values of cash equivalent
instruments that do not trade on a regular basis in active markets are classified as Level 2.
Debt Securities – Where quoted prices are available in an active market, debt securities are classified in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. The
Company’s Level 1 debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Treasury securities.
The fair values of the Company’s Level 2 debt securities are obtained using models, such as matrix pricing, which use quoted market prices of debt
securities with similar characteristics or discounted cash flows to estimate fair value. The Company reviews these prices to ensure they are based on
observable market inputs that include quoted prices for similar assets in active markets, quoted prices for identical assets in inactive markets and inputs
that are observable that are not prices (such as interest rates and credit risks). The Company also reviews the methodologies and the assumptions used to
calculate prices from these observable inputs. On a quarterly basis, the Company selects a sample of its Level 2 debt securities’ prices and compares them
to prices provided by a secondary source. Variances over a specified threshold are identified and reviewed to confirm the price provided by the primary
source represents an appropriate estimate of fair value. In addition, the Company’s internal investment team consistently compares the prices obtained for
select Level 2 debt securities to the team’s own independent estimates of fair value for those securities. The Company obtained one price for each of its
Level 2 debt securities and did not adjust any of those prices at December 31, 2019 or 2018.
The Company also values certain debt securities using Level 3 inputs. For Level 3 debt securities, fair values are determined by outside brokers or, in the
case of certain private placement securities, are priced internally. Outside brokers determine the value of these debt securities through a combination of
their knowledge of the current pricing environment and market flows. The Company did not have any broker quoted debt securities at December 31, 2019.
The total fair value of broker quoted debt securities at December 31, 2018 was $50 million. The Company obtained one non-binding broker quote for each
of these Level 3 debt securities and did not adjust any of those quotes at December 31, 2018. Examples of these broker quoted Level 3 debt securities
include certain U.S. and foreign corporate securities and certain of the Company’s commercial mortgage-backed securities as well as other asset-backed
securities. For some private placement securities, the Company’s internal staff determines the value of these debt securities by analyzing spreads of
corporate and sector indices as well as interest spreads of comparable public
125

bonds. Examples of these private placement Level 3 debt securities include certain U.S. and foreign securities and certain tax-exempt municipal securities.
Equity Securities – The Company currently has two classifications of equity securities: those that are publicly traded and those that are privately
placed. Publicly-traded equity securities are classified in Level 1 because quoted prices are available for these securities in an active market. For privately
placed equity securities, there is no active market; therefore, these securities are classified in Level 3 because the Company prices these securities through
an internal analysis of each investment’s financial statements and cash flow projections. Significant unobservable inputs consist of earnings and revenue
multiples, discount for lack of marketability and comparability adjustments. An increase or decrease in any of these unobservable inputs would result in a
change in the fair value measurement, which may be significant.
There were no financial liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2019 or 2018. Financial assets
measured at fair value on a recurring basis on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2019
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
3,397
$
2,286
$
—
$
5,683
Debt securities:
 
 
 
 
U.S. government securities
1,785
67
—
1,852
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
—
2,309
—
2,309
U.S. corporate securities
—
7,700
37
7,737
Foreign securities
—
2,348
—
2,348
Residential mortgage-backed securities
—
533
—
533
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
—
700
—
700
Other asset-backed securities
—
1,405
—
1,405
Redeemable preferred securities
—
26
12
38
Total debt securities
1,785
15,088
49
16,922
Equity securities
34
—
39
73
Total
$
5,216
$
17,374
$
88
$
22,678
December 31, 2018
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
2,619
$
1,440
$
—
$
4,059
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
1,597
91
—
1,688
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
—
2,399
—
2,399
U.S. corporate securities
—
6,422
67
6,489
Foreign securities
—
2,380
3
2,383
Residential mortgage-backed securities
—
577
—
577
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
—
605
—
605
Other asset-backed securities
—
1,085
—
1,085
Redeemable preferred securities
—
22
7
29
Total debt securities
1,597
13,581
77
15,255
Equity securities
19
—
54
73
Total
$
4,235
$
15,021
$
131
$
19,387
126

There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. The changes in the balances of Level 3 financial assets
during 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Foreign
securities
U.S.
corporate
securities
Equity
securities
Redeemable
preferred
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
3
$
67
$
54
$
7
$
131
Net realized and unrealized capital gains (losses):
Included in earnings 
—
(33)
13
—
(20)
Included in other comprehensive income
—
18
—
5
23
Purchases
2
3
13
—
18
Sales
—
(6)
(41)
—
(47)
Settlements
(1)
(12)
—
—
(13)
 Transfers out of Level 3, net
(4)
—
—
—
(4)
Ending balance
$
—
$
37
$
39
$
12
$
88
The total gross transfers into (out of) Level 3 during the year ended December 31, 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Gross transfers into Level 3
$
—
Gross transfers out of Level 3
(4)
Net transfers out of Level 3
$
(4)
The increase in the balance of Level 3 financial assets during 2018 relates to investments acquired in the Aetna Acquisition, which occurred on November 28,
2018. There were no transfers into or out of Level 3 subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date in 2018.
Financial Instruments Not Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
The carrying value and estimated fair value classified by level of fair value hierarchy for financial instruments carried on the consolidated balance sheets at
adjusted cost or contract value at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
Carrying
Value
 Estimated Fair Value
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2019
Assets:
 
Mortgage loans
$
1,213
$
—
$
—
$
1,239
$
1,239
Equity securities (1)
149
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Liabilities:
Investment contract liabilities:
With a fixed maturity
5
—
—
5
5
Without a fixed maturity
372
—
—
392
392
Long-term debt
68,480
74,306
—
—
74,306
127

Carrying
Value
 Estimated Fair Value
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2018
Assets:
Mortgage loans
$
1,361
$
—
$
—
$
1,366
$
1,366
Equity securities (1)
140
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Liabilities:
Investment contract liabilities:
With a fixed maturity
5
—
—
5
5
Without a fixed maturity
382
—
—
357
357
Long-term debt
72,709
71,252
—
—
71,252
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
It was not practical to estimate the fair value of these cost-method investments as it represents shares of unlisted companies. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional
information regarding the valuation of cost method investments.
Separate Accounts Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
Separate Accounts assets relate to the Company’s large case pensions products which represent funds maintained to meet specific objectives of contract
holders. Since contract holders bear the investment risk of these assets, a corresponding Separate Accounts liability has been established equal to the assets. These
assets and liabilities are carried at fair value. Net investment income and capital gains and losses on Separate Accounts assets accrue directly to such contract
holders. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims arising from the Company’s other businesses. Deposits, withdrawals, net
investment income and realized and unrealized capital gains and losses on Separate Accounts assets are not reflected in the consolidated statements of operations,
shareholders’ equity or cash flows.
Separate Accounts assets include debt and equity securities. The valuation methodologies used for these assets are similar to the methodologies described above in
this Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value.’’ Separate Accounts assets also include investments in common/collective trusts that are carried at fair value. Common/collective trusts
invest in other investment funds otherwise known as the underlying funds. The Separate Accounts’ interests in the common/collective trust funds are based on the
fair values of the investments of the underlying funds and therefore are classified in Level 2. The assets in the underlying funds primarily consist of equity
securities. Investments in common/collective trust funds are valued at their respective net asset value (“NAV”) per share/unit on the valuation date.
Separate Accounts financial assets at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
2
$
143
$
—
$
145
$
2
$
189
$
—
$
191
Debt securities
1,224
2,589
—
3,813
782
2,500
4
3,286
Equity securities
—
2
—
2
—
3
—
3
Common/collective trusts
—
499
—
499
—
404
—
404
Total
$
1,226
$
3,233
$
—
$
4,459
$
784
$
3,096
$
4
$
3,884
During 2019 and 2018, there were no transfers of Separate Accounts financial assets between Levels 1 and 2. During 2019 and 2018, the Company had an
immaterial amount of gross transfers of Separate Accounts financial assets into or out of Level 3.
Offsetting Financial Assets and Liabilities
Certain financial assets and liabilities are offset in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets or are subject to master netting arrangements or similar agreements
with the applicable counterparty. Financial liabilities subject to offsetting and enforceable master netting arrangements were $3 million as of December 31, 2019.
Financial assets subject to offsetting and enforceable master netting arrangements were $13 million as of December 31, 2018.
128

5.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Goodwill
Below is a summary of the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by segment for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
Pharmacy
Services
    
Retail/
LTC
    
Health Care
Benefits
Total
Balance at December 31, 2017
$
21,819
$
16,632
$
—
$
38,451
Acquisitions
1,569
735
44,484
46,788
Foreign currency translation adjustments
—
(14)
—
(14)
Divestiture of RxCrossroads subsidiary
—
(398)
—
(398)
Impairments
—
(6,149)
—
(6,149)
Balance at December 31, 2018
23,388
10,806
44,484
78,678
Segment realignment
194
—
(194)
—
Purchase accounting adjustments
—
—
1,071
1,071
Other
(1)
1
—
—
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
23,581
$
10,807
$
45,361
$
79,749
Cumulative goodwill impairments were $6.1 billion at both December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 reflect the following activity:
Segment Realignment
During 2019, the Company realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and reflect how the CODM reviews
information and manages the business as discussed in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies.’’ As a result of this realignment, the Company reallocated the
goodwill balance of the Pharmacy Services and Health Care Benefits segments based on a relative fair value approach.
 
Aetna Acquisition
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. The majority of the preliminary valuation of goodwill associated with the Aetna
Acquisition was recorded in the Health Care Benefits segment. The Company also allocated a portion of such goodwill to the Retail/LTC and Pharmacy Services
segments related to the fair value of identified synergies that are expected to directly benefit those segments. During 2019, the Company finalized its purchase
accounting assessment and recorded the applicable measurement period adjustments, including an adjustment to the acquired goodwill. See Note 2 ‘‘Acquisitions
and Divestitures’’ for further discussion regarding the Aetna Acquisition.
LTC
During 2018, the LTC reporting unit continued to experience industry-wide challenges that impacted management’s ability to grow the business at the rate that was
originally estimated when the Company acquired Omnicare, Inc. (“Omnicare”) and when the 2017 annual goodwill impairment test was performed. Those
challenges include lower client retention rates, lower occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities, the deteriorating financial health of numerous skilled nursing
facility customers which resulted in a number of customer bankruptcies in 2018, and continued facility reimbursement pressures. In June 2018, LTC management
submitted its initial budget for 2019 and updated the 2018 annual forecast which showed a deterioration in the projected financial results for the remainder of 2018
and in 2019, which also caused management to update its long-term forecast beyond 2019. Based on these updated projections, management determined that there
were indicators that the LTC reporting unit’s goodwill may be impaired and, accordingly, management performed an interim goodwill impairment test as of June
30, 2018. The results of that interim impairment test showed that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in a $3.9
billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the second quarter of 2018. The fair value of the LTC reporting unit was determined using a combination of a
discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. In addition to the lower financial projections, changes in risk-free interest rates and lower market
multiples of peer group companies contributed to the amount of the 2018 goodwill impairment charges.
129

During the third quarter of 2018, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill and concluded there was no impairment of goodwill or
trade names.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, the LTC reporting unit missed its forecast primarily due to operational issues and customer liquidity issues, including one
significant customer bankruptcy. Additionally, LTC management submitted an updated final budget for 2019 which showed significant additional deterioration in
the projected financial results for 2019 compared to the analyses performed in the second and third quarters of 2018 primarily due to continued industry and
operational challenges, which also caused management to make further updates to its long-term forecast beyond 2019. The updated projections reflected continued
industry wide challenges including lower occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities, significant deterioration in the financial health of numerous skilled nursing
facility customers and continued facility reimbursement pressures. Based on these updated projections, management determined that there were indicators that the
LTC reporting unit’s goodwill may be further impaired and, accordingly, management performed an interim goodwill impairment test during the fourth quarter of
2018. The results of that interim impairment test showed that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in an additional
$2.2 billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2018. In addition to the lower financial projections, lower market multiples of peer group
companies also contributed to the amount of the fourth quarter 2018 goodwill impairment charge. The fair value of the LTC reporting unit was determined using a
methodology consistent with the methodology described above for the analyses performed during the second and third quarters of 2018.
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill. The results of these impairment tests indicated that
there was no impairment of goodwill. As of December 31, 2019, the remaining goodwill balance in the LTC reporting unit was $431 million.
RxCrossroads
During 2017, the Company began pursuing various strategic alternatives for its RxCrossroads reporting unit. In connection with this effort, the Company
performed an interim goodwill impairment test in the second quarter of 2017. The results of that impairment test showed that the fair value of the RxCrossroads
reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in a $135 million pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the second quarter of 2017.
The TCJA was enacted on December 22, 2017 and reduced the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018 (see Note 10
‘‘Income Taxes’’). As a result, the RxCrossroads deferred income tax liabilities were reduced by $47 million and an income tax benefit of $47 million was
recorded in the 2017 statement of operations. The reduction in the deferred income tax liabilities increased the carrying value of the RxCrossroads reporting unit by
$47 million which triggered an additional goodwill impairment charge in the RxCrossroads reporting unit of $46 million during the fourth quarter of 2017.
On January 2, 2018, the Company sold its RxCrossroads subsidiary to McKesson Corporation for $725 million, at which time the remaining goodwill of this
reporting unit was removed from the consolidated balance sheets.
130

Intangible Assets
The following table is a summary of the Company’s intangible assets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions, except weighted average life
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Net
Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average
Life (years)
2019
Trademarks (indefinite-lived)
$
10,498
$
—
$
10,498
N/A
Customer contracts/relationships and covenants not to compete
25,447
(8,128)
17,319
14.8
Technology
1,060
(386)
674
3.0
Provider networks
4,200
(229)
3,971
20.0
Value of Business Acquired
590
(63)
527
20.0
Other
364
(232)
132
8.1
Total
$
42,159
$
(9,038)
$
33,121
15.1
2018
Trademarks (indefinite-lived)
$
10,498
$
—
$
10,498
N/A
Customer contracts/relationships and covenants not to compete
26,213
(6,349)
19,864
14.8
Technology
1,060
(31)
1,029
3.0
Provider networks
4,200
(19)
4,181
20.0
Value of Business Acquired
590
(7)
583
20.0
Favorable leases and other (1)
1,177
(808)
369
17.1
Total
$
43,738
$
(7,214)
$
36,524
15.3
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Upon adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases, the Company’s favorable leases were reclassified from an intangible asset to a reduction of the right-of-use asset. Refer to Note 1 ‘‘Significant
Accounting Policies’’ for additional information on the adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases.
Amortization expense for intangible assets totaled $2.4 billion, $1.0 billion and $817 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
The projected annual amortization expense for the Company’s intangible assets for the next five years is as follows:
In millions
2020
$
2,283
2021
2,186
2022
1,816
2023
1,786
2024
1,743
6.
Leases
The Company adopted ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASC 842”) on January 1, 2019 on a modified retrospective basis. As a result, the Company’s lease
disclosures as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019 are reported under ASC 842. Comparative financial information for prior periods has not been restated
and continues to be reported under ASC 840, the lease accounting standard in effect for those periods.
Disclosure Subsequent to the Adoption of the New Lease Accounting Standard (ASU 2016-02)
The Company leases most of its retail stores and mail order facilities and certain distribution centers and corporate offices under operating or finance leases,
typically with initial terms of 15 to 25 years. The Company also leases certain equipment and other assets under operating or finance leases, typically with initial
terms of 3 to 10 years.
In addition, the Company leases pharmacy space at the stores of another retail chain for which the noncancelable contractual term of the pharmacy lease
arrangement exceeds the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings. For these pharmacy
131

lease arrangements, the Company concluded that for accounting purposes the lease term was the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings. Consequently,
most of these individual pharmacy leases are finance leases.
The following table is a summary of the components of net lease cost for the year ended December 31, 2019:
In millions
2019
Operating lease cost
$
2,720
Finance lease cost:
Amortization of right-of-use assets
38
Interest on lease liabilities
44
Total finance lease costs
82
Short-term lease costs
24
Variable lease costs
581
Less: sublease income
50
Net lease cost
$
3,357
Supplemental cash flow information related to leases for the year ended December 31, 2019 is as follows:
In millions
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows paid for operating leases
$
2,701
Operating cash flows paid for interest portion of finance leases
44
Financing cash flows paid for principal portion of finance leases
26
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for lease obligations:
Operating leases
1,824
Finance leases
283
132

Supplemental balance sheet information related to leases as of December 31, 2019 is as follows:
In millions, except remaining lease term and discount rate
Operating leases:
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$
20,860
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
$
1,596
Long-term operating lease liabilities
18,926
Total operating lease liabilities
$
20,522
Finance leases: (1)
Property and equipment, gross
$
790
Accumulated depreciation (2)
(38)
Property and equipment, net
$
752
Current portion of long-term debt
$
27
Long-term debt
781
Total finance lease liabilities
$
808
Weighted average remaining lease term (in years)
Operating leases
13.8
Finance leases
20.5
Weighted average discount rate
Operating leases
4.6%
Finance leases
6.7%
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Finance lease right-of-use assets are included within property and equipment, net and the respective finance lease liabilities are included in current portion of long-term debt and long-term
debt on the consolidated balance sheets.
(2)
In accordance with ASC 842, upon adoption the net carrying value of the prior capital leases became the initial basis of the Company’s finance leases. As a result, upon adoption there was
no accumulated amortization associated with such finance leases.
The following table summarizes the maturity of lease liabilities under finance and operating leases as of December 31, 2019:
In millions
Finance 
Leases
Operating 
Leases (1)
Total
2020
$
84
$
2,699
$
2,783
2021
82
2,598
2,680
2022
79
2,444
2,523
2023
77
2,335
2,412
2024
76
2,103
2,179
Thereafter
1,056
15,654
16,710
Total lease payments (2)
1,454
27,833
29,287
Less: imputed interest
(646)
(7,311)
(7,957)
Total lease liabilities
$
808
$
20,522
$
21,330
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Future operating lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of $315 million due in the future under noncancelable subleases.
(2)
The Company leases pharmacy and clinic space from Target Corporation. Amounts related to such finance and operating leases are reflected above. Pharmacy lease amounts due in excess
of the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings of approximately $2.2 billion are not reflected in this table since the estimated economic life of the buildings is shorter than the
contractual term of the pharmacy lease arrangement.
133

Sale-Leaseback Transactions
The Company finances a portion of its store development program through sale-leaseback transactions. The properties are generally sold at net book value, which
generally approximates fair value, and the resulting leases generally qualify and are accounted for as operating leases. The operating leases that resulted from these
transactions are included in the tables above. The Company does not have any retained or contingent interests in the stores and does not provide any guarantees,
other than a guarantee of lease payments, in connection with the sale-leaseback transactions. Proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions totaled $5 million in 2019.
Store Rationalization Charges
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company performed a review of its retail stores and determined it would close 46 underperforming retail pharmacy stores
during the second quarter of 2019. As a result, management determined that there were indicators of impairment with respect to the impacted stores, including the
associated operating lease right-of-use assets. Accordingly, an interim long-lived asset impairment test was performed. The results of the impairment test indicated
that the fair value of each store asset group was lower than the carrying value. The fair value was determined using a discounted cash flow method based on
estimated sublease income. In the three months ended March 31, 2019, the Company recorded a store rationalization charge of $135 million, primarily related to
these operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges, which was recorded within operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment.
During the third quarter of 2019, in connection with its annual budgeting process, the Company performed an updated review of its retail stores and determined it
would close an additional 22 underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the first quarter of 2020. As a result, management determined that there were
indicators of impairment with respect to the impacted stores, including the associated operating lease right-of-use assets. Accordingly, an interim long-lived asset
impairment test was performed. The results of the impairment test indicated that the fair value of each store asset group was lower than the carrying value. The fair
value was determined using a discounted cash flow method based on estimated sublease income. In the three months ended September 30, 2019, the Company
recorded a store rationalization charge of $96 million, primarily related to these operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges, which was recorded within
operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment.
Comparative Disclosure Prior to the Adoption of the New Lease Accounting Standard (ASU 2016-02)
The following table is a summary of the Company’s net rental expense for operating leases for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017:
In millions
2018
2017
Minimum rentals
$
2,528
$
2,455
Contingent rentals
28
29
Rental expense
2,556
2,484
Less: sublease income
(21)
(24)
Total rental expense, net
$
2,535
$
2,460
The amount of property and equipment under capital leases at December 31, 2018 was as follows:
In millions
2018
Property and equipment under capital leases
$
582
Accumulated amortization of property and equipment under capital leases
(163)
Property and equipment under capital leases, net
$
419
Sale-Leaseback Transactions
The Company finances a portion of its store development program through sale-leaseback transactions. The properties are generally sold at net book value, which
generally approximates fair value, and the resulting leases generally qualify and are accounted for as operating leases. The Company does not have any retained or
contingent interests in the stores and does not provide any guarantees, other than a guarantee of lease payments, in connection with the sale-leaseback transactions.
There were no sale-leaseback transactions in 2018. Proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions totaled $265 million in 2017.
134

Store Rationalization Charges
Prior to the adoption of ASC 842, when the Company closed a facility, the present value of estimated unrecoverable costs, including the remaining lease obligation
less estimated sublease income and the book value of abandoned property and equipment, were charged to expense. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the
Company did not recognize any significant charges related to facility closing costs.
In December 2016, the Company announced an enterprise streamlining initiative designed to reduce costs and enhance operating efficiencies to allow the Company
to be more competitive in the current health care environment. During the year ended December 31, 2017, in connection with that enterprise streamlining initiative,
the Company closed 71 retail stores and recorded charges of $215 million within operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment. The charges primarily consist of
provisions for the present value of noncancelable lease obligations. The noncancelable lease obligations associated with stores closed during the year ended
December 31, 2017 extend through the year 2039.
The long-term portion of the lease obligations associated with all outstanding facility closings was $269 million as of December 31, 2018 and was recorded in other
long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. Upon adoption of ASC 842, the closed store lease obligation was reclassified from a liability to a reduction
of the right-of-use asset. Refer to Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional discussion regarding the adoption of ASC 842.
7.
Health Care Costs Payable
The following is information about incurred and cumulative paid health care claims development as of December 31, 2019, net of reinsurance, and the total IBNR
liabilities plus expected development on reported claims included within the net incurred claims amounts. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for
information on how the Company estimates IBNR reserves and health care costs payable as well as changes to those methodologies, if any. The Company’s
estimate of IBNR liabilities is primarily based on trend and completion factors. Claim frequency is not used in the calculation of the Company’s liability. In
addition, it is impracticable to disclose claim frequency information for health care claims due to the Company’s inability to gather consistent claim frequency
information across its multiple claims processing systems. Any claim frequency count disclosure would not be comparable across the Company’s different claim
processing systems and would not be consistent from period to period based on the volume of claims processed through each system. As a result, health care claim
count frequency is not included in the disclosures below.
The Company acquired Aetna on November 28, 2018. The information about incurred and cumulative paid health care claims development in the table below is
presented on a retrospective basis, under which the Company included Aetna’s historical development of health care claims for all years presented in the table. The
information about incurred and paid health care claims development for the year ended December 31, 2018 is presented as required unaudited supplemental
information.
In millions
Incurred Health Care Claims,
Net of Reinsurance
For the Years Ended December 31,
Date of Service
2018
2019
(Unaudited)
2018
$
44,962
$
44,621
2019
51,426
Total
$
96,047
In millions
Cumulative Paid Health Care Claims,
Net of Reinsurance
For the Years Ended December 31,
Date of Service
2018
2019
(Unaudited)
2018
$
39,440
$
44,373
2019
44,987
Total
$
89,360
All outstanding liabilities for health care costs payable prior to 2018, net of reinsurance
56
Total outstanding liabilities for health care costs payable, net of reinsurance
$
6,743
135

At December 31, 2019, the Company’s liabilities for IBNR plus expected development on reported claims totaled approximately $5.0 billion. Substantially all of
the Company’s liabilities for IBNR plus expected development on reported claims at December 31, 2019 related to the current calendar year.
The reconciliation of the December 31, 2019 health care net incurred and paid claims development tables to the health care costs payable liability on the
consolidated balance sheet is as follows:
In millions
December 31, 2019
Short-duration health care costs payable, net of reinsurance
$
6,743
Reinsurance recoverables
5
Premium deficiency reserve
4
Insurance lines other than short duration
127
Total health care costs payable
$
6,879
 
Prior to the Aetna Acquisition on November 28, 2018, the Company’s health care costs payable balance was immaterial and related to unpaid pharmacy claims for
its SilverScript PDP. Accordingly, the Company has not provided disclosures for health care costs payable for periods prior to 2018. The following table shows the
components of the change in health care costs payable during 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
2018
Health care costs payable, beginning of the period
$
6,147
$
5
Less: Reinsurance recoverables
4
—
Health care costs payable, beginning of the period, net
6,143
5
Acquisitions, net
—
5,357
Reclassification from pharmacy claims and discounts payable (1)
—
776
Add: Components of incurred health care costs
  Current year
52,723
6,594
  Prior years
(524)
(42)
Total incurred health care costs (2)
52,199
6,552
Less: Claims paid
  Current year
46,158
6,303
  Prior years
5,314
260
Total claims paid
51,472
6,563
Add: Premium deficiency reserve
4
16
Health care costs payable, end of period, net
6,874
6,143
Add: Reinsurance recoverables
5
4
Health care costs payable, end of period
$
6,879
$
6,147
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
As of the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company reclassified $776 million of the Pharmacy Services segment’s unpaid retail pharmacy claims to third parties from pharmacy claims and
discounts payable to health care costs payable as the third party liability was incurred to support the Health Care Benefits segment’s insured members.
(2)
Total incurred health care costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 in the table above exclude (i) $4 million and $16 million, respectively, related to a premium deficiency
reserve related to the Company’s Medicaid products, (ii) $41 million and $4 million, respectively, of benefit costs recorded in the Health Care Benefits segment that are included in other
insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and (iii) $285 million and $22 million, respectively, of benefit costs recorded in the Corporate/Other segment that are included in
other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company’s estimates of prior years’ health care costs payable decreased by $524 million in 2019 because claims were settled for amounts less than originally
estimated (i.e., the amount of claims incurred was lower than originally estimated), primarily due to lower health care cost trends as well as the actual claim
submission time being faster than originally assumed (i.e., the Company’s completion factors were higher than originally assumed) in estimating health care costs
payable at the end of the prior year. This development does not directly correspond to an increase in the Company’s operating results as these reductions were
offset by estimated current period health care costs when the Company established the estimate of the current year health care costs payable.
136

8.
Borrowings and Credit Agreements
The following table is a summary of the Company’s borrowings as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
2018
Short-term debt
Commercial paper
$
—
$
720
Long-term debt
2.2% senior notes due March 2019
—
375
2.25% senior notes due August 2019
—
850
3.125% senior notes due March 2020
723
2,000
Floating rate notes due March 2020 (2.515% and 3.397% at December 31, 2019 and 2018)
277
1,000
2.8% senior notes due July 2020
2,750
2,750
3.35% senior notes due March 2021
2,038
3,000
Floating rate notes due March 2021 (2.605% and 3.487% at December 31, 2019 and 2018)
1,000
1,000
4.125% senior notes due May 2021
222
550
2.125% senior notes due June 2021
1,750
1,750
4.125% senior notes due June 2021
203
500
5.45% senior notes due June 2021
187
600
3-year tranche term loan due November 2021
—
3,000
3.5% senior notes due July 2022
1,500
1,500
2.75% senior notes due November 2022
1,000
1,000
2.75% senior notes due December 2022
1,250
1,250
4.75% senior notes due December 2022
399
399
3.7% senior notes due March 2023
6,000
6,000
2.8% senior notes due June 2023
1,300
1,300
4% senior notes due December 2023
1,250
1,250
2.625% senior notes due August 2024
1,000
—
3.375% senior notes due August 2024
650
650
3.5% senior notes due November 2024
750
750
5% senior notes due December 2024
299
299
4.1% senior notes due March 2025
5,000
5,000
3.875% senior notes due July 2025
2,828
2,828
2.875% senior notes due June 2026
1,750
1,750
3% senior notes due August 2026
750
—
6.25% senior notes due June 2027
372
372
4.3% senior notes due March 2028
9,000
9,000
3.25% senior notes due August 2029
1,750
—
4.875% senior notes due July 2035
652
652
6.625% senior notes due June 2036
771
771
6.75% senior notes due December 2037
533
533
4.78% senior notes due March 2038
5,000
5,000
6.125% senior notes due September 2039
447
447
5.75% senior notes due May 2041
133
133
4.5% senior notes due May 2042
500
500
4.125% senior notes due November 2042
500
500
5.3% senior notes due December 2043
750
750
4.75% senior notes due March 2044
375
375
5.125% senior notes due July 2045
3,500
3,500
3.875% senior notes due August 2047
1,000
1,000
5.05% senior notes due March 2048
8,000
8,000
Finance lease liabilities
808
642
Other
279
19
Total debt principal
69,246
74,265
Debt premiums
262
302

Debt discounts and deferred financing costs
(1,028)
(1,138)
68,480
73,429
Less:
Short-term debt (commercial paper)
—
(720)
Current portion of long-term debt
(3,781)
(1,265)
Long-term debt
$
64,699
$
71,444
137

The following is a summary of the Company’s required repayments of debt principal due during each of the next five years and thereafter, as of December 31,
2019:
In millions
2020
$
3,754
2021
5,404
2022
4,153
2023
8,554
2024
2,704
Thereafter
43,869
Total
68,438
Finance lease liabilities (1)
808
Total debt principal
$
69,246
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for a summary of maturities of the Company’s finance lease liabilities.
Short-term Borrowings
Commercial Paper and Back-up Credit Facilities
The Company did not have any commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2019. The Company had $720 million of commercial paper outstanding at a
weighted average interest rate of 2.8% as of December 31, 2018. In connection with its commercial paper program, the Company maintains a $1.0 billion 364-day
unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 14, 2020, a $1.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on
May 18, 2022, a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 17, 2023 and a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up
revolving credit facility, which expires on May 16, 2024. The credit facilities allow for borrowings at various rates that are dependent, in part, on the Company’s
public debt ratings and require the Company to pay a weighted average quarterly facility fee of approximately .03%, regardless of usage. As of December 31, 2019
and 2018, there were no borrowings outstanding under any of the Company’s back-up credit facilities.
Bridge Loan Facility
On December 3, 2017, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company entered into a $49.0 billion unsecured bridge loan facility commitment. The
Company paid $221 million in fees upon entering into the agreement. The fees were capitalized in other current assets and were amortized as interest expense over
the period the bridge loan facility commitment was outstanding. The bridge loan facility commitment was reduced to $44.0 billion on December 15, 2017 upon the
Company entering into a $5.0 billion term loan agreement. The Company recorded $56 million of amortization of the bridge loan facility fees during the year
ended December 31, 2017, which was recorded in interest expense in the consolidated statement of operations.
On March 9, 2018, the Company issued an aggregate of $40.0 billion principal amount of unsecured floating rate notes and unsecured fixed rate senior notes,
collectively the “2018 Notes.” At that time, the bridge loan facility commitment was reduced to $4.0 billion, and the Company paid $8 million in fees to retain the
bridge loan facility commitment through the Aetna Acquisition Date. Those fees were capitalized in other current assets and were amortized as interest expense
over the period the bridge loan facility commitment was outstanding. The Company recorded $173 million of amortization of the bridge loan facility commitment
fees during the year ended December 31, 2018, which was recorded in interest expense in the consolidated statement of operations. On October 26, 2018, the
Company entered into a $4.0 billion unsecured 364-day bridge term loan agreement to formalize the bridge loan facility discussed above. On November 28, 2018,
in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the $4.0 billion unsecured 364-day bridge term loan agreement terminated.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston
Since the Aetna Acquisition Date, a subsidiary of the Company is a member of the FHLBB. As a member, the subsidiary has the ability to obtain cash advances,
subject to certain minimum collateral requirements. The maximum borrowing capacity available from the FHLBB as of December 31, 2019 was approximately
$850 million. At both December 31, 2019 and 2018, there were no outstanding advances from the FHLBB.
138

Long-term Borrowings
2019 Notes
On August 15, 2019, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.625% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2024, $750 million aggregate
principal amount of 3% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2026 and $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.25% unsecured senior notes due August 15,
2029 (collectively, the “2019 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.5 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees. The net proceeds of the 2019 Notes
were used to repay certain of the Company’s outstanding debt.
Beginning in July 2019, the Company entered into several interest rate swap and treasury lock transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were
designated as cash flow hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the
anticipated issuance of the 2019 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The
Company paid a net amount of $25 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $18 million in accumulated
other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the 2019 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ for
additional information.
Early Extinguishment of Debt
In August 2019, the Company purchased $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$1.3 billion of its 3.125% senior notes due 2020, $723 million of its floating rate notes due 2020, $328 million of its 4.125% senior notes due 2021, $297 million of
4.125% senior notes due 2021 issued by Aetna, $413 million of 5.45% senior notes due 2021 issued by Coventry Health Care, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Aetna, and $962 million of its 3.35% senior notes due 2021. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $76 million in
excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, incurred $8 million in fees and recognized a net gain of $5 million on the write-
off of net unamortized deferred financing premiums, for a net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million.
2018 Notes
On March 9, 2018, the Company issued an aggregate of $40.0 billion in principal amount of the 2018 Notes for total proceeds of approximately $39.4 billion, net
of discounts and underwriting fees. The net proceeds of the 2018 Notes were used to fund a portion of the Aetna Acquisition. The 2018 Notes consisted of the
following at the time of issuance:
In millions
3.125% senior notes due March 2020
$
2,000
Floating rate notes due March 2020
1,000
3.35% senior notes due March 2021
3,000
Floating rate notes due March 2021
1,000
3.7% senior notes due March 2023
6,000
4.1% senior notes due March 2025
5,000
4.3% senior notes due March 2028
9,000
4.78% senior notes due March 2038
5,000
5.05% senior notes due March 2048
8,000
Total debt principal
$
40,000
From December 2017 through March 2018, the Company entered into several interest rate swap and treasury lock transactions to manage interest rate risk. These
agreements were designated as cash flow hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates
related to the anticipated issuance of long-term debt to fund the Aetna Acquisition.
In connection with the issuance of the 2018 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. In connection with the hedge transactions, the
Company received a net amount of $446 million from the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a gain, net of tax, of $331 million in
accumulated other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as a reduction of interest expense over the life of the 2018 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other
Comprehensive Income’’ for additional information.
139

Term Loan Agreement
On December 15, 2017, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company entered into a $5.0 billion term loan agreement. The term loan agreement allowed
for borrowings at various rates that were dependent, in part, on the Company’s debt ratings. In connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company borrowed $5.0
billion (a $3.0 billion three-year tranche and a $2.0 billion five-year tranche) under the term loan agreement in November 2018. The Company terminated the $2.0
billion five-year tranche in December 2018 with the repayment of the borrowing. The Company made principal payments of $500 million in March 2019, $1.0
billion in May 2019 and $1.5 billion in July 2019 on the three-year tranche, and terminated the three-year tranche and the term loan agreement with the final
repayment of the borrowing in July 2019, at which time the Company had repaid all term loans.
Aetna Related Debt
Upon the closing of the Aetna Acquisition, the Company assumed long-term debt with a fair value of $8.1 billion, with stated interest rates ranging from 2.2% to
6.75%. The long-term debt assumed is included in the summary of the Company’s borrowings table above.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s back-up revolving credit facilities, unsecured senior notes and unsecured floating rate notes contain customary restrictive financial and operating
covenants. These covenants do not include an acceleration of the Company’s debt maturities in the event of a downgrade in the Company’s credit ratings. The
Company does not believe the restrictions contained in these covenants materially affect its financial or operating flexibility. As of December 31, 2019, the
Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants.
9.
Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits
Defined Contribution Plans
As of December 31, 2019, the Company sponsors several active 401(k) savings plans that cover all employees who meet plan eligibility requirements. The
Company makes matching contributions consistent with the provisions of the respective plans.
At the participant’s option, account balances, including the Company’s matching contribution, can be invested among various investment options under each plan.
Two of the defined contribution plans offer the Company’s common stock fund as an investment option. The Company also maintains nonqualified, unfunded
deferred compensation plans for certain key employees. The plans provide participants the opportunity to defer portions of their eligible compensation and for
certain nonqualified plans, participants receive matching contributions equivalent to what they could have received under the CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan
or Aetna 401(k) Plan absent certain restrictions and limitations under the Internal Revenue Code. The Company’s contributions under the above defined
contribution plans were $550 million, $334 million and $314 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The Company’s contributions for the years ended
December 31, 2019 and 2018 include contributions to the Aetna Inc. 401(k) plan subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. Aetna sponsors a tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan that was frozen in 2010. Aetna
also sponsors a nonqualified supplemental pension plan that was frozen in 2007. Aetna’s pension plan benefit obligations and the fair value of plan assets were
remeasured as of the Aetna Acquisition Date.
Prior to the Aetna Acquisition, during the year ended December 31, 2017, the Company settled the pension obligations of its two existing tax-qualified defined
benefit pension plans by irrevocably transferring pension liabilities to an insurance company through the purchase of group annuity contracts and through lump
sum distributions. These purchases, funded with pension plan assets, resulted in pre-tax settlement losses of $187 million in the year ended December 31, 2017,
related to the recognition of accumulated deferred actuarial losses. The settlement losses were recorded in other expense in the consolidated statement of
operations. The Company also sponsors several other defined benefit pension plans that are unfunded nonqualified supplemental retirement plans.
140

Pension Benefit Obligation and Plan Assets
The following tables outline the change in pension benefit obligation and plan assets over the specified periods:
In millions
2019
2018
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation, beginning of year
$
5,841
$
131
Acquired benefit obligations
—
5,685
Interest cost
225
25
Actuarial loss
530
41
Benefit payments
(357)
(41)
Benefit obligation, end of year
6,239
5,841
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets, beginning of year
5,663
—
Fair value of plan assets acquired
—
5,709
Actual return on plan assets
1,064
(17)
Employer contributions
25
12
Benefit payments
(357)
(41)
Fair value of plan assets, end of year
6,395
5,663
Funded status
$
156
$
(178)
The assets (liabilities) recognized on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2019 and 2018 for the pension plans consisted of the following:
In millions
2019
2018
Non-current assets reflected in other assets
$
494
$
147
Current liabilities reflected in accrued expenses
(25)
(25)
Non-current liabilities reflected in other long-term liabilities
(313)
(300)
Net assets (liabilities)
$
156
$
(178)
Net Periodic Benefit Cost (Income)
The components of net periodic benefit cost (income) for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 are shown below:
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Components of net periodic benefit cost (income):
Interest cost
$
225
$
25
$
20
Expected return on plan assets
(357)
(33)
(20)
Amortization of net actuarial loss
1
2
21
Settlement losses
—
—
187
Net periodic benefit cost (income)
$
(131)
$
(6)
$
208
141

Pension Plan Assumptions
The Company uses a series of actuarial assumptions to determine its benefit obligation and net periodic benefit cost (income), including discount rates and
expected return on plan assets assumptions, as further detailed below.
Discount Rates - The discount rate is determined using a yield curve as of the annual measurement date. The yield curve consists of a series of individual
discount rates, with each discount rate corresponding to a single point in time, based on high-quality bonds. Projected benefit payments are discounted to
the measurement date using the corresponding rate from the yield curve that is consistent with the maturity profile of the expected liability cash flows.
Expected Return on Plan Assets - The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by using the plan’s target allocation and return
expectations based on many factors including forecasted long-term capital market real returns and the inflationary outlook on a plan by plan basis. See
“Pension Plan Assets” below for additional details regarding the pension plan assets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The Company determined its benefit obligation based on the following weighted average assumptions as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
2019
2018
Discount rate
3.2%
4.3%
The Company determined its net periodic benefit cost (income) based on the following weighted average assumptions for the years ended December 31, 2019,
2018 and 2017:
2019
2018
2017
Discount rate
4.0%
4.0%
4.0%
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
6.5%
6.6%
5.0%
Pension Plan Assets
As of December 31, 2017, the assets in the Company’s tax-qualified defined benefit pension plans had been fully liquidated to settle all plan obligations through
the purchase of group annuity contracts and through lump sum distributions. Subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company’s pension plan assets
primarily include debt and equity securities held in separate accounts, common/collective trusts and real estate investments. The valuation methodologies used to
value these debt and equity securities and common/collective trusts are similar to the methodologies described in Note 4 “Fair Value.” Pension plan assets also
include investments in other assets that are carried at fair value. The following is a description of the valuation methodologies used to value real estate investments
and these additional investments, including the general classification pursuant to the fair value hierarchy.
Real Estate - Real estate investments are valued by independent third party appraisers. The appraisals comply with the Uniform Standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice, which include, among other things, the income, cost, and sales comparison approaches to estimating property value. Therefore, these
investments are classified in Level 3.
Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships - Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships are carried at fair value which is estimated using
the NAV per unit as reported by the administrator of the underlying investment fund as a practical expedient to fair value. Therefore, these investments
have been excluded from the fair value table below.
142

Pension plan assets with changes in fair value measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
92
$
65
$
—
$
157
Debt securities:
    U.S. government securities
592
31
—
623
    States, municipalities and political subdivisions
—
157
—
157
    U.S. corporate securities
—
1,849
1
1,850
    Foreign securities
—
178
—
178
    Residential mortgage-backed securities
—
385
—
385
    Commercial mortgage-backed securities
—
89
—
89
    Other asset-backed securities
—
150
—
150
    Redeemable preferred securities
—
5
—
5
Total debt securities
592
2,844
1
3,437
Equity securities:
    U.S. domestic
931
1
—
932
    International
481
—
—
481
    Domestic real estate
25
—
—
25
Total equity securities
1,437
1
—
1,438
Other investments:
    Real estate
—
—
353
353
    Common/collective trusts (1)
—
288
—
288
    Derivatives
—
(2)
—
(2)
Total other investments
—
286
353
639
Total pension investments (2)
$
2,121
$
3,196
$
354
$
5,671
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
The assets in the underlying funds of common/collective trusts consist of $137 million of equity securities and $151 million of debt securities.
(2)
Excludes $540 million of private equity limited partnership investments and $184 million of hedge fund limited partnership investments as these amounts are measured at NAV per share or
an equivalent and are not subject to leveling within the fair value hierarchy.
143

Pension plan assets with changes in fair value measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2018 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
68
$
30
$
—
$
98
Debt securities:
    U.S. government securities
511
38
—
549
    States, municipalities and political subdivisions
—
147
—
147
    U.S. corporate securities
—
1,671
5
1,676
    Foreign securities
—
177
—
177
    Residential mortgage-backed securities
—
339
—
339
    Commercial mortgage-backed securities
—
70
—
70
    Other asset-backed securities
—
162
—
162
    Redeemable preferred securities
—
6
—
6
Total debt securities
511
2,610
5
3,126
Equity securities:
    U.S. domestic
744
—
—
744
    International
356
—
—
356
    Domestic real estate
30
—
—
30
Total equity securities
1,130
—
—
1,130
Other investments:
    Real estate
—
—
425
425
    Common/collective trusts (1)
—
253
—
253
    Derivatives
—
2
—
2
Total other investments
—
255
425
680
Total pension investments (2)
$
1,709
$
2,895
$
430
$
5,034
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
The assets in the underlying funds of common/collective trusts consist of $109 million of equity securities and $144 million of debt securities.
(2)
Excludes $465 million of private equity limited partnership investments and $164 million of hedge fund limited partnership investments as these amounts are measured at NAV per share or
an equivalent and are not subject to leveling within the fair value hierarchy.
The changes in the balance of Level 3 pension plan assets during 2019 were as follows:
2019
In millions
Real estate
U.S. corporate
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
425
$
5
$
430
Actual return on plan assets
5
—
5
Purchases, sales and settlements
(77)
(5)
(82)
Transfers into (out of) Level 3
—
1
1
Ending balance
$
353
$
1
$
354
The increase in the balance of Level 3 pension plan assets during 2018 relates to investments acquired in the Aetna Acquisition. There was an immaterial amount
of transfers into or out of Level 3 from the Aetna Acquisition Date to December 31, 2018.
The Company’s pension plan invests in a diversified mix of assets intended to maximize long-term returns while recognizing the need for adequate liquidity to
meet ongoing benefit and administrative obligations. The risk of unexpected investment and actuarial outcomes is regularly evaluated. This evaluation is performed
through forecasting and assessing ranges of investment outcomes over short- and long-term horizons and by assessing the pension plan’s liability characteristics.
Complementary investment styles and strategies are utilized by multiple investment management firms to further improve portfolio and operational risk
characteristics. Public and private equity investments are used primarily to increase overall plan returns. Real estate investments are viewed favorably for their
diversification benefits and above-average dividend generation. Fixed income
144

investments provide diversification benefits and liability hedging attributes that are desirable, especially in falling interest rate environments.
At December 31, 2019, target investment allocations for the Company’s pension plan were: 33% in equity securities, 54% in debt securities, 6% in real estate, 4%
in private equity limited partnerships and 3% in hedge funds. Actual asset allocations may differ from target allocations due to tactical decisions to overweight or
underweight certain assets or as a result of normal fluctuations in asset values. Asset allocations are consistent with stated investment policies and, as a general
rule, periodically rebalanced back to target asset allocations. Asset allocations and investment performance are formally reviewed periodically throughout the year
by the pension plan’s Benefit Finance Committee. Forecasting of asset and liability growth is performed at least annually.
Cash Flows
The Company generally contributes to its tax-qualified pension plan based on minimum funding requirements determined under applicable federal laws and
regulations. Employer contributions related to the nonqualified supplemental pension plans generally represent payments to retirees for current benefits. The
Company contributed $25 million, $12 million and $46 million to its pension plans during 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. No contributions are required for the
tax-qualified pension plan in 2020. The Company expects to make an immaterial amount of contributions for all other pension plans in 2020. The Company
estimates the following future benefit payments, which are calculated using the same actuarial assumptions used to measure the pension benefit obligation as of
December 31, 2019:
In millions
2020
$
373
2021
415
2022
379
2023
384
2024
380
2025-2029
1,851
Multiemployer Pension Plans
The Company also contributes to a number of multiemployer pension plans under the terms of collective-bargaining agreements that cover its union-represented
employees. The risks of participating in these multiemployer plans are different from single-employer pension plans in the following respects: (i) assets contributed
to the multiemployer plan by one employer may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers, (ii) if a participating employer stops
contributing to the plan, the unfunded obligations of the plan may be borne by the remaining participating employers, and (iii) if the Company chooses to stop
participating in some of its multiemployer plans, the Company may be required to pay those plans an amount based on the underfunded status of the applicable
plan, which is referred to as a withdrawal liability.
None of the multiemployer pension plans in which the Company participates are individually significant to the Company. The Company’s contributions to
multiemployer pension plans were $18 million, $18 million and $17 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Other Postretirement Benefits
The Company provides postretirement health care and life insurance benefits to certain retirees who meet eligibility requirements. During 2018, the Company
acquired additional OPEB plans in connection with the Aetna Acquisition. The Company’s funding policy is generally to pay covered expenses as they are
incurred. For retiree medical plan accounting, the Company reviews external data and its own historical trends for health care costs to determine the health care
cost trend rates. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s other postretirement benefits had an accumulated postretirement benefit obligation of $246
million and $228 million, respectively. Net periodic benefit costs related to these other postretirement benefits were $7 million, $2 million and $1 million in 2019,
2018 and 2017, respectively.
145

The Company estimates the following future benefit payments, which are calculated using the same actuarial assumptions used to measure the accumulated other
postretirement benefit obligation as of December 31, 2019:
In millions
2020
$
15
2021
15
2022
15
2023
15
2024
15
2025-2029
72
Pursuant to various collective bargaining agreements, the Company also contributes to multiemployer health and welfare plans that cover certain union-represented
employees. The plans provide postretirement health care and life insurance benefits to certain employees who meet eligibility requirements. The Company’s
contributions to multiemployer health and welfare plans totaled $57 million, $58 million and $58 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
10.
Income Taxes
The income tax provision (benefit) for continuing operations consisted of the following for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
In millions
2019
    
2018
    
2017
Current:
Federal
$
2,450
$
1,480
$
2,594
State
565
499
464
3,015
1,979
3,058
Deferred:
Federal
(535)
22
(1,435)
State
(114)
1
14
(649)
23
(1,421)
Total
$
2,366
$
2,002
$
1,637
The TCJA was enacted on December 22, 2017. Among numerous changes to existing tax laws, the TCJA permanently reduced the federal corporate income tax
rate from 35% to 21% effective on January 1, 2018. The effects of changes in tax rates on deferred tax balances are required to be taken into consideration in the
period in which the changes are enacted, regardless of when they are effective. As a result of the reduction of the corporate income tax rate under the TCJA, the
Company estimated the revaluation of its net deferred tax liabilities and recorded a provisional income tax benefit of approximately $1.5 billion for year ended
December 31, 2017. In 2018, the Company completed its process of determining the TCJA’s final impact and recorded an additional income tax benefit of $100
million.
The following table is a reconciliation of the statutory income tax rate to the Company’s effective income tax rate for continuing operations for the years ended
December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
2019
    
2018
    
2017
Statutory income tax rate
21.0%
21.0 %
35.0 %
State income taxes, net of federal tax benefit
4.0
27.7
4.1
Effect of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
—
(7.1)
(18.3)
Health insurer fee
—
2.2
—
Goodwill impairments
—
89.5
0.8
Sale of subsidiary
—
5.0
—
Other
1.3
4.1
(1.8)
Effective income tax rate
26.3%
142.4 %
19.8 %
146

The following table is a summary of the components of the Company’s deferred income tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2019
    
2018
Deferred income tax assets:
Lease and rents
$
267
$
277
Inventory
23
28
Employee benefits
191
243
Bad debts and other allowances
294
243
Retirement benefits
47
130
Net operating loss and capital loss carryforwards
480
529
Deferred income
36
104
Insurance reserves
430
467
Investments
—
11
Other
451
242
Valuation allowance
(374)
(520)
Total deferred income tax assets
1,845
1,754
Deferred income tax liabilities:
Investments
(289)
—
Depreciation and amortization
(8,850)
(9,431)
Total deferred income tax liabilities
(9,139)
(9,431)
Net deferred income tax liabilities
$
(7,294)
$
(7,677)
As of December 31, 2019, the Company has net operating and capital loss carryovers of $480 million, which expire between 2021 and 2038. The Company
considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax
planning strategies and the Company’s recent operating results. The Company established a valuation allowance of $374 million because it does not consider it
more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will be recovered.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 is as follows:
In millions
2019
    
2018
    
2017
Beginning balance
$
661
$
344
$
307
Additions based on tax positions related to the current year
4
1
62
Additions based on tax positions related to prior years
115
324
32
Reductions for tax positions of prior years
(111)
(5)
(28)
Expiration of statutes of limitation
(7)
(2)
(10)
Settlements
(7)
(1)
(19)
Ending balance
$
655
$
661
$
344
The increase in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits in 2018 compared to 2017 was mainly due to the Aetna Acquisition.
The Company and most of its subsidiaries are subject to U.S. federal income tax as well as income tax of numerous state and local jurisdictions. The Company is a
participant in the Compliance Assurance Process, which is a program made available by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) to certain qualifying large
taxpayers, under which participants work collaboratively with the IRS to identify and resolve potential tax issues through open, cooperative and transparent
interaction prior to the annual filing of their federal income tax returns. The IRS has completed its examinations of the Company’s consolidated U.S. federal
income tax returns through tax year 2013. The IRS has substantially completed its examinations of the Company’s consolidated U.S. federal income tax returns for
tax years 2014 through 2018. The IRS is currently examining the Company’s 2019 consolidated U.S. federal income tax return.
147

The Company and its subsidiaries are also currently under income tax examinations by a number of state and local tax authorities. As of December 31, 2019, no
examination has resulted in any proposed adjustments that would result in a material change to the Company’s operating results, financial condition or liquidity.
Substantially all material state and local income tax matters have been concluded for fiscal years through 2014. Certain state exams are likely to be concluded and
certain state statutes of limitations will lapse in 2020, but the change in the balance of the Company’s uncertain tax positions is projected to be immaterial. In
addition, it is reasonably possible that the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits could change within the next twelve months due to the anticipated conclusion of
various examinations with the IRS for various years. An estimate of the range of the possible change cannot be made at this time.
The Company records interest expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and penalties in the income tax provision. The Company accrued interest expense of
approximately $49 million, $19 million and $11 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The Company had approximately $173 million and $80 million
accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As of December 31, 2019, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the Company’s effective income tax rate is approximately
$532 million, after considering the federal benefit of state income taxes.
11.
Stock Incentive Plans
The terms of the CVS Health 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan (“ICP”) provide for grants of annual incentive and long-term performance awards to executive
officers and other officers and employees of the Company or any subsidiary of the Company, as well as equity compensation to outside directors of CVS Health.
Payment of such annual incentive and long-term performance awards will be in cash, stock, other awards or other property, at the discretion of the Management
Planning and Development Committee (the “MP&D Committee”) of CVS Health’s Board of Directors (the “Board”). The ICP allows for a maximum of 32 million
shares of CVS Health common stock to be reserved and available for grants. Prior to the acquisition of Aetna in 2018, the ICP was the only compensation plan
under which the Company granted stock options, restricted stock and other stock-based awards to its employees, with the exception of the Company’s Employee
Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). As of December 31, 2019, there were approximately 17 million shares of CVS Health common stock available for future grants
under the ICP.
As of the Aetna Acquisition Date, approximately 22 million shares of Aetna common stock subject to awards outstanding under the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010
Stock Incentive Plan (“SIP”) were assumed by CVS Health. In addition, in accordance with the merger agreement, shares which were available for future issuance
under the SIP were converted into approximately 32 million shares of CVS Health common stock reserved and available for issuance pursuant to future awards. As
of December 31, 2019, there were approximately 27 million shares of CVS Health common stock available for future grants under the SIP.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the
stock award (generally three to five years) using the straight-line method. The following table is a summary of stock-based compensation for the years ended
December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Stock options and stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) (1) (2)
$
76
$
70
$
65
Restricted stock units and performance stock units (2)
377
210
169
Total stock-based compensation
$
453
$
280
$
234
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Includes the ESPP.
(2)
Stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2018 includes $14 million and $27 million associated with accelerated vesting of SARs and restricted stock replacement
awards, respectively, issued to Aetna employees who were terminated subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition.
ESPP
The ESPP provides for the purchase of up to 30 million shares of CVS Health common stock. Under the ESPP, eligible employees may purchase common stock at
the end of each six month offering period at a purchase price equal to 90% of the lower of the fair market value on the first day or the last day of the offering
period. During 2019, approximately two million
148

shares of common stock were purchased under the provisions of the ESPP at an average price of $53.29 per share. As of December 31, 2019, approximately seven
million shares of common stock were available for issuance under the ESPP.
The fair value of stock-based compensation associated with the ESPP is estimated on the date of grant (the first day of the six month offering period) using the
Black-Scholes option pricing model.
The following table is a summary of the assumptions used to value the ESPP awards for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
2019
2018
2017
Dividend yield (1)
1.70%
1.45%
1.24%
Expected volatility (2)
27.96%
28.02%
22.70%
Risk-free interest rate (3)
2.27%
1.87%
0.86%
Expected life (in years) (4)
0.5
0.5
0.5
Weighted-average grant date fair value
$
10.51
$
12.26
$
13.01
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
The dividend yield is calculated based on semi-annual dividends paid and the fair market value of CVS Health stock at the grant date.
(2)
The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of CVS Health’s daily stock price over the previous six month period.
(3)
The risk-free interest rate is selected based on the Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected term of ESPP purchases (i.e., six months).
(4)
The expected life is based on the semi-annual purchase period.
Restricted Stock Units and Performance Stock Units
The Company’s restricted stock units and performance stock units are considered nonvested share awards and require no payment from the employee. The fair
value of the restricted stock units is based on the market price of CVS Health common stock on the grant date and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
vesting period. For each restricted stock unit granted, employees receive one share of common stock, net of taxes, at the end of the vesting period.
The Company’s performance stock units contain performance vesting conditions in addition to a service vesting condition. Vesting of the Company’s performance
stock units is dependent upon the degree to which the Company achieves its performance goals, which are generally set for a three-year performance period and are
approved at the time of grant by the MP&D Committee.
The fair value of performance stock units granted with service and performance vesting conditions is based on the market price of CVS Health common stock on
the grant date and is recognized over the vesting period. Certain of the performance stock units also contain a market vesting condition based on the performance of
CVS Health common stock relative to a comparator group. The fair value of these performance stock units is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation as of the
grant date and is recognized over the vesting period.
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. All unvested Aetna performance stock unit and restricted stock unit awards as of the Aetna
Acquisition Date were converted into replacement CVS Health restricted stock awards.
As of December 31, 2019, there was $524 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to the Company’s restricted stock units and performance stock
units that are expected to vest. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.2 years. The total fair value of restricted stock units
vested during 2019, 2018 and 2017 was $265 million, $262 million and $175 million, respectively.
149

The following table is a summary of the restricted stock unit and performance stock unit activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
In thousands, except weighted average grant date fair value
Units
Weighted Average
Grant Date
Fair Value
Outstanding at beginning of year, nonvested
11,005
$
76.18
Granted
7,644
$
54.34
Vested
(4,216)
$
62.59
Forfeited
(1,308)
$
58.73
Outstanding at end of year, nonvested
13,125
$
61.57
Stock Options and SARs
All stock option grants are awarded at fair value on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and
stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Stock options granted generally become exercisable over a four-
year period from the grant date. Stock options granted prior to 2019 generally expire seven years after the grant date. Stock options granted in 2019 expire ten years
after the grant date.
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. All unvested Aetna SARs outstanding as of the Aetna Acquisition Date were converted
into replacement CVS Health SARs. The replacement SARs granted will be settled in CVS Health common stock, net of taxes, based on the appreciation of the
stock price on the exercise date over the market price on the date of grant. The fair value of SARs is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and
stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. SARs generally become exercisable over a three-year period from
the grant date. SARs generally expire ten years after the grant date.
The following table is a summary of stock option and SAR activity that occurred for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Cash received from stock options exercised (including ESPP)
$
210
$
242
$
329
Payments for taxes for net share settlement of equity awards
112
97
71
Intrinsic value of stock options and SARs exercised
30
79
176
Fair value of stock options and SARs vested
467
324
341
The fair value of each stock option and SAR is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model based on the following assumptions at the time of grant:
2019
2018
2017
Dividend yield (1)
3.68%
2.76%
2.56%
Expected volatility (2)
21.76%
21.27%
18.39%
Risk-free interest rate (3)
0.56%
2.77%
1.77%
Expected life (in years) (4)
6.3
4.8
4.1
Weighted-average grant date fair value
$
6.27
$
24.55
$
9.43
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
The dividend yield is based on annual dividends paid and the fair market value of CVS Health stock at the grant date.
(2)
The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of CVS Health’s daily stock price over a period equal to the expected life of each option or SAR grant after
adjustments for infrequent events such as stock splits.
(3)
The risk-free interest rate is selected based on yields from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected term of the options or SARs being valued.
(4)
The expected life represents the number of years the options or SARs are expected to be outstanding from grant date based on historical option or SAR holder exercise experience.
The increase in the weighted-average grant date fair value in 2018 was due to the issuance of the replacement SARs in connection with the Aetna Acquisition.
150

As of December 31, 2019, unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock options and SARs totaled $41 million, which the Company expects to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.1 years. After considering anticipated forfeitures, the Company expects approximately 10 million of the unvested
stock options and SARs to vest over the requisite service period.
The following table is a summary of the Company’s stock option and SAR activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
In thousands, except weighted average exercise price and remaining contractual term
Shares
Weighted
Average
Exercise
 Price
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Term
Aggregate
Intrinsic
Value
Outstanding at beginning of year
22,909
$
71.15
Granted
6,538
$
54.40
Exercised
(3,667)
$
46.17
Forfeited
(769)
$
68.12
Expired
(1,109)
$
82.40
Outstanding at end of year
23,902
$
69.98  
4.76
$
274,987
Exercisable at end of year
13,267
$
77.48  
2.73
109,765
Vested at end of year and expected to vest in the future
23,328
$
70.28  
4.67
265,128
12.
Shareholders’ Equity
Share Repurchases
The following share repurchase programs have been authorized by the Board:
In billions
Authorization Date
Authorized
Remaining as of
December 31, 2019
November 2, 2016 (“2016 Repurchase Program”)
$
15.0
$
13.9
December 15, 2014 (“2014 Repurchase Program”)
10.0
—
Each of the share Repurchase Programs was effective immediately. The 2014 Repurchase Program has been completed. The 2016 Repurchase Program permits the
Company to effect repurchases from time to time through a combination of open market repurchases, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share
repurchase (“ASR”) transactions, and/or other derivative transactions. The 2016 Repurchase Program can be modified or terminated by the Board at any time.
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock pursuant to the 2016 Repurchase Program.
During the year ended December 31, 2017, the Company repurchased an aggregate of 55.4 million shares of common stock for approximately $4.4 billion under
the 2014 and 2016 Repurchase Programs, a significant portion of which were repurchased through two ASR transactions which are further described below.
Pursuant to the authorization under the 2014 Repurchase Program, in August 2016, the Company entered into two fixed dollar ASRs with Barclays Bank PLC
(“Barclays”) for a total of $3.6 billion. Upon payment of the $3.6 billion purchase price in January 2017, the Company received a number of shares of CVS Health
common stock equal to 80% of the $3.6 billion notional amount of the ASRs or approximately 36.1 million shares, which were placed into treasury stock in
January 2017. The ASRs were accounted for as an initial treasury stock transaction for $2.9 billion and a forward contract for $0.7 billion. In April 2017, the
Company received an additional 9.9 million shares of CVS Health common stock, representing the remaining 20% of the $3.6 billion notional amount of the ASRs,
thereby concluding the ASRs. The additional 9.9 million shares of common stock delivered to the Company by Barclays were placed into treasury stock, and the
forward contract was reclassified from capital surplus to treasury stock in April 2017.
Dividends
The quarterly cash dividend declared by the Board was $0.50 per share in 2019 and 2018. CVS Health has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a
public company. Future dividend payments will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant
by the Board.
151

Regulatory Requirements
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. Aetna’s insurance business operations are conducted through subsidiaries that principally
consist of HMOs and insurance companies. The Company’s HMO and insurance subsidiaries report their financial statements in accordance with accounting
practices prescribed by state regulatory authorities which may differ from GAAP.
The combined statutory net income of the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.8 billion and for the year
ended December 31, 2018 (which includes Aetna and its subsidiaries from November 28, 2018 to December 31, 2018) was not material. The estimated combined
statutory capital and surplus at December 31, 2019 and 2018 of the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries was approximately $11.0 billion and $10.1 billion,
respectively. The Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries paid $2.4 billion of gross dividends to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2019.
In addition to general state law restrictions on payments of dividends and other distributions to stockholders applicable to all corporations, HMOs and insurance
companies are subject to further regulations that, among other things, may require those companies to maintain certain levels of equity and restrict the amount of
dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their equity holders. In addition, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company made certain
undertakings that require prior regulatory approval of dividends by certain of its HMOs and insurance companies. At December 31, 2019, these amounts were as
follows:
In millions
Estimated minimum statutory surplus required by regulators
$
5,841
Investments on deposit with regulatory bodies
672
Estimated maximum dividend distributions permitted in 2020 without prior regulatory approval
366
Noncontrolling Interests
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, noncontrolling interests were $306 million and $318 million, respectively, primarily related to third party interests in the
Company’s operating entities. The noncontrolling entities’ share is included in total shareholders’ equity on the consolidated balance sheets.
152

13.
Other Comprehensive Income
Shareholders’ equity included the following activity in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in 2019, 2018 and 2017:
At December 31,
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Net unrealized investment gains:
Beginning of year balance
$
97
$
—
$
—
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications ($927, $132 and $0 pretax)
763
97
—
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income ($(105), $1 and $0 pretax) (1)
(86)
—
—
Other comprehensive income
677
97
—
End of year balance
774
97
—
Foreign currency translation adjustments:
Beginning of year balance
(158)
(129)
(127)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
8
(29)
(2)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss (2)
154
—
—
Other comprehensive income (loss)
162
(29)
(2)
End of year balance
4
(158)
(129)
Net cash flow hedges:
Beginning of year balance
312
(15)
(5)
Adoption of new accounting standard (3)
—
(3)
—
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications ($(25), $465 and $(18) pretax)
(18)
344
(11)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) ($(20), $(19) and $2 pretax) (4)
(15)
(14)
1
Other comprehensive income (loss)
(33)
330
(10)
End of year balance
279
312
(15)
Pension and other postretirement benefits:
Beginning of year balance
(149)
(21)
(173)
Adoption of new accounting standard (3)
—
(4)
—
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications ($162, $(178) and $0 pretax)
120
(132)
—
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss ($(12), $11 and $249 pretax) (5)
(9)
8
152
Other comprehensive income (loss)
111
(124)
152
End of year balance
(38)
(149)
(21)
Total beginning of year accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
102
(165)
(305)
Adoption of new accounting standard (3)
—
(7)
—
Total other comprehensive income
917
274
140
Total end of year accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
$
1,019
$
102
$
(165)
_____________________________________________ 
(1)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income for specifically identified debt securities are included in net investment income in the consolidated statements of
operations.
(2)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss represent the elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment associated with the sale of Onofre, which was sold on
July 1, 2019. The loss on the divestiture of Onofre is reflected in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
(3)
Reflects the adoption of ASU 2018-02, Income Statement Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220); Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income during the year ended December 31, 2018.
153

(4)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) for specifically identified cash flow hedges are included within interest expense in the consolidated statements
of operations. The Company expects to reclassify approximately $14 million, net of tax, in net gains associated with its cash flow hedges into net income within the next 12 months.
(5)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss for specifically identified pension and other postretirement benefits are included in other expense (income) in the
consolidated statements of operations.
 
14.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Earnings (loss) per share is computed using the two-class method. For periods in which the Company reports net income, diluted earnings per share is determined
by using the weighted average number of common and dilutive common equivalent shares outstanding during the period, unless the effect is antidilutive. SARs and
options to purchase 17 million shares of common stock were outstanding, but were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share, for the year ended
December 31, 2019 because the exercise prices of the SARs and options were greater than the average market price of the common shares and, therefore, the effect
would be antidilutive. For the same reason, options to purchase 13 million and 10 million shares of common stock were outstanding, but were excluded from the
calculation of diluted earnings per share, for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. In addition, due to the loss from continuing operations
attributable to CVS Health in the year ended December 31, 2018, 3 million potentially dilutive common equivalent shares were excluded from the calculation of
diluted earnings per share, as the impact of these shares was antidilutive for that period.
The following is a reconciliation of basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
In millions, except per share amounts
2019
2018
2017
Numerator for earnings (loss) per share calculation:
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
6,631
$
(596)
$
6,631
Income allocated to participating securities
(5)
(3)
(24)
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
3
2
(1)
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
6,629
$
(597)
$
6,606
Denominator for earnings (loss) per share calculation:
Weighted average shares, basic
1,301
1,044
1,020
Effect of dilutive securities
4
—
4
Weighted average shares, diluted
1,305
1,044
1,024
Earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations:
Basic
$
5.10
$
(0.57)
$
6.48
Diluted
$
5.08
$
(0.57)
$
6.45
15.
Reinsurance
The Company utilizes reinsurance agreements primarily to: (a) reduce required capital and (b) facilitate the acquisition or disposition of certain insurance contracts.
Ceded reinsurance agreements permit the Company to recover a portion of its losses from reinsurers, although they do not discharge the Company’s primary
liability as the direct insurer of the risks reinsured.
On November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plans to a subsidiary of WellCare Health Plans,
Inc. (“WellCare”), effective December 31, 2018. In connection with that sale, subsidiaries of WellCare and Aetna entered into reinsurance agreements under which
WellCare ceded to Aetna 100% of the insurance risk related to the divested standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plans for the 2019 PDP plan year.
In January 2020, the Company entered into two four-year reinsurance agreements with an unrelated reinsurer that allow it to reduce required capital and provide
collateralized excess of loss reinsurance coverage on a portion of the Health Care Benefits segment’s group Commercial Insured business.
154

Reinsurance recoverables (recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance sheets) at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2019
2018
Reinsurer
Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company
$
3,085
$
3,470
Lincoln Life & Annuity Company of New York
413
424
WellCare Health Plans
355
—
VOYA Retirement Insurance and Annuity Company
175
186
All Other
103
461
Total
$
4,131
$
4,541
Prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company had no material assumed or ceded premiums or benefit costs. Accordingly, the Company has not provided
disclosure of these amounts for periods prior to 2018.
Direct, assumed and ceded premiums earned for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2019
2018
Direct
$
62,968
$
8,365
Assumed
2,108
38
Ceded
(1,954)
(219)
Net premiums
$
63,122
$
8,184
The impact of reinsurance on benefit costs for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2019
2018
Direct
$
52,592
$
6,773
Assumed
1,562
32
Ceded
(1,625)
(211)
Net benefit costs
$
52,529
$
6,594
There is not a material difference between premiums on a written basis versus an earned basis.
The Company also has various agreements with unrelated reinsurers that do not qualify for reinsurance accounting under GAAP, and consequently are accounted
for using deposit accounting. The Company entered into these contracts to reduce the risk of catastrophic loss which in turn reduces the Company’s capital and
surplus requirements. Total deposit assets and liabilities related to reinsurance agreements that do not qualify for reinsurance accounting under GAAP were not
material as of December 31, 2019 or 2018.
16.
Commitments and Contingencies
Guarantees
The Company has the following significant guarantee arrangements at December 31, 2019:
•
ASC Claim Funding Accounts - The Company has arrangements with certain banks for the processing of claim payments for its ASC customers. The banks
maintain accounts to fund claims of the Company’s ASC customers. The customer is responsible for funding the amount paid by the bank each day. In these
arrangements, the Company guarantees that the banks will not sustain losses if the responsible ASC customer does not properly fund its account. The
aggregate maximum exposure under these arrangements is generally limited to $250 million. The Company can limit its exposure to these guarantees by
suspending the payment of claims for ASC customers that have not adequately funded the amount paid by the bank.
•
Separate Accounts Assets - Certain Separate Accounts assets associated with the large case pensions business in the Corporate/Other segment represent funds
maintained as a contractual requirement to fund specific pension annuities that the Company has guaranteed. Minimum contractual obligations underlying the
guaranteed benefits in these Separate
155

Accounts were approximately $1.4 billion at both December 31, 2019 and 2018. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information on
Separate Accounts. Contract holders assume all investment and mortality risk and are required to maintain Separate Accounts balances at or above a specified
level. The level of required funds is a function of the risk underlying the Separate Account’s investment strategy. If contract holders do not maintain the
required level of Separate Accounts assets to meet the annuity guarantees, the Company would establish an additional liability. Contract holders’ balances in
the Separate Accounts at December 31, 2019 exceeded the value of the guaranteed benefit obligation. As a result, the Company was not required to maintain
any additional liability for its related guarantees at December 31, 2019.
Lease Guarantees
Between 1995 and 1997, the Company sold or spun off a number of subsidiaries, including Bob’s Stores and Linens ‘n Things, each of which subsequently filed
for bankruptcy, and Marshalls. In many cases, when a former subsidiary leased a store, the Company provided a guarantee of the former subsidiary’s lease
obligations for the initial lease term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. When the
subsidiaries were disposed of and accounted for as discontinued operations, the Company’s guarantees remained in place, although each initial purchaser agreed to
indemnify the Company for any lease obligations the Company was required to satisfy. If any of the purchasers or any of the former subsidiaries fail to make the
required payments under a store lease, the Company could be required to satisfy those obligations. As of December 31, 2019, the Company guaranteed 79 such
store leases (excluding the lease guarantees related to Linens ‘n Things, which have been recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet), with the
maximum remaining lease term extending through 2030.
Guaranty Fund Assessments, Market Stabilization and Other Non-Voluntary Risk Sharing Pools
Under guaranty fund laws existing in all states, insurers doing business in those states can be assessed (in most states up to prescribed limits) for certain obligations
of insolvent insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. The life and health insurance guaranty associations in which the Company participates that
operate under these laws respond to insolvencies of long-term care insurers as well as health insurers. The Company’s assessments generally are based on a
formula relating to the Company’s health care premiums in the state compared to the premiums of other insurers. Certain states allow assessments to be recovered
over time as offsets to premium taxes. Some states have similar laws relating to HMOs and/or other payors such as not-for-profit consumer-governed health plans
established under the ACA.
In 2009, the Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner placed long-term care insurer Penn Treaty Network America Insurance Company and one of its subsidiaries
(collectively, “Penn Treaty”) in rehabilitation, an intermediate action before insolvency, and subsequently petitioned a state court to convert the rehabilitation into a
liquidation. Penn Treaty was placed in liquidation in March 2017. The Company has recorded a liability for its estimated share of future assessments by applicable
life and health guaranty associations. It is reasonably possible that in the future the Company may record a liability and expense relating to other insolvencies
which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results, financial condition and cash flows. While historically the Company has ultimately
recovered more than half of guaranty fund assessments through statutorily permitted premium tax offsets, significant increases in assessments could lead to
legislative and/or regulatory actions that limit future offsets.
HMOs in certain states in which the Company does business are subject to assessments, including market stabilization and other risk-sharing pools, for which the
Company is assessed charges based on incurred claims, demographic membership mix and other factors. The Company establishes liabilities for these assessments
based on applicable laws and regulations. In certain states, the ultimate assessments the Company pays are dependent upon the Company’s experience relative to
other entities subject to the assessment, and the ultimate liability is not known at the financial statement date. While the ultimate amount of the assessment is
dependent upon the experience of all pool participants, the Company believes it has adequate reserves to cover such assessments.
The Company’s total guaranty fund assessments liability was $84 million and $90 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and was recorded in
accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets.
Litigation and Regulatory Proceedings
The Company is a party to numerous legal proceedings, investigations, audits and claims arising, for the most part, in the ordinary course of its businesses,
including the matters described below. The Company records accruals for outstanding legal matters when it believes it is probable that a loss will be incurred and
the amount can be reasonably estimated. The Company
156

evaluates, on a quarterly basis, developments in legal matters that could affect the amount of any accrual and developments that would make a loss contingency
both probable and reasonably estimable. If a loss contingency is not both probable and reasonably estimable, the Company does not establish an accrued liability.
None of the Company’s accruals for outstanding legal matters are material individually or in the aggregate to the Company’s financial condition.
Except as otherwise noted, the Company cannot predict with certainty the timing or outcome of the legal matters described below, and the Company is unable to
reasonably estimate a possible loss or range of possible loss in excess of amounts already accrued for these matters. It is reasonably possible that the outcome of
such legal matters could be material to the Company.
Usual and Customary Litigation
The Company is named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits that allege that the Company’s retail stores overcharged for prescription drugs by not providing the
correct usual and customary charge.
Corcoran et al. v. CVS Health Corporation (U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California) and Podgorny et al. v. CVS Health Corporation (U.S.
District Court for the Northern District of Illinois). These putative class actions were filed against the Company in July and September 2015. The cases were
consolidated in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California. Plaintiffs seek damages and injunctive relief under the consumer protection statutes
of certain states on behalf of a class of consumers who purchased certain prescription drugs. Several third-party payors filed similar putative class actions on behalf
of payors captioned Sheet Metal Workers Local No. 20 Welfare and Benefit Fund v. CVS Health Corp. and Plumbers Welfare Fund, Local 130 v. CVS Health
Corporation (both pending in the U.S. District Court for the District of Rhode Island) in February and August 2016. In all of these cases the plaintiffs allege the
Company overcharged for certain prescription drugs by not submitting the price available to members of the CVS Health Savings Pass program as the pharmacy’s
usual and customary price. In the Corcoran case, the U.S. District Court granted summary judgment to CVS on plaintiffs’ claims in their entirety and certified
certain subclasses in September 2017. In June 2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the U.S. District Court’s grant of summary judgment
and reversed the U.S. District Court’s narrowing of the requested class. The Corcoran case is proceeding to a trial on a six state class basis, and trial is scheduled to
occur in 2020. The Sheet Metal Workers plaintiffs have amended their complaint to assert a claim under the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act premised on an alleged conspiracy between the Company and other PBMs. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
State of California ex rel. Matthew Omlansky v. CVS Caremark Corporation (Superior Court of the State of California, County of Sacramento). In April 2016, the
California Superior Court unsealed a first amended qui tam complaint filed in July 2013. The government has declined to intervene in this case. The relator alleges
that the Company submitted false claims for payment to the California Medicaid program in connection with reimbursement for drugs available through the CVS
Health Savings Pass program as well as certain other generic drugs. The case has been stayed pending the relator’s appeal of the judgment against him in a similar
case against another retailer. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
State of Mississippi v. CVS Health Corporation, et al. (Circuit Court of DeSoto County, Mississippi, Third Judicial District). In July 2016, the Company was served
with a complaint filed on behalf of the State of Mississippi. The complaint alleged that CVS retail pharmacies in Mississippi submitted false claims for
reimbursement to the Mississippi Medicaid program by not submitting the price available to members of the CVS Health Savings Pass program as the pharmacy’s
usual and customary price. In June 2019, the Company’s motion for judgment on the pleadings was granted in part and denied in part. Also in June 2019, the State
of Mississippi’s motion to dismiss the Company’s counterclaim for declaratory relief was granted. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
PBM Litigation and Investigations
The Company is named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits and is subject to a number of investigations concerning its PBM practices.
Klein, et al. v. Prime Therapeutics, et al. (U.S. District Court for the District of Minnesota). This putative class action was filed against the Company and other
PBMs in June 2017 on behalf of ERISA plan members who purchased and paid for EpiPen or EpiPen Jr. Plaintiffs allege that the PBMs are ERISA fiduciaries to
plan members and have violated ERISA by allegedly causing higher inflated prices for EpiPens through the process of negotiating increased rebates from EpiPen
manufacturer Mylan. This case has been consolidated with a similar matter and is now proceeding as In re EpiPen ERISA Litigation. The Company is defending
itself against these claims.
157

County of Harris, Texas v. Eli Lilly and Company, et al. (U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas). This lawsuit was filed against Caremark, Aetna,
the manufacturers of insulin and other PBMs in November 2019 by Harris County. Harris County alleges that it was overcharged for insulin as a result of a “price
fixing conspiracy” between the manufacturers and PBMs to artificially increase the price of insulin and other diabetes medications. The complaint alleges that the
manufacturers and PBMs engaged in an “Insulin Pricing Scheme” whereby the manufacturers artificially increased the reported prices of their insulin products
while “secretly” paying rebates to the PBMs in exchange for preferred treatment on the PBMs’ drug formularies. The Company is defending itself against these
claims.
In March 2017, Advanced Care Scripts, a subsidiary acquired in the Omnicare transaction that is now part of the Company’s PBM specialty operations, received a
subpoena from the U.S. Department of Justice (the “DOJ”) requesting documents concerning its work with pharmaceutical manufacturers and charitable
foundations that provide payment assistance to Medicare patients in connection with an investigation concerning potential violations of the federal Anti-Kickback
Statute and/or federal False Claims Act. The Company has been cooperating with the government with respect to this subpoena and additional requests for
information.
The Company has received subpoenas, CIDs and other requests for documents and information from, and is being investigated by, Attorneys General of several
states regarding its PBM practices, including pricing and rebates. In addition, the Company has received inquiries from congressional committees regarding insulin
pricing. The Company has been providing documents and information in response to these subpoenas, CIDs and requests for information.
Controlled Substances Litigation, Audits and Subpoenas
In December 2017, the U.S. Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation consolidated numerous cases filed against various defendants by plaintiffs such as counties,
cities, hospitals, Indian tribes and third-party payors, alleging claims generally concerning the impacts of widespread opioid abuse. The consolidated multidistrict
litigation captioned In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio. This
multidistrict litigation presumptively includes hundreds of relevant federal court cases that name the Company as a defendant. A significant number of similar
cases that name the Company as a defendant in some capacity are pending in state courts. In addition, the Company has been named as a defendant in similar cases
brought by certain state Attorneys General. The Company is defending itself against all such claims. Additionally, the Company has received subpoenas, CIDs
and/or other requests for information regarding opioids from state Attorneys General and insurance and other regulators of several states. The Company has been
cooperating with the government with respect to these subpoenas, CIDs and other requests for information.
The Company routinely is audited by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (the “DEA”). In some instances, the Company is in discussions with the DEA and
U.S. Attorney’s Offices concerning allegations that the Company violated certain requirements of the federal Controlled Substances Act.
In September 2015, the DEA served the Company with an administrative subpoena. The subpoena seeks documents related to controlled substance policies,
procedures and practices at eight Omnicare pharmacy locations from May 2012 to the present. In September 2017, the DEA expanded the investigation to include
an additional Omnicare pharmacy location. The Company has been cooperating with the government and providing documents and witnesses in response to this
subpoena.
In January 2020, the DOJ served the Company with a DEA administrative subpoena. The subpoena seeks documents relating to practices with respect to opioids
and other controlled substances at CVS Pharmacy locations in connection with an investigation concerning potential violations of the federal Controlled Substances
Act and the federal False Claims Act. The Company has been cooperating with the government with respect to this subpoena.
Prescription Processing Litigation and Investigations
U.S. ex rel. Bassan et al. v. Omnicare, Inc. and CVS Health Corp. and U.S. ex rel. Mohajer et al. v. Omnicare, Inc. and CVS Health Corp. (U.S. District Court for
the Southern District of New York). In December 2019, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York (the “SDNY”) filed complaints-in-
intervention in these two previously sealed qui tam cases. With respect to the Bassan complaint, all states except Washington, D.C. and Indiana have declined to
intervene;  Washington,  D.C. has intervened,  and Indiana  has not filed  a decision  on intervention.  The government’s  investigation  related to these complaints
included the previously disclosed CID that the Company received in October 2015 from the SDNY concerning the Company’s Omnicare pharmacies’ cycle fill
process for assisted living facilities. The complaints allege that for certain non-skilled nursing facilities,
158

Omnicare improperly filled prescriptions beyond one year where a valid prescription did not exist and that these dispensing events violated the federal False
Claims Act. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
In July 2017, the Company also received a subpoena from the California Department of Insurance requesting documents concerning the Company’s Omnicare
pharmacies’ cycle fill process for assisted living facilities. The Company has been cooperating with the California Department of Insurance and providing
documents and information in response to this subpoena.
In December 2016, the Company received a CID from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of New York requesting documents and information in
connection with a federal False Claims Act investigation concerning whether the Company’s retail pharmacies improperly submitted certain insulin claims to Part
D of the Medicare program rather than Part B of the Medicare program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and providing documents and
information in response to this CID.
In May 2017, the Company received a CID from the SDNY requesting documents and information concerning possible false claims submitted to Medicare in
connection with reimbursements for prescription drugs under the Medicare Part D program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and
providing documents and information in response to this CID.
Provider Proceedings
The Company is named as a defendant in purported class actions and individual lawsuits arising out of its practices related to the payment of claims for services
rendered to its members by health care providers with whom the Company has a contract and with whom the Company does not have a contract (“out-of-network
providers”). Among other things, these lawsuits allege that the Company paid too little to its health plan members and/or providers for these services and/or
otherwise allege that the Company failed to timely or appropriately pay or administer claims and benefits (including the Company’s post payment audit and
collection practices and reductions in payments to providers due to sequestration). Other major health insurers are the subject of similar litigation or have settled
similar litigation.
The Company also has received subpoenas and/or requests for documents and other information from, and been investigated by, state Attorneys General and other
state and/or federal regulators, legislators and agencies relating to, and the Company is involved in other litigation regarding, its out-of-network benefit payment
and administration practices. It is reasonably possible that others could initiate additional litigation or additional regulatory action against the Company with
respect to its out-of-network benefit payment and/or administration practices.
CMS Actions
CMS regularly audits the Company’s performance to determine its compliance with CMS’s regulations and its contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of
services it provides to Medicare beneficiaries. CMS uses various payment mechanisms to allocate and adjust premium payments to the Company’s and other
companies’ Medicare plans by considering the applicable health status of Medicare members as supported by information prepared, maintained and provided by
health care providers. The Company collects claim and encounter data from providers and generally relies on providers to appropriately code their submissions to
the Company and document their medical records, including the diagnosis data submitted to the Company with claims. CMS pays increased premiums to Medicare
Advantage plans and Medicare PDP plans for members who have certain medical conditions identified with specific diagnosis codes. Federal regulators review and
audit the providers’ medical records to determine whether those records support the related diagnosis codes that determine the members’ health status and the
resulting risk-adjusted premium payments to the Company. In that regard, CMS has instituted risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”) audits of various
Medicare Advantage plans, including certain of the Company’s plans, to validate coding practices and supporting medical record documentation maintained by
health care providers and the resulting risk adjusted premium payments to the plans. CMS may require the Company to refund premium payments if the
Company’s risk adjusted premiums are not properly supported by medical record data. The Office of the Inspector General of Health and Human Services (the
“OIG”) also is auditing the Company’s risk adjustment-related data and that of other companies. The Company expects CMS and the OIG to continue these types
of audits.
In 2012, CMS revised its audit methodology for RADV audits to determine refunds payable by Medicare Advantage plans for contract year 2011 and forward.
Under the revised methodology, among other things, CMS will extrapolate the error rate identified in the audit sample of approximately 200 members to all risk
adjusted premium payments made under the contract being audited. For contract years prior to 2011, CMS did not extrapolate sample error rates to the entire
contract. As a result, the revised methodology may increase the Company’s exposure to premium refunds to CMS based on incomplete medical records
159

maintained by providers. Since 2013, CMS has selected certain of the Company’s Medicare Advantage contracts for various contract years for RADV audit, and
the number of RADV audits continues to increase. The Company is currently unable to predict which of its Medicare Advantage contracts will be selected for
future audit, the amounts of any retroactive refunds of, or prospective adjustments to, Medicare Advantage premium payments made to the Company, the effect of
any such refunds or adjustments on the actuarial soundness of the Company’s Medicare Advantage bids, or whether any RADV audit findings would require the
Company to change its method of estimating future premium revenue in future bid submissions to CMS or compromise premium assumptions made in the
Company’s bids for prior contract years, the current contract year or future contract years. Any premium or fee refunds or adjustments resulting from regulatory
audits, whether as a result of RADV, Public Exchange related or other audits by CMS, the OIG, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services or otherwise,
including audits of the Company’s minimum MLR rebates, methodology and/or reports, could be material and could adversely affect the Company’s operating
results, financial condition and/or cash flows.
Medicare CIDs
The Company has received CIDs from the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of the Company’s patient chart review processes in
connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D of the Medicare program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and
providing documents and information in response to these CIDs.
Stockholder Matters
The Company and/or its current and/or former directors and/or executive officers are named as defendants in a number of lawsuits and a request for access to
information initiated by holders or putative holders of CVS Health common stock.
Between February and August 2019, six class action complaints were filed by putative plaintiffs against the Company and certain current and former officers and
directors: Anarkat v. CVS Health Corp., et al. (U.S. District Court for the District of Rhode Island); Labourers’ Pension Fund of Central and Eastern Canada v.
CVS Health Corp., et al. (New York Supreme Court); City of Warren Police and Fire Retirement Sys.v. CVS Health Corp., et. al. (Rhode Island Superior Court);
Cambria Co. Employees Retirement Sys. v. CVS Health Corp., et al. (New York Supreme Court); Freundlich v. CVS Health Corp., et al. (Rhode Island Superior
Court); and Waterford Twp. Police & Fire Retirement Sys. v. CVS Health Corp., et al. (U.S. District Court for the District of Rhode Island). The plaintiffs in these
cases assert a variety of causes of action under federal securities laws that are premised on allegations that the defendants made certain omissions and
misrepresentations relating to the performance of the Company’s LTC business unit, which allegedly injured investors who acquired CVS Health securities
between February 9, 2016 and February 20, 2019. The Freundlich case also alleges that defendants misrepresented anticipated synergies of the Aetna
Acquisition. Plaintiffs in the Freundlich and the City of Warren cases have filed a consolidated complaint that combines their allegations. The Company is
defending itself against these claims.
In January 2020, a derivative complaint was filed against the Company’s directors and current and former executive officers in the U.S. District Court for the
District of Rhode Island by a stockholder. Lovoi v. Aguirre, et al. makes allegations similar to those contained the six stockholder class action complaints described
above, including that the Company made false or misleading statements about its LTC business unit’s financial health. The Lovoi complaint alleges claims for
breach of fiduciary duty against the Company’s directors and certain of its current and former executive officers and for violation of the federal securities laws. The
Lovoi complaint seeks damages, restitution and equitable relief on behalf of the Company. The Company’s directors and current and former executive officers are
defending themselves against these claims.
In November 2019, the Company received a demand to inspect its books and records under Delaware General Corporation Law Section 220 from purported
stockholder Judith B. Cohen. The demand seeks various documents related to the Company’s LTC operations, its financial condition and its goodwill impairment
charges, as well as more general information regarding share repurchases, director nominations and charitable donations. The Company has objected to this
request.
Other Legal and Regulatory Proceedings.
The Company is also a party to other legal proceedings and is subject to government investigations, inquiries and audits and has received and is cooperating with
the government in response to CIDs, subpoenas or similar process from various governmental agencies requesting information, arising, for the most part, in the
ordinary course of its businesses. These other legal proceedings and government actions include claims of or relating to bad faith, medical or professional
malpractice, claims processing, dispensing of medications, non-compliance with state and federal regulatory regimes, marketing misconduct, failure to timely or
appropriately pay or administer claims and benefits, provider network structure (including the use of performance-
160

based networks and termination of provider contracts), rescission of insurance coverage, improper disclosure or use of personal information, anticompetitive
practices, general contractual matters, product liability, intellectual property litigation and employment litigation. Some of these other legal proceedings are or are
purported to be class actions or derivative claims. The Company is defending itself against the claims brought in these matters.
Awards to the Company and others of certain government contracts, particularly Medicaid contracts and other contracts with government customers in the
Company’s Health Care Benefits segment, frequently are subject to protests by unsuccessful bidders. These protests may result in awards to the Company being
reversed, delayed or modified. The loss or delay in implementation of any government contract could adversely affect the Company’s operating results. The
Company will continue to defend contract awards it receives.
There also continues to be a heightened level of review and/or audit by regulatory authorities and legislators of, and increased litigation regarding, the Company’s
and the rest of the health care and related benefits industry’s business and reporting practices, including premium rate increases, utilization management,
development and application of medical policies, complaint, grievance and appeal processing, information privacy, provider network structure (including provider
network adequacy, the use of performance-based networks and termination of provider contracts), provider directory accuracy, calculation of minimum medical
loss ratios and/or payment of related rebates, delegated arrangements, rescission of insurance coverage, limited benefit health products, student health products,
pharmacy benefit management practices (including manufacturers’ rebates, pricing, the use of narrow networks and the placement of drugs in formulary tiers),
sales practices, customer service practices, vendor oversight and claim payment practices (including payments to out-of-network providers).
As a leading national health care company, the Company regularly is the subject of government actions of the types described above. These government actions
may prevent or delay the Company from implementing planned premium rate increases and may result, and have resulted, in restrictions on the Company’s
businesses, changes to or clarifications of the Company’s business practices, retroactive adjustments to premiums, refunds or other payments to members,
beneficiaries, states or the federal government, withholding of premium payments to the Company by government agencies, assessments of damages, civil or
criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including the possible suspension or loss of licensure and/or suspension or exclusion from participation in
government programs.
The Company can give no assurance that its businesses, financial condition, operating results and/or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected, or that the
Company will not be required to materially change its business practices, based on: (i) future enactment of new health care or other laws or regulations; (ii) the
interpretation or application of existing laws or regulations as they may relate to one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which
the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iii) pending or future federal or state government investigations of one or more of the Company’s
businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iv) pending or future government audits,
investigations or enforcement actions against the Company; (v) adverse developments in any pending qui tam lawsuit against the Company, whether sealed or
unsealed, or in any future qui tam lawsuit that may be filed against the Company; or (vi) adverse developments in pending or future legal proceedings against the
Company or affecting one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally.
17.
Segment Reporting
The Company has three operating segments, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits, as well as a Corporate/Other segment. The Company’s
segments maintain separate financial information, and the CODM evaluates the segments’ operating results on a regular basis in deciding how to allocate resources
among the segments and in assessing segment performance. The CODM evaluates the performance of the Company’s segments based on adjusted operating
income. Effective for the first quarter of 2019, adjusted operating income is defined as operating income (GAAP measure) excluding the impact of amortization of
intangible assets and other items, if any, that neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business
performance. Segment financial information has been retrospectively adjusted to conform with the current period presentation. See the reconciliation of
consolidated operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income below for further context regarding the items excluded from operating income in
determining adjusted operating income. The Company uses adjusted operating income as its principal measure of segment performance as it enhances the
Company’s ability to compare past financial performance with current performance and analyze underlying business performance and trends. Non-GAAP financial
measures the Company discloses, such as consolidated adjusted operating income, should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures
determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP.
161

Effective for the first quarter of 2019, the Company realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and reflect how its
CODM reviews information and manages the business. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for further discussion of this realignment. Segment financial
information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect these changes.
In 2018 and 2017, approximately 9.8% and 12.3%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated revenues were from Aetna, a Pharmacy Services segment client.
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. Subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition, transactions with Aetna continue to be reported
within the Pharmacy Services segment, but are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In millions
Pharmacy  
Services (1)
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations (2)
Consolidated 
Totals
2019:
Revenues from customers
$
141,491
$
86,608
$
69,005
$
100
$
(41,439)
$
255,765
Net investment income
—
—
599
412
—
1,011
Total revenues
141,491
86,608
69,604
512
(41,439)
256,776
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,129
6,705
5,202
(1,000)
(697)
15,339
Depreciation and amortization
766
1,723
1,721
161
—
4,371
Additions to property and equipment
332
1,212
533
404
—
2,481
2018:
Revenues from customers
134,736
83,989
8,904
4
(33,714)
193,919
Net investment income
—
—
58
602
—
660
Total revenues
134,736
83,989
8,962
606
(33,714)
194,579
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
4,955
7,403
528
(856)
(769)
11,261
Depreciation and amortization
710
1,698
172
138
—
2,718
Additions to property and equipment
326
1,350
46
401
—
2,123
2017:
Revenues from customers
130,822
79,398
3,582
—
(29,037)
184,765
Net investment income
—
—
5
16
—
21
Total revenues
130,822
79,398
3,587
16
(29,037)
184,786
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
4,628
7,475
359
(896)
(741)
10,825
Depreciation and amortization
710
1,651
2
116
—
2,479
Additions to property and equipment
311
1,398
—
340
—
2,049
_____________________________________________ 
(1) Total revenues of the Pharmacy Services segment include approximately $11.5 billion, $11.4 billion and $10.8 billion of retail co-payments for 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. See Note
1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information about retail co-payments.
(2) Intersegment eliminations relate to intersegment revenue generating activities that occur between the Pharmacy Services segment, the Retail/LTC segment and/or the Health Care Benefits
segment.
162

The following is a reconciliation of consolidated operating income to adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
In millions
2019
2018
2017
Operating income (GAAP measure)
$
11,987
$
4,021
$
9,538
Amortization of intangible assets (1)
2,436
1,006
817
Acquisition-related transaction and integration costs (2)
480
492
65
Store rationalization charges (3)
231
—
215
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary (4)
205
86
9
Goodwill impairments (5)
—
6,149
181
Impairment of long-lived assets (6)
—
43
—
Interest income on financing for the Aetna Acquisition (7)
—
(536)
—
Adjusted operating income
$
15,339
$
11,261
$
10,825
_____________________________________________ 
(1) The Company’s acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets as required under the acquisition method of accounting which consist primarily of trademarks,
customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology, provider networks and value of business acquired. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated
useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in the Company’s statements
of operations in operating expenses within each segment. Although intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the amortization of intangible assets does not directly
relate to the underwriting of the Company’s insurance products, the services performed for the Company’s customers or the sale of the Company’s products or services. Additionally,
intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of the Company’s acquisition activity. Accordingly, the Company believes excluding the amortization
of intangible assets enhances the Company’s and investors’ ability to compare the Company’s past financial performance with its current performance and to analyze underlying business
performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within the Company’s GAAP financial
statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset amortization is excluded from
the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an intangible asset becomes
impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised.
(2) In 2019, 2018 and 2017, acquisition-related transaction and integration costs relate to the Aetna Acquisition. In 2018 and 2017, acquisition-related transaction and integration costs also
relate to the acquisition of Omnicare. The acquisition-related transaction and integration costs are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses
within the Corporate/Other segment and the Retail/LTC segment.
(3) In 2019, the store rationalization charges relate to the planned closure of 46 underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the second quarter of 2019 and the planned closure of 22
underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the first quarter of 2020. In 2019, the store rationalization charges primarily relate to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges and
are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment. In 2017, the store rationalization charges related to the
Company’s enterprise streamlining initiative and are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(4) In 2019, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019. The loss on divestiture primarily relates to the elimination of
the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income. In 2018, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of the Company’s
RxCrossroads subsidiary for $725 million on January 2, 2018. In 2017, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents transaction costs associated with the sale of RxCrossroads. The losses
on divestiture of subsidiary are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment and Corporate/Other segment.
(5) In 2018, the goodwill impairments relate to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment. In 2017, the goodwill impairments relate to the RxCrossroads reporting unit within the
Retail/LTC segment.
(6) In 2018, impairment of long-lived assets primarily relates to the impairment of property and equipment within the Retail/LTC segment and is reflected in operating expenses in the
Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
(7) In 2018, the Company recorded interest income of $536 million on the proceeds of the $40 billion of unsecured senior notes it issued in March 2018 to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition.
All amounts are for the periods prior to the close of the Aetna Acquisition, which occurred on November 28, 2018, and were recorded within the Corporate/Other segment.
163

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation
 
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
We have audited CVS Health Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control-
Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion,
CVS Health Corporation (the Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on
the COSO criteria.
 
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the 2019 consolidated
financial statements of the Company and our report dated February 18, 2020, expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 
Basis for Opinion
 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are
required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
 
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
 
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
Boston, Massachusetts
February 18, 2020
164

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  balance  sheets  of  CVS  Health  Corporation  (the  Company)  as  of  December  31,  2019 and  2018,  the  related
consolidated  statements  of  operations,  comprehensive  income  (loss),  shareholders’  equity  and  cash  flows  for  each  of  the  three  years  in  the  period  ended
December 31, 2019, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2019, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February 18, 2020 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Adoption of ASU 2016-02
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed its method of accounting for leases in 2019 due to the adoption of ASU
2016-02, Leases.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance
with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to
be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the
accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
165

Impairment of goodwill
Description of the
Matter
At December 31, 2019, the Company’s goodwill allocated to the Long-term Care (“LTC”) and Commercial Business reporting units was
$0.4 billion and $26.8 billion, respectively. As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, goodwill is not amortized,
but rather is subject to an annual impairment review, or more frequent reviews, if events and circumstances indicate an impairment exists.
Auditing management's annual goodwill impairment test related to the LTC and Commercial Business reporting units was complex and
highly judgmental due to the significant estimation required to determine the fair value of the reporting units. In particular, the fair value
estimate was sensitive to significant assumptions, such as changes in the discount rate, projected revenue and projected operating income
that are forward-looking and affected by future economic and market conditions.  
How We
Addressed the
Matter in Our
Audit
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls over the Company’s annual goodwill
impairment review process, including controls over management’s review of the significant assumptions described above.
To test the estimated fair value of the LTC and Commercial Business reporting units, we performed audit procedures that included, among
others, assessing methodologies and testing the significant assumptions discussed above and the underlying data used by the Company in
its analysis. We compared the significant assumptions to the reporting units’ historical results and third-party industry data. We performed
sensitivity analyses of significant assumptions to evaluate the changes in the fair value of the reporting units that would result from changes
in the key assumptions. We involved valuation specialists to assist in our assessment of the methodology and significant assumptions (such
as discount rates), used by the Company. In addition, we tested management’s reconciliation of the fair value of all reporting units to the
market capitalization of the Company.  
Valuation of health care costs payable
Description of the
Matter
At  December  31,  2019,  the  incurred  but  not  reported  (“IBNR”)  liabilities  represented  $5.0  billion  of  $6.9  billion  of  health  care  costs
payable.  As  discussed  in  Note  1  to  the  financial  statements,  the  Company’s  liability  for  health  care  costs  payable  includes  estimated
payments for (1) services rendered to members but not yet reported and (2) claims that have been reported but not yet paid, each as of the
financial statement date (collectively, “IBNR”). The estimated IBNR liability is developed utilizing actuarial principles and assumptions
that  include  historical  and  projected  claim  submission  and  processing  patterns,  historical  and  assumed  medical  cost  trends,  historical
utilization of medical services, claim inventory levels, changes in membership and product mix, seasonality and other relevant factors to
record  the  actuarial  best  estimate  of  health  care  costs  payable.  There  is  significant  uncertainty  inherent  in  determining  management’s
actuarial  best  estimate  of  health  care  costs  payable.  In  particular,  the  estimate  is  sensitive  to  the  assumed  completion  factors  and  the
assumed health care cost trend rates.
Auditing management’s actuarial best estimate of IBNR reserves for health care costs payable for its products and services involved a high
degree of subjectivity in evaluating management’s assumptions used in the valuation process.
How We
Addressed the
Matter in Our
Audit
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls over the process for estimating IBNR
reserves. This included, among others, controls over the completeness and accuracy of data used in the actuarial projections, the transfer of
data between underlying source systems, and the review and approval processes that management has in place for the actuarial principles
and assumptions used in estimating the health care costs payable.  
To test IBNR reserves, our audit procedures included, among others, testing the completeness and accuracy of the underlying claim and
membership data used in the calculation of IBNR reserves. We involved actuarial specialists to assist with our audit procedures, which
included,  among  others,  evaluating  the  methodologies  applied  by  the  Company  in  determining  the  actuarially  determined  liability,
evaluating  management’s  actuarial  principles  and  assumptions  used  in  their  analysis  based  on  historical  claim  experience,  and
independently calculating a range of reserve estimates for comparison to management’s actuarial best estimate of the liability for health
care costs payable. Additionally, we performed a review of the prior period liabilities for incurred but not paid claims to subsequent claims
development. 
166

/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2007.
Boston, Massachusetts
February 18, 2020
167

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)
In millions, except per share amounts
First
Quarter
Second
Quarter
Third
Quarter
Fourth
Quarter
Year
2019:
Total revenues
$
61,646
$
63,431
$
64,810
$
66,889
$
256,776
Operating income
2,690
3,332
2,928
3,037
11,987
Income from continuing operations
1,427
1,931
1,529
1,744
6,631
Net income attributable to CVS Health
1,421
1,936
1,530
1,747
6,634
Per common share data:
Basic earnings per common share:
Income from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
1.09
$
1.49
$
1.17
$
1.34
$
5.10
Income from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
Net income attributable to CVS Health
$
1.09
$
1.49
$
1.17
$
1.34
$
5.10
Diluted earnings per common share:
Income from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
1.09
$
1.49
$
1.17
$
1.33
$
5.08
Income from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
Net income attributable to CVS Health
$
1.09
$
1.49
$
1.17
$
1.33
$
5.08
Dividends per common share
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
2.00
168

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
In millions, except per share amounts
First
Quarter
Second
Quarter
Third
Quarter
Fourth
Quarter
Year
2018:
Total revenues
$
45,743
$
46,922
$
47,490
$
54,424
$
194,579
Operating income (loss)
1,996
(1,373)
2,574
824
4,021
Income (loss) from continuing operations
998
(2,562)
1,390
(422)
(596)
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
998
(2,563)
1,390
(419)
(594)
Per common share data:
Basic earnings (loss) per common share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
0.98
$
(2.52)
$
1.36
$
(0.37)
$
(0.57)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
0.98
$
(2.52)
$
1.36
$
(0.37)
$
(0.57)
Diluted earnings (loss) per common share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
0.98
$
(2.52)
$
1.36
$
(0.37)
$
(0.57)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
0.98
$
(2.52)
$
1.36
$
(0.37)
$
(0.57)
Dividends per common share
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
0.50
$
2.00
169

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures.
Evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, after evaluating the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15 (f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of December 31, 2019, have concluded that as
of such date the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were adequate and effective at a reasonable assurance level and designed to ensure that material
information relating to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries would be made known to such officers on a timely basis.
Management’s report on internal control over financial reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. The Company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of the
Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial
statements. In order to ensure the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective, management regularly assesses such control and did so most
recently for its financial reporting as of December 31, 2019.
Management conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria established in Internal
Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 Framework). This evaluation included
review of the documentation, evaluation of the design effectiveness and testing of the operating effectiveness of controls. The Company’s system of internal
control over financial reporting is enhanced by periodic reviews by the Company’s internal auditors, written policies and procedures and a written Code of Conduct
adopted by CVS Health’s Board of Directors, applicable to all employees of the Company. In addition, the Company has an internal Disclosure Committee,
comprised of management from each functional area within the Company, which performs a separate review of disclosure controls and procedures. There are
inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of internal control over financial reporting.
Based on management’s assessment, management concluded that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective and provides reasonable
assurance that assets are safeguarded and that the financial records are reliable for preparing financial statements as of December 31, 2019.
Ernst & Young LLP, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, is appointed by CVS Health’s Board of Directors and ratified by CVS Health’s
stockholders. They were engaged to render an opinion regarding the fair presentation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements as well as conducting an
audit of internal control over financial reporting. Their reports included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K are based upon audits conducted in accordance with the
standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Changes in internal control over financial reporting
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed its acquisition of Aetna. During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019, the Company completed the process
of integrating the internal control over financial reporting of Aetna with the rest of the Company. 
Other than the foregoing, there has been no change in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required
by paragraph (d) of Rule 13a-15 or Rule 15d-15 that occurred during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019 that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
170

Table of Contents
Item 9B. Other Information.
No events have occurred during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019 that would require disclosure under this item.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
Information concerning the Executive Officers of CVS Health Corporation is included in Part I of this 10-K pursuant to General Instruction G to Form 10-K.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Committees of the Board as of the Annual Meeting,” “Code of Conduct,” “Audit Committee Report,” and
“Biographies of our Incumbent Board Nominees” are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Non-Employee Director Compensation” and “Executive Compensation and Related Matters,” including
“Letter from the Management Planning and Development Committee,” “Compensation Committee Report,” “Compensation Discussion and Analysis” and
“Compensation of Named Executive Officers” are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Share Ownership of Directors and Certain Executive Officers” and “Share Ownership of Principal
Stockholders” are incorporated herein by reference. Those sections contain information concerning security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters.
The following table summarizes information about the registrants common stock that may be issued upon the exercise of options, warrants and rights under all of
the Company’s equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2019:
Number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights (1) (2)
(a)
Weighted
average exercise
price of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
(b)
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
first column) (1)
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by stockholders (3)
32,237
$
73.32  
17,152
Equity compensation plans not approved by stockholders (4) (5)
4,518
43.46  
26,849
Total
36,755
$
71.83  
44,001
_____________________________________________ 
(1) Shares in thousands.
(2) Consists of: (i) 21,184 shares of common stock underlying outstanding options, (ii) 1,110 shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock appreciation rights
(“SARs”) and (iii) 14,461 shares of common stock issuable on the vesting of outstanding restricted stock units, deferred stock units and performance stock units, assuming target level
performance in the case of performance stock units. The number of shares included with respect to outstanding SARs is the number of shares of CVS Health common stock that would have
been issued had the SARs been exercised based on the closing price per share of CVS Health common stock on December 31, 2019, as reported on the NYSE, which was $74.29.
(3) Consists of the CVS Health 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan.
(4) Consists of the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Aetna Stock Plan”).
(5) Amount in column (c) consists of the maximum number of shares of CVS Health common stock available for future issuance under the Aetna Stock Plan as of December 31, 2019.
The Aetna Stock Plan was last approved by Aetna’s shareholders at Aetna’s 2017 Annual Meeting on May 19, 2017. The Company elected to continue to grant
awards under the Aetna Stock Plan to employees of Aetna and its subsidiaries following the completion of the Aetna Acquisition. The Aetna Stock Plan is designed
to promote the Company’s interests and those of its stockholders and to further align the interests of stockholders and employees by tying awards to total return to
stockholders, enabling plan participants to acquire additional equity interests in the Company and providing compensation opportunities
171

Table of Contents
dependent upon the Company’s performance. The Aetna Stock Plan has not been submitted to the Company’s stockholders and will expire on May 21, 2020.
Under the Aetna Stock Plan, eligible participants can be granted stock options to purchase shares of CVS Health common stock, SARs, time-vesting and/or
performance-vesting incentive stock or incentive units and other stock based awards. As of December 31, 2019, the maximum number of shares of CVS Health
common stock that may be issued under the awards outstanding under the Aetna Stock Plan was 4.5 million shares, subject to adjustment for corporate transactions
and 26.8 million shares remained available for future awards. If an award under the Aetna Stock Plan is paid solely in cash, no shares are deducted from the
number of shares available for issuance under the Aetna Stock Plan.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Independence Determinations for Directors” and “Related Person Transaction Policy” are incorporated
herein by reference.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services.
The section of the Proxy Statement under the caption “Item 2: Ratification of Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm for 2020” is
incorporated herein by reference.
172

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
The following documents are filed as part of this 10-K:
1.
Financial Statements. See “Index to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules. All financial statement schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not required under the instructions, or the
information is included in the consolidated financial statements or related notes.
3.
Exhibits. The exhibits listed in the “Index to Exhibits” in this Item 15 are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this 10-K. Exhibits marked with an
asterisk (*) are management contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements. Exhibits other than those listed are omitted because they are not required to
be listed or are not applicable. Pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, the Registrant hereby agrees to furnish to the Securities and Exchange
Commission a copy of any omitted instrument that is not required to be listed.
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Exhibit
Description
2
Plan of acquisition, reorganization, arrangement, liquidation or succession
2.1
Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 20, 2015, among CVS Pharmacy, Inc., Tree Merger Sub, Inc. and Omnicare, Inc. (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed May 21, 2015).
2.2
Master Transaction Agreement dated as of October 22, 2017, by and between Aetna Inc. and Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.3 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
2.3
Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of December 3, 2017, among CVS Health Corporation, Hudson Merger Sub Corp. and Aetna Inc.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 5, 2017).
3
Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws
3.1
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant dated June 4, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1C of Registrant’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed June 5, 2018).
3.2
By-Laws of the Registrant, as amended and restated June 4, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed June 5, 2018).
4
Instruments defining the rights of security holders, including indentures
4.1
Specimen common stock certificate (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registration Statement of the Registrant ((then known as
CVS Corporation) as successor to Melville Corporation) on Form 8-B filed November 4, 1996).
4.2
Senior Indenture dated August 15, 2006, between the Registrant and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15, 2006).
4.3
Form of the Registrant’s 2020 Floating Rate Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed March 12, 2018).
4.4
Form of the Registrant’s 2021 Floating Rate Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed March 12, 2018).
4.5
Form of the Registrant’s 2020 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.6
Form of the Registrant’s 2021 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.7
Form of the Registrant’s 2023 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.8
Form of the Registrant’s 2025 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.6 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.9
Form of the Registrant’s 2028 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.7 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
173

4.10
Form of the Registrant’s 2038 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.8 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.11
Form of the Registrant’s 2048 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.9 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.12
Form of the Registrant’s 2024 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15,
2019).
4.13
Form of the Registrant’s 2026 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15,
2019).
4.14
Form of the Registrant’s 2029 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15,
2019).
4.15
Material terms of outstanding securities that are registered under Section 12 of the 1934 Act as required by Item 202(a)-(d) and (f) of
Regulation S-K.
10
Material Contracts
10.1
Five Year Credit Agreement, dated as of May 18, 2017, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York
Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.2
Amendment No. 1 to Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of December 15, 2017, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 18,
2017, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 19, 2017).
10.3
Amendment No. 2 to Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 18, 2017, by
and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2018).
10.4
Amendment No. 3, dated as of May 16, 2019, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 18, 2017, by and among the Registrant, the
lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.5
Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York
Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended June 30, 2018).
10.6
Amendment No. 1, dated as of May 16, 2019, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, by and among the Registrant, the
lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.7
364-Day Credit Agreement dated as of May 16, 2019 by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as
Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended
June 30, 2019).
10.8
Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 16, 2019 by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as
Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended
June 30, 2019).
10.9*
The Registrant’s Supplemental Retirement Plan I for Select Senior Management, as amended and restated as of December 31, 2008
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2009).
10.10*
Form of Enterprise Non-Competition, Non-Disclosure and Developments Agreement between the Registrant and certain of the Registrant’s
executive officers (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 of the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2013).
10.11*
The Registrant’s Deferred Stock Compensation Plan, as amended and restated.
10.12*
The Registrant’s 2007 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to the Registrant’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015).
10.13*
Universal 409A Definition Document, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.28 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015).
10.14*
The Registrant’s Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and restated.
10.15*
The Registrant’s Partnership Equity Program, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.16*
The Registrant’s Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to the Registrant’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
174

10.17*
The Registrant’s 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit A to the Registrant’s Definitive Proxy Statement on
Form 14A filed March 31, 2017).
10.18*
The Registrant’s Executive Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.19*
The Registrant’s Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.20*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.29 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.21*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant - between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.30 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.22*
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.23*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement (Pre-
Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.32 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2014).
10.24*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Post-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2014).
10.25*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2018).
10.26*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement (LTIP) - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2018).
10.27*
The Registrant’s Management Incentive Plan.
10.28*
The Registrant’s Severance Plan for Non-Store Employees amended as of November 28, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to
the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.29*
The Registrant’s Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Program, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the Registrant’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.30*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.39 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.31*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant - between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.40 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.32*
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.41 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.33*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement (Pre-
Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2018).
10.34*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Post-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2013).
10.35*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.36*
Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended May 19, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the Registrant’s
Registration Statement on Form S-8 filed November 30, 2018).
10.37*
Form of Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan - Market Stock Unit Terms of Award (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.45 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.38*
Form of Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan - Performance Stock Unit Terms of Award (2015) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.46 to
the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
175

10.39*
Form of Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan - Executive Restricted Stock Unit Terms of Award (2015) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.47 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.40*
Form of Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan - Stock Appreciation Right Terms of Award (2015) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.48
to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.41*
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2008).
10.42*
Amendment dated as of December 21, 2012 to the Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Registrant and Larry Merlo
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012).
10.43*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.37 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.44*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38
to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.45*
Amendment dated January 22, 2015 to Nonqualified Stock Option Agreements between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed January 23, 2015).
10.46*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.47*
Change in Control Agreement effective as of July 19, 2010 between the Registrant and Eva Boratto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2019).
10.48*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated June 21, 2019 between the Registrant and Eva Boratto.
10.49*
Change in Control Agreement dated December 22, 2008 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012).
10.50*
Amendment dated as of December 31, 2012 to the Change in Control Agreement dated December 22, 2008 between the Registrant and
Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.34 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2012).
10.51*
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant dated April 1, 2016 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.44 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.52*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated May 20, 2016 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.45
to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.53*
Change in Control Agreement dated as of November 10, 2017 between the Registrant and Derica Rice (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2019).
10.54*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated June 19, 2019 between the Registrant and Derica Rice.
10.55*
Change in Control Agreement dated October 1, 2012 between the Registrant and Thomas Moriarty (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2015).
10.56*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated July 8, 2019 between the Registrant and Thomas Moriarty.
10.57*
Descriptions of certain arrangements not embodied in formal documents as described under the heading “Non-Employee Director
Compensation” are incorporated herein by reference to the Proxy Statement (when filed).
21
Subsidiaries of the registrant
21.1
Subsidiaries of CVS Health Corporation.
23
Consents of experts and counsel
23.1
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP.
31
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certifications
31.1
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer.
176

31.2
Certification by the Chief Financial Officer.
32
Section 1350 Certifications
32.1
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer.
32.2
Certification by the Chief Financial Officer.
101
Interactive Data File
101
The following materials from the CVS Health Corporation Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019
formatted in Inline XBRL: (i) the Consolidated Statements of Operations, (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss),
(iii) the Consolidated Balance Sheets, (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, (v) the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
and (vi) the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File because its
XBRL tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document.
104
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File - The cover page from the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019,
formatted in Inline XBRL (included as Exhibit 101).
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary.
None.
177

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
Date:
February 18, 2020
By:
/s/ EVA C. BORATTO
Eva C. Boratto
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
    
Title(s)
    
Date
/s/ FERNANDO AGUIRRE
Director
February 18, 2020
Fernando Aguirre
/s/ RICHARD M. BRACKEN
Director
February 18, 2020
Richard M. Bracken
/s/ C. DAVID BROWN II
Director
February 18, 2020
C. David Brown II
/s/ EVA C. BORATTO
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
February 18, 2020
Eva C. Boratto
Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ JAMES D. CLARK
Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief
February 18, 2020
James D. Clark
Accounting Officer (Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ ALECIA A. DECOUDREAUX
Director
February 18, 2020
Alecia A. DeCoudreaux
/s/ NANCY-ANN M. DEPARLE
Director
February 18, 2020
Nancy-Ann M. DeParle
/s/ DAVID W. DORMAN
Chair of the Board and Director
February 18, 2020
David W. Dorman
/s/ ROGER N. FARAH
Director
February 18, 2020
Roger N. Farah
/s/ ANNE M. FINUCANE
Director
February 18, 2020
Anne M. Finucane
/s/ EDWARD J. LUDWIG
Director
February 18, 2020
Edward J. Ludwig
/s/ LARRY J. MERLO
President and Chief Executive Officer
February 18, 2020
Larry J. Merlo
(Principal Executive Officer) and Director
/s/ JEAN-PIERRE MILLON
Director
February 18, 2020
Jean-Pierre Millon
/s/ MARY L. SCHAPIRO
Director
February 18, 2020
Mary L. Schapiro
/s/ RICHARD J. SWIFT
Director
February 18, 2020
Richard J. Swift
/s/ WILLIAM C. WELDON
Director
February 18, 2020
William C. Weldon
/s/ TONY L. WHITE
Director
February 18, 2020
Tony L. White

Exhibit 4.15
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
The following description (this “Description”) of the terms of the common stock of CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”) is a summary only and is
qualified by reference to the relevant provisions of Delaware law and the Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Charter”) and the By-Laws (the “By-Laws”) of
CVS Health. Copies of the Charter and the By-Laws are incorporated by reference as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10-K to which this Description is an
exhibit.
Authorized Capital Stock
Under the Charter as of February 12, 2020, the authorized capital stock of CVS Health consisted of (i) 3,200,000,000 shares of common stock, par value of
$0.01 per share (“common stock”), (ii) 120,619 shares of cumulative preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share (“preferred stock”), and (iii) 50,000,000 shares of
preference stock, par value $1.00 per share (“preference stock”).
Common Stock
The holders of shares of common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters voted on by CVS Health stockholders, including elections of
directors. Except as otherwise required by law, or by the provisions of the preferred stock or the preference stock, or provided in any resolution adopted by the
CVS Health board of directors (the “board”) with respect to any subsequently created class or series of shares of CVS Health, the holders of the shares of common
stock exclusively possess all voting power. The Charter precludes cumulative voting in the election of directors. The Charter provides for a majority vote standard
for uncontested elections of directors, and a plurality of votes standard for contested elections of directors. Subject to any rights of any outstanding series of
preferred stock or preference stock, (i) the holders of shares of common stock are entitled to such dividends as may be declared from time to time by the board
from funds available therefor, (ii) no dividends may be declared, paid, or set aside for payment on shares of common stock unless full cumulative dividends are
paid on any outstanding preference stock and any other preferred stock issued and outstanding at such time that is designated to have such dividend preference and
(iii) upon dissolution the holders of shares of common stock are entitled to receive pro rata all assets of CVS Health available for distribution to such holders,
subject to any liquidation preferences designated to any preferred stock or preference stock that may be issued and outstanding at such time of liquidation.
No Preemptive Rights
The Charter provides that no holder of any shares of CVS Health of any class or series may have any preemptive right to purchase or subscribe to any shares
of CVS Health or any security convertible into shares of CVS Health of any class or series.
Provisions Relating to Amendments to CVS Health’s Charter and By-Laws
Under Delaware law, stockholders have the right to adopt, amend or repeal the certificate of incorporation and by-laws of a corporation. However, Delaware
law requires that any amendment to the Charter also be approved by the board. Under Delaware law, unless a higher vote is required in a corporation’s certificate
of incorporation, amendments to the corporation’s certificate of incorporation will be adopted upon receiving at a properly convened meeting the affirmative vote
of a majority of the votes cast by all stockholders entitled to vote thereon, and if any class or series is entitled to vote thereon as a class, the affirmative vote of a
majority of the votes cast in each class vote.
In addition, the By-Laws may be amended by the board with respect to all matters not exclusively reserved by law to the stockholders. Amendments to
the By-Laws may be adopted and approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of stock of CVS Health entitled
to vote at any annual or special meeting, or by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors cast at any regular or special meeting, at which a quorum is
present.
1

Certain Statutory and Charter Provisions
Certain provisions of the Charter and By-Laws summarized in the following paragraphs may be deemed to have an antitakeover effect and may delay, defer
or prevent a tender offer or takeover attempt.
Potential Issuances of Preferred Stock and Preference Stock
As of February 12, 2020, the Charter authorized 120,619 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share and 50,000,000 shares of preference stock, par
value $1.00 per share. The Charter also authorizes the board to issue shares of preferred stock or preference stock, from time to time, in such class or classes, and
such series within any class, and with such designations, preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights, and qualifications, limitations or
restrictions thereof as the board may determine, including, for example, (i) the designation of the class or series; (ii) the number of shares of the class or series,
which number the board may thereafter (except where otherwise provided in the designation of any subsequently authorized class or series) increase or decrease
(but not below the number of shares thereof then outstanding); (iii) whether dividends, if any, will be cumulative or noncumulative and the dividend rate of the
class or series; (iv) the dates on which dividends, if any, will be payable; (v) the redemption rights and price or prices, if any, for shares of the class or series;
(vi) the terms and amounts of any sinking fund provided for the purchase or redemption of shares of the class or series; (vii) the amounts payable on shares of the
class or series in the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the affairs of CVS Health; (viii) whether the shares of the class
or series will be convertible into shares of any other class or series, or any other security, of CVS Health or any other corporation, and, if so, the specification of
such other class or series or such other security, the conversion price or prices or rate or rates, any adjustments thereof, the date or dates as of which such shares
will be convertible and all other terms and conditions upon which such conversion may be made; (ix) restrictions on the issuance of shares of the same class or
series or of any other class or series; and (x) the voting rights, if any, of the holders of such class or series. The authorized capital stock of CVS Health, including
preferred stock, preference stock and common stock, will be available for issuance without further action by CVS Health stockholders, unless such action is
required by applicable law or the rules of any stock exchange or automated quotation system on which CVS Health’s securities may be listed or traded. If the
approval of CVS Health stockholders is not so required, the board does not intend to seek stockholder approval.
Although the board has no intention at the present time of doing so, it could issue a class or series of preferred stock or preference stock that could,
depending on the terms of such class or series, impede completion of a merger, tender offer or other takeover attempt that the holders of some, or a majority, of
CVS Health shares might believe to be in their best interests or in which CVS Health stockholders might receive a premium for their shares over the then-current
market price of such shares.
Potential Issuances of Rights to Purchase Securities
CVS Health does not currently have a stockholder rights plan, although the board retains the right to adopt a new plan at a future date. The Charter grants
the board exclusive authority to create and issue rights entitling the holders thereof to purchase from CVS Health shares of capital stock or other securities and to
elect to repurchase, redeem, terminate or amend any such rights. The times at which and terms upon which such rights are to be issued, repurchased, redeemed,
terminated or amended are to be determined exclusively by the board and set forth in the contracts or instruments that evidence any such rights. The authority of
the board with respect to such rights includes determining, for example, (i) the purchase price of the capital stock or other securities or property to be purchased
upon exercise of such rights; (ii) provisions relating to the times at which and the circumstances under which such rights may be exercised or sold or otherwise
transferred, either together with or separately from any other shares or other securities of CVS Health; (iii) provisions which adjust the number or exercise price of
such rights or the amount or nature of the shares, other securities or other property receivable upon exercise of such rights in the event of a combination, split or
recapitalization of any shares of CVS Health, a change in ownership of CVS Health’s shares or other securities or a reorganization, merger, consolidation, sale of
assets or other occurrence relating to CVS Health or any shares of CVS Health, and provisions restricting the ability of CVS Health to enter into any such
transaction absent an assumption by the other party or parties thereto of the obligations of CVS Health under such rights; (iv) provisions which deny the holder of a
specified percentage of the outstanding securities of CVS Health the right to exercise such rights and/or cause such rights held by such holder to become void;
(v) provisions which
2

permit CVS Health to redeem or exchange such rights; and (vi) the appointment of the rights agent with respect to such rights. This provision is intended to
confirm the board’s exclusive authority to issue, repurchase, redeem, terminate or amend share purchase rights or other rights to purchase shares or securities of
CVS Health or any other corporation.
Stockholder Action by Written Consent
The Charter provides that stockholder action may be taken at an annual or special meeting of stockholders or by written consent in lieu of a meeting, but
only if such action is taken in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and By-Laws. Any person other than CVS Health seeking to have the CVS Health
stockholders authorize or take corporate action by written consent without a meeting is required to deliver a written notice signed by holders of record of at least
twenty-five percent (25%) of the voting power of the outstanding capital stock of CVS Health entitled to express consent on the relevant action and request that a
record date be fixed for such purpose.
Stockholder Vote on Fundamental or Extraordinary Corporate Transactions
Under Delaware law, a sale, lease or exchange of all or substantially all of CVS Health’s assets, an amendment to the Charter, a merger or consolidation of
CVS Health with another corporation or a dissolution of CVS Health generally requires the affirmative vote of the board and, with limited exceptions, the
affirmative vote of a majority of the aggregate voting power of the outstanding stock entitled to vote on the transaction.
With respect to transactions with related persons (persons who own at least 10% of the outstanding capital stock of CVS Health), the Charter provides that a
majority of outstanding shares (excluding those owned by the related person) voting as a single class is required to approve a business combination transaction with
a related person, unless (i) such transaction is approved by a majority of continuing directors (directors who are not the related person, or an affiliate or associate
thereof (or a representative or nominee of the related person or such affiliate or associate), that is involved in the relevant business combination and (a) who were
members of the board immediately prior to the time that such related person became a related person or (b) whose initial election as a director was recommended
by the affirmative vote of a least a majority of the continuing directors then in office, provided that, in either such case, such continuing director has continued in
office after becoming a continuing director) or (ii) certain fair price requirements are met.
State Anti-Takeover Provisions
CVS Health has not opted out of Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, which provides that, if a person acquires 15% or more of the
outstanding voting stock of a Delaware corporation, thereby becoming an “interested stockholder,” that person may not engage in certain “business combinations”
with the corporation, including mergers, purchases and sales of 10% or more of its assets, stock purchases and other transactions pursuant to which the percentage
of the corporation’s stock owned by the interested stockholder increases (other than on a pro rata basis) or pursuant to which the interested stockholder receives a
financial benefit from the corporation, for a period of three years after becoming an interested stockholder unless one of the following exceptions applies: (i) the
board approved the acquisition of stock pursuant to which the person became an interested stockholder or the transaction that resulted in the person becoming an
interested stockholder prior to the time that the person became an interested stockholder; (ii) upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the person
becoming an interested stockholder such person owned at least 85% of the outstanding voting stock of CVS Health, excluding, for purposes of determining the
voting stock outstanding, voting stock owned by directors who are also officers and certain employee stock plans; or (iii) the transaction is approved by the board
and by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the outstanding voting stock which is not owned by the interested stockholder. An “interested stockholder” also
includes the affiliates and associates of a 15% or more owner and any affiliate or associate of CVS Health who was the owner of 15% or more of the outstanding
voting stock within the three-year period prior to determine whether a person is an interested stockholder.
3

Exhibit 10.11
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
DEFERRED STOCK COMPENSATION PLAN
Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2020

CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
Deferred Compensation Plan
Page
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
1
1.1
Name of Plan
1
1.2
Purpose of Plan
1
1.3
“Top Hat” Pension Benefit Plan
1
1.4
Funding
1
1.5
Effective Date
1
1.6
Administration
1
1.7
Number and Gender
1
1.8
Headings
1
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
2
2.1
Account
2
2.2
Affiliate
2
2.3
Beneficiary
2
2.4
Board
2
2.5
Change in Control
2
2.6
Code
2
2.7
Committee
2
2.8
Deferral Account
2
2.9
Deferred Stock
2
2.10
Deferred Stock Compensation Election
3
2.11
Disability
3
2.12
Distribution Date
3
2.13
Effective Date
3
2.14
Eligible Executive
3
Page | i

2.15
Employee
3
2.16
ERISA
3
2.17
Exchange Act
3
2.18
Executive
3
2.19
Grandfathered Deferral Account
3
2.20
Participant
4
2.21
Plan Administrator
4
2.22
Plan Year
4
2.23
Retirement
4
2.24
Specified Employee
4
2.25
Specific Future Year
4
2.26
Stock
4
2.27
Termination of Employment
4
2.28
Trust
4
2.29
Trustee
4
2.30
Trust Agreement
4
2.31
Universal 409A Definition Document
5
2.32
Years of Service
5
ARTICLE III - ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION
6
3.1
Eligibility
6
3.2
Commencement of Participation
6
3.3
Termination of Participation
6
ARTICLE IV - DEFERRALS
7
4.1
Deferrals
7
4.2
Filing Requirements of Deferred Compensation Elections
7
4.3
Modification or Revocation of Election by Participant
7
ARTICLE V - DEFERRAL ACCOUNTS
8
5.1
Establishment; Crediting of Amounts Deferred
8
5.2
Deferred Stock As Sole Investment Vehicle
8
Page | ii

5.3
Dividend Equivalents
8
5.4
Trusts
8
ARTICLE VI - DISTRIBUTION OF ACCOUNT
10
6.1
Distribution of Elections - Timing of Payment
10
6.2
Disability Distributions
10
6.3
Distributions in the Event of Death
10
6.4
Distributions Upon Termination of Employment Other Than Retirement, Death or Disability
10
6.5
Change in Control
11
6.6
Form of Payment
11
6.7
Change of Distribution Election
11
6.8
Designation of Beneficiary
12
6.9
Unclaimed Account
13
6.10
Forfeited Stock
13
6.11
Hardship Withdrawals
13
6.12
Distribution of Grandfathered Deferral Account
13
6.13
Form of Settlement
13
6.14
Adjustments
13
6.15
Special rules for stock units transferred from the Aetna Deferred Compensation Program
14
ARTICLE VII - ADMINISTRATION
15
7.1
Plan Administrator
15
7.2
General Powers of Administration
15
7.3
Costs of Administration
15
7.4
Indemnification of Plan Administrator
15
7.5
409A Compliance
16
7.6
Sources of Stock: Limitation on Amount of Stock-Denominated Deferrals
16
ARTICLE VIII - CLAIMS PROCEDURE
17
8.1
Claims
17
8.2
Claim Decision
17
8.3
Request for Review/Appeal
17
Page | iii

8.4
Review of Decision
17
8.5
Time Limit for Bringing Legal Action
17
ARTICLE IX - MISCELLANEOUS
18
9.1
Not Contract of Employment
18
9.2
Non-Assignability of Benefits
18
9.3
Receipt and Release
18
9.4
Withholding and Deduction and Taxes
18
9.5
Amendment and Termination
18
9.6
Compliance with Securities and Other Laws
19
9.7
Provisions Relating to Section 16 of the Exchange Act
19
9.8
No Trust Created
19
9.9
Unsecured General Creditor Status of Employee
19
9.10
Limitation
19
9.11
Payment to Minors and Incompetents
20
9.12
Acceleration of or Delay in Payments
20
9.13
Severability
20
9.14
Governing Laws
20
9.15
Binding Effect
20
APPENDIX A - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE AETNA DEFERRED COMEPNSATION
PROGRAM
21
Page | iv

ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
1.1
Name of Plan.
CVS Health Corporation (the “Company”) hereby adopts the CVS Health Deferred Stock Compensation Plan as amended and restated as
of January 1, 2020(the “Plan”).
1.2
Purpose of Plan.
The purpose of the Plan is to provide certain eligible employees of the Company or an Affiliate authorized by the Committee to participate in
the Plan with the opportunity to elect to defer receipt of shares of Stock under certain Stock-based compensation plans or arrangements.
1.3
“Top Hat” Pension Benefit Plan.
The Plan is an “employee pension benefit plan” within the meaning of ERISA. However, the Plan is unfunded and maintained for a select
group of management or highly compensated employees and, therefore, it is intended that the Plan will be exempt from Parts 2, 3 and 4 of
Title I of ERISA. The Plan is not intended to qualify under Section 401(a) of the Code.
1.4
Funding.
The Plan is unfunded. All benefits will be paid from the general assets of the Company. Participants in the Plan shall have the status of
general unsecured creditors of the Company.
1.5
Effective Date.
The Plan was originally effective as of September 10, 1997, and is amended and restated in its entirety effective as of January 1, 2020to
reflect certain design and administrative changes desired by the Company.
1.6
Administration.
The Plan shall be administered by the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, as defined in Article VII.
1.7
Number and Gender.
Wherever appropriate herein, words used in the singular shall be considered to include the plural and words used in the plural shall be
considered to include the singular. The masculine gender, where appearing in the Plan, shall be deemed to include the feminine gender.
The feminine gender, where appearing in the Plan, shall be deemed to include the masculine gender.
1.8
Headings.
The headings of Articles and Sections herein are included solely for convenience, and if there is any conflict between such headings and the
text of the Plan, the text shall control.
Page | 1

ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
For purposes of the Plan, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless their context clearly requires a different
meaning:
2.1
Account.
The Deferral Account and the Grandfathered Deferral Account maintained by the Company on behalf of each Participant pursuant to the
Plan. Account shall also include those accounts established under the Plan to receive stock-based compensation transferred from deferred
compensation plans acquired by the Company.
2.2
Affiliate.
A subsidiary of the Company, as defined in the Company’s Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.3
Beneficiary.
The person or persons (which may include trusts) designated in writing (either by hand or electronic submission) by the Participant on the
beneficiary designation form prescribed by the Plan Administrator to receive the amounts, if any, payable under the Plan upon the death of
the  Participant.  In  the  absence  of  such  written  designation  by  the  Participant,  the  Beneficiary  shall  mean,  in  the  following  order,  the
Participant’s  spouse,  if  any;  the  person  named  as  the  Participant’s  beneficiary  under  the  Company’s  life  insurance  program;  or  the
Participant’s estate.
2.4
Board.
The Board of Directors of the Company.
2.5
Change in Control.
“Change  in  Control”  as  such  term  is  defined  in  Section  10(e)  of  the  CVS  Health  Corporation  2010  Incentive  Compensation Plan (for
deferrals  prior  to  October  1,  2015,  under  Section  10(c)  of  the  CVS  Caremark  Corporation  1997  Incentive  Compensation  Plan)  which
definition, for purposes of amounts subject to Section 409A of the Code, shall comply with Section 409A of the Code.
2.6
Code.
The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. References to any provision of the Code or regulation (including a proposed regulation)
thereunder shall include any successor provisions or regulations.
2.7
Committee.
The Management Planning and Development Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company or any other directors of the Company
designated as the Committee.
2.8
Deferral Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s) thereof) maintained for each Participant to record any and all deferrals made under the Plan.
2.9
Deferred Stock.
A right to receive Stock at the end of a specified deferral period (including upon the occurrence of specified events).
Page | 2

2.10
Deferred Stock Compensation Election.
The  written  election  (either  by  hand  or  electronic  submission)  including  any  amendments,  attachments  and  appendices  thereto  as
prescribed by the Plan Administrator, regardless of how it may be titled, under which the Participant agrees to defer receipt of Stock under
an award in the form of units denominated in Stock to be received from the Company or an Affiliate. This election as to deferral and the
related form and timing of distribution is made by the Participant and constitutes the agreement entered into between the Company and a
Participant for participation in the Plan. The Participant elects the terms of his or her deferral pursuant to the provisions of this Plan and the
administrative procedures established by the Plan Administrator.
2.11
Disability.
“Disability” as defined in the Company’s Long-Term Disability Plan.
2.12
Distribution Date.
The date on which a Participant’s distribution is scheduled to be paid with respect to his or her Account under the Plan pursuant to his or her
Deferred Stock Compensation Election, which date shall take into account any processing period.
2.13
Effective Date.
September 10, 1997.
2.14
Eligible Executive.
An Executive who is eligible to participate in the Plan as provided in Section 3.1(a).
2.15
Employee.
Any  common-law  full-time  salaried  exempt  employee  of  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate  who  has  been  authorized  by  the  Committee  to
participate in the Plan.
2.16
ERISA.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
2.17
Exchange Act.
The Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. References to any provision of the Exchange Act or rule thereunder shall include any
successor provisions or rules.
2.18
Executive.
An Employee whose Base Salary (determined on the basis of a maximum forty (40) hour work week) equals or exceeds $150,000 (as
adjusted from time to time by the Committee).
2.19
Grandfathered Deferral Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s)) maintained for each Participant to record the part of a Participant’s Deferral Account that was
earned and vested as of December 31, 2004 and not subject to Section 409A of the Code.
Page | 3

2.20
Participant.
Each Eligible Executive participating in the Plan as set forth in Section 3.2.
2.21
Plan Administrator.
The Deferred Compensation Plans Committee appointed pursuant to Section 7.1 to administer the Plan.
2.22
Plan Year.
A calendar year ending on December 31.
2.23
Retirement.
Termination of Employment with the Company and all Affiliates on or after (i) age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) or more Years
of Service or, if earlier, (ii) age sixty (60) and the completion of five (5) or more Years of Service. For the Grandfathered Deferral Account,
“Retirement” shall mean the Participant’s termination of employment (i) at or after attaining age sixty (60) or (ii) at or after attaining age fifty-
five (55) but prior to attaining age sixty (60), if such termination is approved in advance by the Plan Administrator.
2.24
Specified Employee.
“Specified Employee” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.25
Specific Future Year.
A calendar year in the future elected by a Participant with respect to the distribution of his or her Account(s) (or subaccount(s) thereof)
pursuant to the Plan.
2.26
Stock.
CVS Health Corporation Common Stock or any other equity securities of the Company designated by the Committee.
2.27
Termination of Employment.
“Termination of Employment” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.28
Trust.
Any trust or trusts established or designated by the Company to hold Stock or other assets in connection with the Plan; provided, however,
that the assets of such trusts shall remain subject to the claims of the general creditors of the Company.
2.29
Trustee.
The trustee of a Trust established under the Plan.
2.30
Trust Agreement.
The agreement entered into between the Company and the Trustee to carry out the purposes of the Plan, as amended or restated from time
to time.
Page | 4

2.31
Universal 409A Definition Document.
The document developed by the Company for the purpose of defining terms relating to benefits or amounts in all plans covered by Section
409A of the Code and sponsored by the Company or any Affiliate.
2.32
Year of Service.
Twelve (12) months of continuous service with the Company and any of its Affiliates.
Page | 5

ARTICLE III - ELIGIBILTY AND PARTICIPATION
3.1
Eligibility.
(a)
An Employee who is an Executive on October 1st of a calendar year (or such other date in the calendar year as designated by the
Committee) shall be eligible to participate in the Plan. The Committee may, in its sole discretion, designate other key employees of
the Company or an Affiliate who are members of a select group of management or highly compensated employees as eligible to
participate in the Plan.
(b)
Notwithstanding any Plan provision to the contrary, Employees must also be subject to the income tax laws of the United States in
order to be eligible for participation in the Plan.
(c)
Subject to the provisions of Sections 3.3 and Section 4.1, an Eligible Executive shall remain eligible to continue participation in the
Plan for each Plan Year following his or her initial year of participation in the Plan.
3.2
Commencement of Participation.
An Eligible Executive shall become a Participant effective as of the date that the Eligible Executive’s first Deferred Stock Compensation
Election becomes effective, provided that the Eligible Executive has provided such information as the Plan Administrator deems necessary
to properly administer the Plan.
3.3
Termination of Participation.
(a)
Participation shall cease when the benefits that have been credited to a Participant’s Deferral Account have been distributed to him
or her.
(b)
Subject to the provisions of Section 4.3, a Participant shall only be eligible to make Deferred Stock Compensation Elections under
the Plan for as long as he or she remains an Eligible Executive.
(c)
If a former Participant who has incurred a Termination of Employment with the Company and all Affiliates and whose participation in
the  Plan  ceased  under  Section  3.3(a)  is  reemployed  as  an  Executive,  the  former  Participant  may  again  become  eligible  to
participate in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.1.
Page | 6

ARTICLE IV - DEFERRALS
4.1
Deferrals.
To the extent authorized by the Committee, a Participant may elect to defer any award or other compensation that is denominated in Stock
to be received from the Company or an Affiliate, including shares issuable in connection with annual incentive awards or long term awards.
In  addition  to  any  terms  and  conditions  of  deferral  set  forth  under  plans,  programs  or  arrangements  from  which  receipt  of  the Stock-
denominated  award  is  deferred,  the  Committee  may  impose  limitations  on  the  amounts  permitted  to  be  deferred  and  other  terms  and
conditions of deferrals under the Plan. Any such limitations, and other terms and conditions of deferral, shall be set forth in the rules relating
to the Plan or election forms, other forms, or instructions published by the Committee and/or the Plan Administrator.
4.2
Filing Requirements of Deferred Stock Compensation Elections.
Subject to the following provisions of this Section, during an annual enrollment period established by the Plan Administrator in any Plan
Year,  an  Eligible  Executive  described  in  Section  3.1  may  elect,  subject to  Section  4.1  above,  to  defer  Stock-denominated  awards  by
submitting a Deferred Stock Compensation Election during such annual enrollment period. Under no circumstances may a Participant defer
Stock-denominated awards to which the Participant has attained, at the time of deferral, a legally enforceable right to current receipt of such
Stock-denominated awards.
A Participant shall submit a Deferred Stock Compensation Election in the manner specified by the Plan Administrator and a Deferred Stock
Compensation Election that is not timely filed shall be considered void and have no effect. If a Participant does not file a Deferred Stock
Compensation Election applicable to his or her stock-denominated awards on or before the close of the applicable annual enrollment period
(or such later date prescribed by the Plan Administrator), the Participant shall be deemed to have elected not to make a Deferred Stock
Compensation Election for such awards.
Subject to the provisions of this Article, an Eligible Executive must file a new Deferred Stock Compensation Election for each award he or
she elects to defer.
4.3
Modification or Revocation of Election by Participant.
(a)
Once  a  properly  completed  Deferred  Stock  Compensation  Election  form  is  received  by  the  Company,  the  elections  of  the
Participant shall be irrevocable: provided however, that subject to the requirements of Section 409A of the Code, the Committee
and/or Plan Administrator may, in its discretion, permit a Participant to elect a further deferral of amounts credited to a Deferral
Account by filing a later election form in accordance with Section 6.7, below.
(b)
If a Participant ceases to be an Executive after the date a Deferred Stock Compensation Election becomes effective but continues
to  be  employed  by  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate,  he  or  she  shall  continue  to  be  a  Participant  and  his  or  her  Deferred  Stock
Compensation  Election  currently  in  effect  shall  remain  in  force,  but  such  Participant  shall  not  be  eligible  to  make  any  further
Deferred Stock Compensation Elections until such time as he or she shall once again become an Eligible Executive.
(c)
A Participant who ceases to be an Executive shall continue to be eligible to participate unless and until such Participant fails to
make an annual deferral election under the Plan or the CVS Health Corporation Deferred Compensation Plan
Page | 7

ARTICLE V - DEFERRAL ACCOUNTS
5.1
Establishment; Crediting of Amounts Deferred.
One or more Deferral Accounts will be established for each Participant, as determined by the Plan Administrator. The amount of Stock-
denominated awards deferred with respect to each Deferral Account will be credited to such Account as of the date on which such amounts
would have been paid to the Participant but for the Participant’s election to defer receipt hereunder. Unless otherwise determined by the
Plan Administrator, shares will be credited to the Participant’s Deferral Account as units of Deferred Stock (as opposed to cash amounts
valued  by  reference  to  the  market  price  of  Stock).  With  respect  to  any  fractional  shares  of  Stock-denominated  awards,  the  Plan
Administrator shall either pay such fractional shares to the Participant in cash, credit the Deferral Account with cash in lieu of depositing
fractional shares into the Deferral Account, or credit the Deferral Account with a fraction of a share calculated to at least three decimal
places, as determined by the Plan Administrator.
5.2
Deferred Stock As Sole Investment Vehicle.
Amounts  credited  as  Deferred  Stock  to  a  Participant’s  Deferral  Account  may  not  be  reallocated  or  deemed reinvested in  any  other
investment vehicle, but shall remain as Deferred Stock until such time as the Deferral Account is settled in accordance with Article VI.
5.3
Dividend Equivalents.
Except as provided in Section 5.4, dividend equivalents will be credited on Deferred Stock credited to a Participant’s Deferral Account as
follows:
(a)
Cash and Non-Stock Dividends. If the Company declares and pays a dividend on Stock in the form of cash or property other than
shares of Stock, then a number of additional shares of Deferred Stock shall be credited to a Participant’s Deferral Account as of the
payment date for such dividend equal to (A) the number of shares of Deferred Stock credited to the Deferral Account as of the
record date for such dividend, multiplied by (B) the amount of cash plus the fair market value of any property other than shares
actually paid as a dividend on each share at such payment date, divided by (C) the fair market value of a share of Stock at such
payment date.
(b)
Stock Dividends and Splits. If the Company declares and pays a dividend on Stock in the form of additional shares of Stock, or
there occurs a forward split of Stock, then a number of additional shares of Deferred Stock shall be credited to the Participant’s
Deferral Account as of the payment date for such dividend or forward Stock split equal to (A) the number of shares of Deferred
Stock credited to the Deferral Account as of the record date for such dividend or split, multiplied by (B) the number of additional
shares actually paid as a dividend or issued in such split in respect of each share of Stock.
5.4
Trusts.
The Committee may, in its discretion, establish one or more Trusts (including sub-accounts under such Trusts) and deposit therein shares of
Stock  equal  in  number  to  the  number  of  shares  of  Deferred  Stock  then  credited  to  a  Participant’s  Deferral  Account  (or  a  specified
subaccount). In such case, the provisions of Section 5.3 notwithstanding, the dividend equivalents payable on the Participant’s Deferred
Stock shall be equal to the actual dividends paid on the shares deposited in such Trust (which dividends shall be reinvested by the Trustee
in additional shares of Stock), and shares may be delivered in settlement of the Participant’s Deferred Stock from the assets in such Trusts.
The Participant’s rights with respect to directing the voting of shares held in such
Page | 8

Trust or otherwise relating to such shares shall be determined by the Plan Administrator in its sole discretion.
Page | 9

ARTICLE IV - DISTRIBUTION OF ACCOUNT
6.1
Distribution Elections - Timing of Payment.
(a)
Subject to the limitations set forth in this Article VI, each time a Participant makes a Deferred Stock Compensation Election, the
Participant shall designate on that applicable Deferred Compensation Election, that the distribution of such deferrals shall be made
or commence as the case may be pursuant to Section 6.6 as of (i) the Participant’s Retirement; or (ii) a Specific Future Year not
later than the Plan Year in which the Participant attains age seventy-one (71)
A  Participant  may  choose  different  options  with  respect  to  each  Deferred  Stock  Compensation  Election.  A  Participant  may  not
change the election made pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.1, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.7 below.
i.
Retirement.  The  distribution  of  the  portion  of  a  Participant’s  Deferral  Account  (or  subaccount(s))  that  is  deferred  to
Retirement  under  this  Section  shall  commence  on  the  first  business  day  in  the  January  next  following  his  or  her
Retirement,  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Section  6.6,  provided,  however,  that  with  respect  to  a  Participant  who  is  a
Specified Employee as of the date of his or her Retirement, payment of any portion of his or her Deferral Account (or any
subaccount(s)  thereof)  that  is  subject  to  Section  409A  of  the  Code  will  be  delayed  until  the  first  business  day  of  the
seventh (7th) month following the date such Retirement occurs.
ii.
Specific Future Year. In the event a Participant elects to have the distribution of such deferrals made or commence as of
a Specific Future Year, subject to rules established by the Plan Administrator, the deferral period must be at least five (5)
Plan Years.  The distribution  of the portion  of  a Participant’s  Deferral  Account  (or  subaccount(s))  that  is deferred  to a
Specific Future Year shall commence on the first business day of January in that specific year pursuant to the provisions
of Section 6.6.
6.2
Disability Distributions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a Participant has a Termination of Employment because he or she has become Disabled, as determined by
the Plan Administrator, such Participant will receive his or her entire Deferral Account in a single lump sum payment (including a Deferral
Account with respect to which one or more installment payments have previously been made) which shall be made within seventy-five (75)
days from the date of the Participant’s Termination of Employment.
6.3
Distributions in the Event of Death.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a Participant’s death, the Participant’s Beneficiary will receive a single lump sum payment in
settlement of any Deferral Account (including a Deferral Account with respect to which one or more installment payments have previously
been made) which shall be made within seventy-five (75) days following death.
6.4
Distributions Upon Termination of Employment Other Than Retirement, Death or Disability.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event a Participant incurs a Termination of Employment from the Company and all Affiliates for any
reason  other  than  Retirement,  death  or  Disability,  said  Participant  will  receive  his  or  her  entire  Deferral  Account  in  a  single  lump  sum
payment (including a Deferral Account with respect to which one or more installment payments have previously been
Page | 10

made). Such payment shall be made within seventy-five (75) days of the date the Participant’s Termination of Employment occurs; provided,
however, that with respect to a Participant who is a Specified Employee as of the date of his or her Termination of Employment for reasons
other than death, payment of any portion of his or her Deferral Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) pursuant to the provisions of this
Section 6.4 will be delayed until the first business day of the seventh (7th) month following the date such Termination of Employment occurs.
6.5
Change in Control.
Payments in settlement of any Deferral Account (including a Deferral Account with respect to which one or more installment payments have
previously been made) shall be made in a single lump sum within forty-five (45) business days following a Change in Control.
6.6
Form of Payment.
(a)
Installments.  Substantially  equal  annual  installments,  as  elected  by  the  Participant,  from  two  (2)  to  ten  (10)  years.  The  initial
installment of an annual payment stream will begin as of the first business day of the January (a) next following the Participant’s
date of Retirement or (b) of the Specific Future Year, as the case may be. Subsequent annual payments will be as of the first
business day of each subsequent calendar year of the installment period. Each installment will be equal to a fraction of the Account
balance  (or  subaccount(s)  thereof)  as  of  the date  the  installment  is  paid,  with  the  numerator  of  the  fraction  being  “1”  and  the
denominator being the number of payments remaining in the payment schedule.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph (a), if a Participant dies before receiving payment of the entire balance of
his or her Deferral Account under the provisions of this Section, the remaining value of such Accounts shall be payable to his or her
Beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.8.
(b)
Lump  sum.  A Participant may  elect  distribution  in  the  form  of  a  single  lump  sum  payment.  Except  for  Specified  Employees,
distribution shall be made as of the first business day of the January (a) next following the Participant’s date of Retirement or (b) of
the Specific Future Year, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of set forth in Section 6.1.
(c)
Distributions to a Participant made pursuant to Section 6.1 will occur pursuant to the Participant’s payment elections at the time he
or she submits the applicable Deferred Stock Compensation Election. A Participant may choose different forms of payment with
respect to each Deferred Stock Compensation Election. In the absence of an election of the form of payment by a Participant on a
Deferred  Stock  Compensation  Election,  the  portion  of  the  Participant’s  Account  deferred  pursuant  to  that  Deferred  Stock
Compensation Election, adjusted pursuant to the provisions of Article V, shall be paid in a single lump sum.
(d)
A Participant shall not change his or her form of payment election, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.7 below.
6.7
Change of Distribution Election.
(a)
In accordance with such procedures as the Plan Administrator may prescribe, a Participant may elect to change his or her Specific
Future Year election under Section 6.1(a)(ii) with respect to a portion of his or her Deferral Account to a later Specific Future Year
by  duly  completing,  executing and filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  Specific  Future  Year  election  applicable  to  such
Deferrals, subject to the following limitations:
Page | 11

i.
such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to the Specific Future Year then in effect with respect to
that portion of his or her Deferral or Account (or subaccount(s) thereof), and such election will not become effective until
at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made; and
ii.
the new Specific Future Year shall be a calendar year that is not less than five (5) years from the Specific Future Year
then in effect.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Participant may elect to delay his or her distribution from an elected Specific Future Year to the
later of Retirement or a new Specific Future Year that is at least five (5) years from the Specific Future Year then in effect, provided
the election is made in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Section 6.7(a). A Participant may elect to delay his or her
distribution from an elected Specific Future Year pursuant to this Section 6.7(a) more than once, provided that all such elections
comply with the provisions of this Section 6.7(a).
(b)
In accordance with such procedures as the Plan Administrator may prescribe, a Participant may elect to delay the payment of a
portion of his or her Deferral Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) scheduled to be paid at his or her Retirement to his or her
Retirement  plus  five  (5)  calendar  years  by  duly  completing,  executing  and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  Retirement
election applicable to such deferrals; provided, however such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to Retirement
and shall not become effective until at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made.
(c)
In  accordance  with  such  procedures  as  the  Plan  Administrator  may  prescribe,  a  Participant  may  elect  to  change  the  form  of
payment election under Section 6.6 applicable to his or her distribution under Section 6.1(a)(i) or (ii) by duly completing, executing
and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  form  of  payment  election  applicable  to  such  deferrals,  subject  to  the  following
limitations:
i.
such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to the Specific Future Year then in effect with respect to
that portion of his or her Deferral Account (or subaccount(s) thereof), and such election will not become effective until at
least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made; and
ii.
the distribution of that portion of his or her Deferral Account (or subaccount(s) thereof) shall be deferred for five (5) years
from the date such amount would otherwise have been paid absent this election.
(d)
It  is  the  Company’s  intent  that  the  provisions  of  Sections  6.7(a),  (b)  and  (c)  comply  with  the  subsequent  election  provisions  in
Section  409A(a)(4)(C)  of  the  Code,  related  regulations  and other  applicable  guidance,  and  this  Section  6.7  shall  be  interpreted
accordingly. The Plan Administrator may impose additional restrictions or conditions on a Participant’s ability to make an election
pursuant to this Section 6.7. For avoidance of doubt, a Participant may not elect to alter the distribution of any portion of his or her
Deferral Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) from Retirement to a Specific Future Year or, except as provided in paragraph (a)
above, from a Specific Future Year to Retirement.
6.8
Designation of Beneficiary.
Each Participant shall have the right to designate a Beneficiary to receive payment of his or her Account in the event of death. Any such
designation may be changed at any time by executing and submitting (either by hand or electronic submission) a new designation on a form
prescribed
Page | 12

by the Plan Administrator.
6.9
Unclaimed Account.
If the Plan Administrator is unable to locate a Participant or Beneficiary to whom an Account is payable, such Account may be forfeited to
the  Company  upon  the  Plan  Administrator’s  determination.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  if  subsequent  to  any  such  forfeiture,  the
Participant or Beneficiary to whom such Account is payable makes a valid claim, such forfeited Account shall be restored to the Plan and
paid by the Company.
6.10
Forfeited Stock.    
To the extent that Stock (i) is deposited in a Trust pursuant to Section 5.4 in connection with a deferral of a Stock-denominated award under
any  plan,  program,  employment  agreement  or  other  arrangement  and  (ii)  is  forfeited  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  such  plan,  program,
agreement or arrangement,  the Participant shall not be entitled to the value of such Stock and other property related thereto (including
without limitation, dividends thereon) or other award or amount, or proceeds thereof. Any Stock forfeited shall be returned to the Company.
6.11
Hardship Withdrawals.
A Participant may apply in writing to the Plan Administrator for, and the Plan Administrator may grant, a hardship withdrawal of all or any
part  of  a  Participant’s  Deferral  Account  if  the  Plan  Administrator,  in  its  sole  discretion,  determines  that  the  Participant  has  incurred  an
Unforeseeable Emergency, as defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
The Plan Administrator shall determine whether an event qualifies as a hardship within this Section, in its sole and absolute discretion. Such
request shall be made in a time and manner determined by the Plan Administrator. The payment made from a Participant’s Deferral Account
(or any subaccount(s) thereof) pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.10 shall not be in excess of the amount necessary to meet such
financial  hardship  of  the  Participant,  including  amounts  necessary  to  pay  any  federal,  state  or  local  income  taxes  with  respect  to  the
payment and shall not be available unless all other financial resources of the Participant have been exhausted. Payment shall be made in
the month following the date the Plan Administrator determines that the Participant has incurred an unforeseeable severe financial hardship
and grants the right to a withdrawal pursuant to this Section 6.10.
6.12
Distribution of Grandfathered Deferral Account.
Notwithstanding  the foregoing provisions  of  this  Article  VI,  the  distribution  from  a  Participant’s  Grandfathered Deferral Account  (or
subaccount(s)) shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004, without regard to any amendments
after October 3, 2004 which would constitute a material modification for Section 409A of the Code, as modified in Appendix A attached
hereto.
6.13
Form of Settlement.
The Company shall settle a Participant’s Deferral Account, and discharge all of its obligations to pay deferred compensation under the Plan
with respect to such Deferral Account, by delivery of shares of Stock, including shares of Stock delivered out of the assets of any Trust.
6.14
Adjustments.    
In the event that any dividend or other distribution (whether in the form of cash, Stock, or other property), recapitalization, forward or reverse
split,  reorganization,  merger,  consolidation,  spin-off,  combination,  repurchase,  share  exchange,  liquidation,  dissolution  or  other  similar
corporate
Page | 13

transaction or event affects the Stock such that an adjustment is determined by the Administrator or the Committee to be appropriate in
order to prevent dilution or enlargement of a Participant’s rights under the Plan, then the Plan Administrator or the Committee shall, in such
manner as it may deem equitable, adjust any or all of the number and kind of shares of Stock to be issued upon settlement of Deferred
Stock then credited to a Deferral Account under the Plan.
6.15
Special rules for stock units transferred from the Aetna Deferred Compensation Program
Payment of amounts transferred to the Plan from the Aetna Deferred Compensation Program will be made according to the distribution form
and timing provisions of the Aetna Deferred Compensation Program as set forth in Appendix A.
Page | 14

ARTICLE VII - ADMINISTRATION
7.1
Plan Administrator.
The Plan shall be administered by the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, appointed by the Committee as Plan Administrator. The
Plan Administrator shall be responsible for the general operation and administration of the Plan and for carrying out the provisions thereof.
The Plan Administrator may delegate to others certain aspects of the management and operations of the Plan including the employment of
advisors and the delegation of ministerial duties to qualified individuals, provided that such delegation is in writing.
7.2
General Powers of Administration.
The Plan Administrator shall have the exclusive responsibility and complete discretionary authority to control the operation, management
and administration of the Plan, with all powers necessary to enable it properly to carry out such responsibilities, including, but not limited to,
the power to interpret the Plan and any related documents, to establish procedures for making any elections called for under the Plan, to
make factual determinations regarding any and all matters arising hereunder, including, but not limited to, the right to determine eligibility for
benefits, the right to construe the terms of the Plan, the right to remedy possible ambiguities, inequities, inconsistencies or omissions, and
the right to resolve all interpretive, equitable or other questions arising under the Plan. The decisions of the Plan Administrator or such other
party as is authorized under the terms of any grantor trust on all matters shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons to the extent
permitted by law. The Plan Administrator shall have all powers necessary or appropriate to enable it to carry out its administrative duties.
Not in limitation, but in application of the foregoing, the Plan Administrator shall have the duty and power to interpret the Plan and determine
all questions that may raise hereunder as to the status and rights of Employees, Participants, Beneficiaries, and any other person. The Plan
Administrator may exercise the powers hereby granted in its sole and absolute discretion. No member of the Deferred Compensation Plans
Committee shall be personally liable for any actions taken by the Plan Administrator unless the member’s action involves gross negligence
or willful misconduct.
7.3
Costs of Administration.
The costs of administering the Plan shall be borne by the Company unless and until the Participant receives written notice of the imposition
of such administrative costs; with such costs to begin with the next Plan Year and none may be assessed retroactively for prior Plan Years.
Such costs shall be charged against the Participant’s Account and shall be uniform or proportional for all Participants. Such costs shall not
exceed the standard rates for similarly designed nonqualified plans under administration by high quality third party administrators at the time
such costs are initially imposed and thereafter.
7.4
Indemnification.
The Company shall indemnify each director, officer or employee of the Company or any Affiliate and each member of the Committee and
Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, including any subcommittee or delegates thereof, against any and all claims, losses, damages,
expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred by them, and any liability, including any amounts paid in settlement with their approval, arising
from  their action or  failure  to  act,  except  when  the  same  is  judicially  determined  to  be  attributable  to  their  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct, as a result of the fact that he or she is or was serving the Plan in any capacity at the request of the Company.
Page | 15

7.5
409A Compliance.
With respect to the accounts subject to Section 409A of the Code, the Plan is intended to comply with the requirements of Section 409A of
the Code and the provisions hereof shall be interpreted in a manner that satisfies the requirements of Section 409A of the Code and the
regulations thereunder, and the Plan shall be operated accordingly. Regardless of, and superseding any other provision of the Plan to the
contrary,  if  any  provision  of  the  Plan  would  otherwise  frustrate  or  conflict  with  this  intent,  the  provision  will  be  interpreted  and  deemed
amended so as to avoid this conflict. With respect to a Participant who is a Specified Employee as of the date of his or her Termination of
Employment  for  reasons other than  death,  payment  of  any  amounts  subject  to  Section  409A  of  the  Code  on  account  of  his  or  her
Termination of Employment will be delayed until the first day of the seventh (7th) month following the date such Termination of Employment
occurs.
7.6
Sources of Stock: Limitation on Amount of Stock-Denominated Deferrals.
If shares of Stock are deposited under the Plan in a Trust pursuant to Section 5.4 in connection with a deferral of a Stock-denominated
award under another plan, program, employment agreement or other arrangement that provides for the issuance of shares, the shares so
deposited shall be deemed to have originated, and shall be counted against the number of shares reserved, under such other plan, program
or arrangement. Shares of Stock actually delivered in settlement of Deferral Accounts shall be originally issued shares or treasury shares, in
the discretion of the Plan Administrator.
Page | 16

ARTICLE VIII - CLAIMS PROCEDURE
8.1
Claims.
A person who believes that he or she is being denied a benefit to which he or she is entitled under the Plan (hereinafter referred to as a
“Claimant”)  may  file  a  written  request  for  such  benefit  with  the  Plan  Administrator,  setting  forth  his  or  her  claim.  The  request  must  be
addressed to the Senior Vice President, Compensation and Benefits, at the Company’s then principal place of business.
8.2
Claim Decision.
Upon receipt of a claim, the Plan Administrator or its delegate shall review and determine the claim within ninety (90) days. If the Plan
Administrator determines that additional time is needed to review the claim, the Plan Administrator will provide the Claimant with a notice of
the  extension  before  the  end  of  the  initial  ninety  (90)-day  period.  The  notice  of  extension  will  provide  the  date  by  which  the  Plan
Administrator expects to make a decision.
If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Plan Administrator shall notify the Claimant in writing of the following:
(a)
The reason or reasons for such denial;
(b)
The pertinent provisions of the Plan;
(c)
Appropriate information as to the steps to be taken if the Claimant wishes to submit the claim for review; and
(d)
The time limits for requesting a review under this Section.
8.3
Request for Review/Appeal.
Within sixty (60) days after the receipt by the Claimant of the initial written notice of a denial, the Claimant may request in writing that the
initial  determination  be  reviewed.  Such  request  must  be  addressed  to  the  Senior  Vice  President,  Compensation  and  Benefits,  at  the
Company’s then principal place of business. The Claimant or his or her duly authorized representative may, but need not, submit issues and
comments in writing for consideration by the Appeals Committee, a subcommittee of the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee. If the
Claimant does not request a review of the initial determination within such sixty (60)-day period, he or she shall be barred and stopped from
challenging the Plan Administrator’s initial determination.
8.4
Review of Decision.
Within sixty (60) days after the Plan Administrator’s receipt of a request for review, the Appeals Committee of the Plan Administrator will
review the Plan Administrator’s initial determination. After considering all materials presented by the Claimant, the Appeals Committee will
render a written decision, setting forth the reasons for the decision and containing references to the pertinent provisions of the Plan. If the
Appeals  Committee  requires  an  extension  of  the  sixty  (60)-day  time  period,  the  Appeals  Committee  will so  notify  the  Claimant  and will
render the decision as soon as possible, but no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of the request for review.
8.5
Time Limit for Bringing Legal Action.
Any legal action by the Claimant must be brought within ninety (90) days following the date of the decision on the final review under Section
8.4 above.
Page | 17

ARTICLE IX - MISCELLANEOUS
9.1
Not Contract of Employment.
The adoption and maintenance of the Plan shall not be deemed to be a contract between the Company or an Affiliate and any person and
shall not be consideration for the employment of any person. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to give any person the right to be
retained in the employ of the Company or an Affiliate or to restrict the right of the Company or an Affiliate to discharge any person at any
time  nor  shall  the  Plan  be  deemed  to  give  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate  the  right  to  require  any  person  to  remain  in  the  employ  of  the
Company or an Affiliate or to restrict any person’s right to terminate his or her employment at any time.
9.2
Non-Assignability of Benefits.
No  Participant,  Beneficiary  or  distributees  of  benefits  under  the  Plan  shall  have  any  power  or  right  to  transfer,  assign,  anticipate,
hypothecate or otherwise encumber any part or all of the amounts payable hereunder, which are expressly declared to be unassignable and
nontransferable. Any such attempted assignment or transfer shall be void. No amount payable hereunder shall, prior to actual payment
thereof, be subject to seizure by any creditor of any such Participant, Beneficiary or other distributees for the payment of any debt judgment
or other obligation, by a proceeding at law or in equity, nor transferable by operation of law in the event of the bankruptcy, insolvency or
death of such Participant, Beneficiary or other distributee hereunder.
9.3
Receipt and Release.    
Payments (in any form) to any Participant or Beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of the Plan shall, to the extent thereof, be in full
satisfaction of all claims for any compensation deferred, or otherwise relating to any Deferral Account, under the Plan against the Company
or any subsidiary thereof, the Committee, or the Plan Administrator. In the case of any payment under the Plan of less than all amounts then
credited to a Deferral Account in the form of Stock, the amounts paid shall be deemed to relate to the Stock credited to the account at the
earliest time.
9.4
Withholding and Deduction and Taxes.
All deferrals and payments provided for hereunder shall be subject to applicable withholding and other deductions as shall be required of the
Company under any applicable local, state or federal law. The Company may require that the Participant or Beneficiary making a deferral or
receiving payments pay to the Company the amount of any federal, state or local taxes, if any, that the Company or any Affiliate is required
to withhold with respect to such deferrals or payments or the Company or any Affiliate may deduct from other wages paid by the Company
or any Affiliate the amount of any withholding taxes due with respect to such deferrals or payments. A Participant or Beneficiary shall be
solely responsible for any tax consequences related to deferrals or payments made under the Plan. The Company shall have no obligation
to make any payment under the Plan until the Company’s or any Affiliate’s tax withholding obligations have been satisfied by the Participant
or Beneficiary.
9.5
Amendment and Termination.
The Committee or its delegate may from time to time, in its discretion, amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the provisions of the Plan;
provided, however, that no amendment may be made that would impair the rights of a Participant with respect to amounts already allocated
to his or her Account without the Participant’s consent. To the extent consistent with the rules relating to plan terminations and liquidations in
Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or otherwise consistent with Section 409A of the Code, the Committee, in its sole discretion, may
terminate the Plan and any related Deferred Stock Compensation Election at any time and in that event the Committee may provide that,
without the prior written consent of Participants, the Participants’ Accounts shall be distributed in a single lump sum in shares. In the event
of a Plan termination, the distribution of a Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the
Page | 18

Plan  as set forth  on  October  3,  2004,  without  regard  to  any  amendments  after  October  3,  2004  which would constitute  a  material
modification for Section 409A of the Code, as modified in Appendix A attached hereto.
9.6
Compliance with Securities and Other Laws.
Notwithstanding any Plan provision to the contrary, the Committee may at any time impose such restrictions on the Plan and participation
therein, including limiting the amount of any deferral or the timing thereof, as the Committee may deem advisable from time to time in order
to comply or preserve compliance with any applicable laws, including any applicable state and federal securities laws and exemptions from
registration available thereunder.
The Company shall impose such restrictions on Stock delivered to a Participant hereunder and any other interest constituting a security as it
may deem advisable in order to comply with the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the requirements of the New York Stock Exchange or
any other stock exchange or automated quotation system upon which the Stock is then listed or quoted, any applicable state securities laws,
any  provision  of  the  Company’s  Certificate  of  Incorporation  or  Bylaws,  or  any  other  law,  regulation,  or  binding  contract  to  which  the
Company is a party.
9.7
Provisions Relating to Section 16 of the Exchange Act.
With respect to a Participant who is then subject to the reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, the Committee and
Plan Administrator shall implement transactions under the Plan and administer the Plan in a manner that will ensure that each transaction
by such a Participant is exempt from or otherwise not subject to liability under Rule 16b-3, except that such a Participant may be permitted
to engage in a non-exempt transaction under the Plan if written notice is given to the Participant regarding the non-exempt nature of such
transaction.
9.8
No Trust Created.
Nothing contained in the Plan and no action taken pursuant to its provisions by the Company or any person, shall create, nor be construed
to create, a trust of any kind or a fiduciary relationship between the Company or an Affiliate and the Participant, Beneficiary, or any other
person.
9.9
Unsecured General Creditor Status of Employee.
The Plan is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan for deferred compensation and Participants shall rely solely on the unsecured promise
of the Company for payment hereunder. With respect to any payment not yet made to a Participant under the Plan, nothing contained in the
Plan shall give a Participant any rights that are greater than those of a general unsecured creditor of the Company; provided, however, that
the Committee may authorize the creation of Trusts, including but not limited to the Trusts referred to in Section 5.4 hereof, or make other
arrangements  to  meet  the  Company’s  obligations  under  the  Plan,  which  Trusts  or  other  arrangements  shall  be  consistent  with  the
“unfunded’ status of the Plan unless the Committee otherwise determines with the consent of each affected Participant.
No Participant shall have any of the rights or privileges of a stockholder of the Company under the Plan, including as a result of the crediting
of Stock-denominated units or other amounts to a Deferral Account, or the creation of any Trust and deposit of such Stock therein, except at
such time as Stock may be actually delivered to the Participant in settlement of a Deferral Account.
9.10
Limitation.
A Participant and his or her Beneficiary shall assume all risk in connection with any decrease in value of the Deferral Account, and neither
the Company nor the Committee or the Plan Administrator shall be liable or responsible therefor.
Page | 19

9.11
Payment to Minors and Incompetents.
If any Participant, spouse, or Beneficiary entitled to receive any benefits hereunder is a minor or is deemed by the Plan Administrator or is
adjudicated to be legally incapable of giving a valid receipt and discharge for such benefits, the benefits will be paid to the person or entity
as the Plan Administrator determines has been appointed or established to receive such payment on behalf of such person. Such payment
shall, to the extent made, be deemed a complete discharge of any payment obligation under the Plan.
9.12
Acceleration of or Delay in Payments.
The Plan Administrator, in its sole and absolute discretion, may elect to accelerate the time or form of payment of a benefit owed to the
Participant hereunder, provided such acceleration is permitted under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4) and any subsequent guidance. The
Plan Administrator may also, in its sole and absolute discretion, delay the time for payment of a benefit owed to the Participant hereunder, to
the extent permitted under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A- 2(b)(7) and any subsequent guidance.
9.13
Severability.
If any provision of the Plan shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions
hereof; instead, each provision shall be fully severable and the Plan shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provision had
never been included herein.
9.14
Governing Laws.
All provisions of the Plan shall be construed in accordance with the laws of Rhode Island, except to the extent preempted by federal law.
9.15
Binding Effect.
The terms of the Plan shall be binding on each Participant and his or her heirs and legal representatives and on the Company and its
successors and assigns.
Page | 20

APPENDIX A - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE AETNA DEFERRED
COMPENSATION PROGRAM
This  Appendix  C  constitutes  an  integral  part  of  the  Plan  and  is  applicable  with  respect  to  a  Participant’s  accounts  under  the  Aetna  Deferred
Compensation Program (the “Aetna Accounts”), effective January 1, 2020, which have been merged into the Plan. The Participants’ Aetna Accounts
are subject  to all the terms  and conditions of the Plan except  that  the Aetna Accounts  shall remain  subject  to the distribution  provisions  of the
Deferred Compensation Program as set forth on January 1, 2008, as applicable, and as set forth below:
Payment
1.  Payment  will begin on the specified  date  or  event  elected  by the Participant  for  each year’s  deferrals.  The form  of  payment(s)  will  be made
according to the option(s) elected by the Participant for each year’s deferred funds. If the Participant failed to specify the time and form of payment
on an election form, payment shall be made in accordance with: (a) if applicable, the time and form specified by the Company in the separate written
arrangement providing for the compensation or (b) if not so specified, the time of payment shall be the Participant’s separation from service and the
form of payment shall be a single lump sum. Payments are subject to such deductions as may be required in accordance with federal and state tax
regulations.
2. Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, if a Participant is a “Specified Employee” within the meaning of Section 409A at the time of termination
of employment, any payment of “deferred compensation” hereunder to which the participant would otherwise be entitled, due to such termination of
employment, during the first six months following termination of employment, shall remain in the Participant’s bookkeeping account and be paid in a
lump sum on the six-month anniversary of the Specified Employee’s termination of employment date (or, if earlier, death). This requirement shall
only apply to the extent required by Section 409A.
3. The payment of “deferred compensation” (within the meaning of Section 409A) under this program may not be accelerated in violation of Section
409A.
4. Unless otherwise noted in the deferral election form, in the event of the Participant’s “disability” (within the meaning of Section 409A) or death
during the deferral period, payment shall be made to the Participant or the Participant’s beneficiary upon such event.
5.  In  case  of  an  “unforeseeable  emergency,”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  409A,  a  Participant  may  submit  a  request  for  payment  of  amounts
already deferred to be advanced and/or a deferral election to be canceled, to the extent permitted under Section 409A. The Company shall make the
determination of unforeseeable emergency in its sole discretion consistent with the requirements of Section 409A. If approved, payment shall be
made on the first day of the month following approval and shall be limited to such amount as is reasonably necessary to alleviate the Participant’s
emergency need, taking into account other assets available to the Participant to the extent required by Section 409A.
Page | 21

Exhibit 10.14
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2020

CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
Deferred Compensation Plan
Page
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
5
1.1
Name of Plan
5
1.2
Purpose of Plan
5
1.3
“Top Hat” Pension Benefit Plan
5
1.4
Funding
5
1.5
Effective Date
5
1.6
Administration
5
1.7
Number and Gender
5
1.8
Headings
5
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
6
2.1
Account
6
2.2
Affiliate
6
2.3
Annual Cash Incentive
6
2.4
Annual Cash Incentive Deferral
6
2.5
Base Salary
6
2.6
Base Salary Deferral
6
2.7
Beneficiary
7
2.8
Board
7
2.9
Change in Control
7
2.10
Code
7
2.11
Commissions
7
2.12
Commissions Deferral
7
2.13
Committee
7
2.14
Company Account
7
2.15
Company Contribution
7
2.16
CVS Caremark Retention Payment
8
2.17
Deferrals
8
2.18
Deferral Account
8
2.19
Deferred Compensation Election
8
Page | 1

2.20
Disability
8
2.21
Distribution Date
8
2.22
Effective Date
8
2.23
Elective Deferrals
8
2.24
Eligible Executive
8
2.25
Employee
8
2.26
ERISA
9
2.27
Executive
9
2.28
Future Fund
9
2.29
Grandfathered Company Account
9
2.30
Grandfathered Deferral Account
9
2.31
Lost Matching Contributions
9
2.32
Participant
9
2.33
Plan Administrator
9
2.34
Plan Year
9
2.35
Qualified Future Fund Matching Contribution
9
2.36
Retirement
9
2.37
Specified Employee
10
2.38
Specific Future Year
10
2.39
Termination of Employment
10
2.40
Total Pay
10
2.41
Universal 409A Definition Document
10
2.42
Validation Date
10
2.43
Year of Service
10
ARTICLE III - ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION
11
3.1
Eligibility
11
3.2
Commencement of Participation
11
3.3
Termination of Participation
11
ARTICLE IV - DEFERRALS & COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS
12
4.1
Deferrals
12
4.2
Filing Requirements of Deferred Compensation Elections
12
4.3
Modification or Revocation of Election by Participant
13
4.4
Company Contributions and Other Deferrals
13
4.5
Deferral and Contribution Timing
15
ARTICLE V - ACCOUNTS
16
5.1
Establishment of Bookkeeping Accounts
16
Page | 2

5.2
Subaccounts
16
5.3
Hypothetical Nature of Accounts
16
5.4
Vesting
16
5.5
Deferral Crediting Options
16
5.6
Hypothetical Gains or Losses
17
ARTICLE VI - DISTRIBUTION OF ACCOUNT
18
6.1
Distribution of Elections - Timing of Payment
18
6.2
Disability Distributions
18
6.3
Distributions in the Event of Death
18
6.4
Distributions Upon Termination of Employment Other Than Retirement, Death or Disability
19
6.5
Change in Control
19
6.6
Form of Payment
19
6.7
Change of Distribution Election
20
6.8
Account Valuation upon a Distribution
21
6.9
Designation of Beneficiary
21
6.10
Unclaimed Account
21
6.11
Hardship Withdrawals
21
6.12
Distribution of Grandfathered Deferral Account and the Grandfathered Company Account
22
ARTICLE VII - ADMINISTRATION
23
7.1
Plan Administrator
23
7.2
General Powers of Administration
23
7.3
Costs of Administration
23
7.4
Indemnification
23
7.5
409A Compliance
24
ARTICLE VIII - CLAIMS PROCEDURE
25
8.1
Claims
25
8.2
Claim Decision
25
8.3
Request for Review/Appeal
25
8.4
Review of Decision
25
8.5
Time Limit for Bringing Legal Action
25
ARTICLE IX - MISCELLANEOUS
26
9.1
Not Contract of Employment
26
9.2
Non-Assignability of Benefits
26
9.3
Withholding and Deduction and Taxes
26
9.4
Amendment and Termination
26
9.5
Compliance with Securities and Other Laws
27
Page | 3

9.6
No Trust Created
27
9.7
Unsecured General Creditor Status of Employee
27
9.8
Limitation
27
9.9
Payment to Minors and Incompetents
27
9.10
Acceleration of or Delay in Payments
28
9.11
Severability
28
9.12
Governing Laws
28
9.13
Binding Effect
28
APPENDIX A - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S GRANDFATHERED DEFERRAL ACCOUNT AND
GRANDFATHERED COMPANY ACCOUNT
29
ARTICLE I - DEFNITIONS
29
ARTICLE IV - DEFERRALS AND COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS
29
ARTICLE V - MAINTENENCE OF ACCOUNTS
29
ARTICLE VI - PAYMENT OF BENEFIT
29
APPENDIX B - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE OMNICARE, INC. DEFERRED
COMPENSATION PROGRAM
30
APPENDIX C - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE AETNA SUPPLEMENTAL 401(K) PLAN
AND AETNA DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN 
31
Page | 4

ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION
1.1
Name of Plan.
CVS  Health  Corporation  (the  “Company”)  hereby  adopts  the  CVS Health  Deferred  Compensation  Plan  as  amended  and  restated  as  of
January 1, 2020 (the “Plan”).
1.2
Purpose of Plan.
The purpose of the Plan is to provide certain eligible employees of the Company or an Affiliate authorized by the Committee to participate in
the Plan the opportunity to defer elements of his or her compensation which might not otherwise be deferrable under other plans maintained
by the Company or an Affiliate and to make deferrals and receive contributions that would be obtainable under the CVS Health Future Fund
401(k) Plan (“Future Fund”) in the absence of certain restrictions and limitations in the Internal Revenue Code.
1.3
“Top Hat” Pension Benefit Plan.
The Plan is an “employee pension benefit plan” within the meaning of ERISA. However, the Plan is unfunded and maintained for a select
group of management or highly compensated employees and, therefore, it is intended that the Plan will be exempt from Parts 2, 3 and 4 of
Title I of ERISA. The Plan is not intended to qualify under Section 401(a) of the Code.
1.4
Funding.
The Plan is unfunded. All benefits will be paid from the general assets of the Company. Participants in the Plan shall have the status of
general unsecured creditors of the Company.
1.5
Effective Date.
The Plan was originally effective as of January 1, 1997, and amended and restated in its entirety effective as of December 31, 2008, to
comply with the provisions of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code and regulations promulgated thereunder and as of December 17,
2014, October 1, 2015, and November 1, 2016 to reflect certain design and administrative changes desired by the Company.
1.6
Administration.
The Plan shall be administered by the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, as defined in Article VII.
1.7
Number and Gender.
Wherever appropriate herein, words used in the singular shall be considered to include the plural and words used in the plural shall be
considered to include the singular. The masculine gender, where appearing in the Plan, shall be deemed to include the feminine gender.
The feminine gender, where appearing in the Plan, shall be deemed to include the masculine gender.
1.8
Headings.
The headings of Articles and Sections herein are included solely for convenience, and if there is any conflict between such headings and the
text of the Plan, the text shall control.
Page | 5

ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
For purposes of the Plan, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless their context clearly requires a different
meaning:
2.1
Account.
The Company Account, Deferral Account, Grandfathered Company Account, and the Grandfathered Deferral Account maintained by the
Company on behalf of each Participant pursuant to the Plan.
2.2
Aetna Plans.
The Aetna Deferred Compensation Program (“Aetna Program”) and the Aetna Supplemental 401K Plan (“Aetna Supplemental Plan”).
2.2
Affiliate.
A subsidiary of the Company, as defined in the Company’s Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.3
Annual Cash Incentive.
The amount awarded to a Participant in cash for a Plan Year under a regular (annual) incentive plan (other than an exceptional performance
award  program  or  a  one-time  incentive  plan  or  program)  maintained  by  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate,  and  any  other  amount  otherwise
included in Annual Cash Incentive for purposes of the Plan under rules as are adopted by the Committee.
Effective January 1, 2015, Operation Production Incentives shall be excluded from the definition of Annual Cash Incentive.
2.4 Annual Cash Incentive Deferral.
The amount of a Participant’s Annual Cash Incentive which a Participant elects to have withheld on a pre-tax basis from his or her Annual
Cash Incentive and credited to his or her Deferral Account pursuant to the Plan.
2.5
Base Salary.
The base rate of cash compensation paid by the Company or an Affiliate to or for the benefit of a Participant for services rendered or labor
performed while a Participant, including deferrals pursuant to the Plan and any pre-tax contribution to be made on the Participant’s behalf to
any qualified plan maintained by the Company or an Affiliate pursuant to a cash or deferred arrangement maintained by the Company or an
Affiliate (as defined under Section 401(k) of the Code) or under any cafeteria plan (as defined under Section 125 of the Code) or under a
qualified transportation fringe (as defined under Section 132(f) of the Code). Base Salary shall exclude any overtime, premium pay, shift
differentials, bonuses, commissions or any other form of supplemental cash compensation, except to the extent otherwise deemed “Base
Salary” for purposes of the Plan under rules as are adopted by the Committee.
2.6
Base Salary Deferral
The amount of a Participant’s Base Salary which the Participant elects to have withheld on a pre-tax basis from his or her Base Salary and
credited to his or her Deferral Account pursuant to the Plan.
Page | 6

2.7
Beneficiary.
The person or persons (which may include trusts) designated in writing (either by hand or electronic submission) by the Participant on the
beneficiary designation form prescribed by the Plan Administrator to receive the amounts, if any, payable under the Plan upon the death of
the  Participant.  In  the  absence  of  such  written  designation  by  the  Participant,  the  Beneficiary  shall  mean,  in  the  following  order,  the
Participant’s  spouse,  if  any;  the  person  named  as  the  Participant’s  beneficiary  under  the  Company’s  life  insurance  program;  or  the
Participant’s estate.
2.8
Board.
The Board of Directors of the Company.
2.9
Change in Control.
“Change in Control” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.10
Code.
The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. References to any provision of the Code or regulation (including a proposed regulation)
thereunder shall include any successor provisions or regulations.
2.11
Commissions.
The amount of a Participant’s sales commissions or other commissions payable under a sales commissions or other commissions plan
maintained by the Company or an Affiliate. (Sales commissions for purposes of the Plan shall mean sales commissions as defined in Treas.
Reg. Section 1.409A-2(a)(12)(i) and any subsequent guidance and such sales commissions are considered to be earned in the taxable year
of the Participant in which the sale is completed.)
2.12
Commissions Deferral.
The amount of a Participant’s Commissions that a Participant elects to have withheld on a pre-tax basis from his or her Commissions and
credited to his or her Deferral Account pursuant to the Plan.
2.13
Committee.
The Management Planning and Development Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company or any other directors of the Company
designated as the Committee.
2.14
Company Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s) thereof) maintained for each Participant to record the amount of Company Contributions that
are either (i) credited on his or her behalf under Section 4.4 on or after January 1, 2005 or (ii) were credited on his or her behalf under
Section 4.4 prior to January 1, 2005, but became vested on or after January 1, 2005, as adjusted pursuant to Section 5.6.
2.15
Company Contribution.
The amount, as determined by the Company on an annual basis based on the provisions of the Plan, which is credited on the Participant’s
behalf by the Company to his or her Company Account pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.4(a) of the Plan.
Page | 7

2.16
CVS Caremark Retention Payment.
The amount granted to an Eligible Executive, as defined in and provided for under the provisions of the employment term sheet agreement
entered into between the Company or an Affiliate and said Eligible Executive, as a former employee of Caremark Rx, Inc., in connection
with the merger involving Caremark, Rx, Inc. and the Company.
2.17
Deferrals.
The amount of deferrals credited to a Participant pursuant to Section 4.1.
2.18
Deferral Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s) thereof) maintained for each Participant to record any and all deferrals made under the Plan.
2.19
Deferred Compensation Election.
The  written  election  (either  by  hand  or  electronic  submission)  including  any  amendments,  attachments  and  appendices  thereto  as
prescribed by the Plan Administrator, regardless of how it may be titled, under which the Participant agrees to defer a portion of his or her
Base Salary and/or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions under the Plan (or any other cash remuneration payable to a Participant that he
or she may elect to defer under the provisions of the Plan, including but not limited to awards under the Company’s Long Term Incentive
Plan  (LTIP).  This  election  as  to  deferral  and  the  related  form  and  timing  of  distribution  is  made  by  the  Participant  and  constitutes  the
agreement entered into between the Company and a Participant for participation in the Plan. The Participant elects the terms of his or her
deferral pursuant to the provisions of this Plan and the administrative procedures established by the Plan Administrator.
2.20
Disability.
“Disability” as defined in the Company’s Long-Term Disability Plan.
2.21
Distribution Date.
The date on which a Participant’s distribution is scheduled to be paid with respect to his or her Account under the Plan pursuant to his or her
Deferred Compensation Election, which date shall take into account any processing period.
2.22
Effective Date.
January 1, 1997.
2.23
Elective Deferrals.
Elective Deferrals as defined in Section 3.02 of Future Fund.
2.24
Eligible Executive.
An Executive who is eligible to participate in the Plan as provided in Section 3.1(a).
2.25
Employee.
Any common-law full-time salaried exempt employee of the Company or an Affiliate, other than a store manager, pharmacist or MinuteClinic
practitioner, who has been authorized by the Committee to participate in the Plan.
Page | 8

2.26
ERISA.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
2.27
Executive.
An Employee whose Base Salary (determined on the basis of a maximum forty (40) hour work week) equals or exceeds $175,000 (as
adjusted from time to time by the Committee).
2.28
Future Fund.
The CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan.
2.29
Grandfathered Company Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s)) maintained for each Participant to record the amount of Company Contributions credited on a
Participant’s behalf under Section 4.4, which were vested as of December 31, 2004, adjusted as provided in Section 5.6.
2.30
Grandfathered Deferral Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s)) maintained for each Participant to record (i) the amount of Base Salary and/or Annual Cash
Incentive or Commissions deferred in accordance with Section 4.1, (ii) the amount of LTIP deferrals deferred in accordance with Section
4.4, and/or (iii) the amount of cash retention award deferrals deferred in accordance with Section 4.4, as of December 31, 2004, adjusted
pursuant to Section 5.6.
2.31
Lost Matching Contributions.
The amounts credited on a Participant’s behalf to his or her Company Account pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.4(a).
2.32
Participant.
Each Eligible Executive participating in the Plan as set forth in Section 3.2.
2.33
Plan Administrator.
The Deferred Compensation Plans Committee appointed pursuant to Section 7.1 to administer the Plan.
2.34
Plan Year.
A calendar year ending on December 31.
2.35
Qualified Future Fund Matching Contribution.
The total of all matching contributions that could have been made by the Company or an Affiliate with respect to a Plan Year for the benefit
of a Participant under and in accordance with the terms of Future Fund.
2.36
Retirement.
Termination of Employment with the Company and all Affiliates on or after (i) age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) or more Years
of Service or, if earlier, (ii) age sixty (60) and the completion of five (5) or more Years of Service.
Page | 9

2.37
Specified Employee.
“Specified Employee” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.38
Specific Future Year.
A calendar year in the future elected by a Participant with respect to the distribution of his or her Account(s) (or subaccount(s) thereof)
pursuant to the Plan.
2.39
Termination of Employment.
“Termination of employment” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.40
Total Pay
The total of Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive and Commissions.
2.41
Universal 409A Definition Document.
The document developed by the Company for the purpose of defining terms relating to benefits or amounts in all plans covered by Section
409A of the Code and sponsored by the Company or any Affiliate.
2.42
Valuation Date.
The date on which an Account is valued under the Plan, as determined by the Committee, by reference to the New York Stock Exchange.
2.43
Year of Service.
Year of Participation Service as defined in Future Fund.
Page | 10

ARTICLE III - ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION
3.1
Eligibility.
(a)
An Employee who is an Executive on October 1
st of a calendar year (or such other date in the calendar year as designated by the
Committee) shall be eligible to participate in the Plan. The Committee may, in its sole discretion, designate other key employees of
the Company or an Affiliate who are members of a select group of management or highly compensated employees as eligible to
participate in the Plan.
(b)
Notwithstanding any Plan provision to the contrary, Employees must also be subject to the income tax laws of the United States in
order to be eligible for participation in the Plan.
(c)
Subject to the provisions of Sections 3.3 and Section 4.1, an Eligible Executive shall remain eligible to continue participation in the
Plan for each Plan Year following his or her initial year of participation in the Plan.
(d)
A Participant who ceases to be an Executive can continue to be eligible to participate unless and until such Participant fails to make
an annual deferral election under the Plan or under the CVS Health Corporation Deferred Stock Compensation Plan, at which point
the Employee must meet the threshold compensation level in order to be eligible to participate for a future Plan Year.
(e)
Deferred Compensation Plan Participants who made a deferral under the Deferred Compensation Plan with respect to the two most
recent enrollment periods shall, regardless of compensation threshold, be eligible to participate in the Deferred Compensation Plan
for the 2020 Plan Year.
(f)
Active  Aetna  employees  who  elected  to  defer  in  either  of  the  Aetna  Plans  in  the  two  most  recent  enrollment  periods  shall,
regardless of compensation threshold, be eligible to participate in the Deferred Compensation Plan for the 2020 Plan Year.
3.2
Commencement of Participation.
An Eligible Executive shall become a Participant effective as of the date that the Eligible Executive’s first Deferred Compensation Election
becomes  effective,  provided  that  the  Eligible  Executive  has  provided  such  information  as  the  Plan  Administrator  deems  necessary  to
properly administer the Plan.
3.3
Termination of Participation.
(a)
Participation shall cease when the benefits that have been credited to a Participant’s Deferral Account have been distributed to him
or her.
(b)
Subject to the provisions of Section 4.3(c), a Participant shall only be eligible to make Deferrals under the Plan for as long as he or
she remains an Eligible Executive.
(c)
If a former Participant who has incurred a Termination of Employment with the Company and all Affiliates and whose participation in
the  Plan  ceased  under  Section  3.3(a)  is  reemployed  as  an  Executive,  the  former  Participant  may  again  become  eligible  to
participate in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.1(a).
Page | 11

ARTICLE IV - DEFERRALS & COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS
4.1
Deferrals.
(a)
Subject to the following provisions of this Article IV, an Eligible Executive may defer for any Plan Year, (i) up to fifty percent (50%) of
Base  Salary  otherwise  earned  and  payable  in  that  Plan  Year,  and/or  (ii)  up  to  eighty  percent  (80%)  of  Annual  Cash  Incentive
otherwise earned in that Plan Year and payable in that Plan Year or in the first calendar quarter of the following Plan Year, and/or
(iii) up to eighty percent (80%) of Commissions otherwise earned in that Plan Year and payable in that Plan Year or in the first
calendar quarter of the following Plan Year. The Plan Administrator may, as it deems appropriate, establish maximum or minimum
limits on the amounts which may be deferred for a Plan Year and/or the times of such Deferred Compensation Elections. An Eligible
Executive  shall  be  given  advance  notice  of  any  such  limits.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  previously
submitted Participant’s Deferred Compensation Election (with respect to Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive and/or Commissions)
shall be disregarded following the Participant’s Termination of Employment.
(b)
Deferrals under the Plan shall be calculated with respect to the gross cash compensation payable to the Participant prior to any
deductions (e.g., 401(k) deferrals) or withholdings. However, the Deferrals shall be reduced by the Plan Administrator as necessary
if  it  is  later  determined,  after  Deferrals  are  made  under  the  Plan  and  after  additional  deduction  of  all  required  income  and
employment taxes, 401(k) and other employee benefit deductions, and other deductions required by law, that all such total deferrals
will exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the cash compensation of the Participant available under Section 4.1(a). Changes to
payroll  withholdings  that  affect  the  amount  of  compensation  being  deferred  to  the  Plan  shall  be  allowed  only  to  the  extent
permissible under Section 409A of the Code.
4.2
Filing Requirements of Deferred Compensation Elections.
Subject to the following provisions of this Section, during an annual enrollment period established by the Plan Administrator in any Plan
Year, an Eligible Executive described in Section 3.1 may elect, subject to Section 4.1 above, to defer a portion of his or her Base Salary that
is otherwise earned and payable in the next Plan Year and a portion of his or her Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions otherwise earned
in the next Plan Year and payable in that Plan Year or in the first calendar quarter of the subsequent Plan Year by submitting a Deferred
Compensation Election during such annual enrollment period. If an Executive becomes an Eligible Executive after October 1 (or such later
date as prescribed by the Plan Administrator) in any calendar year, he or she may not make a Deferred Compensation Election for Base
Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions earned in the next Plan Year.
A  Participant  shall  submit  a  Deferred  Compensation  Election  in  the  manner  specified  by  the  Plan  Administrator  and  a  Deferred
Compensation  Election  that  is  not  timely  filed  shall  be  considered  void  and  have  no  effect.  If  a  Participant  does  not  file  a  Deferred
Compensation Election applicable to his or her Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions earned in a Plan Year on or before the
close of the applicable annual enrollment period (or such later date prescribed by the Plan Administrator), the Participant shall be deemed to
have elected not to make a Deferred Compensation Election for such Plan Year. The Plan Administrator shall establish procedures that
govern  deferral  elections  under  the  Plan,  including  the  ability  to  make  separate  elections  for  Base  Salary,  Annual  Cash  Incentive  or
Commissions, and any other cash remuneration payable to the Participant that the Committee or Plan Administrator permits a Participant to
defer under the Plan.
Subject to the provisions of this Article, an Eligible Executive must file a new Deferred Compensation Election for each Plan Year that the
Eligible Executive is eligible to participate in the Plan if the Eligible Executive intends to make a deferral under the Plan for such Plan Year.
Page | 12

4.3
Modification or Revocation of Election by Participant.
(a)
A Participant’s Deferred Compensation Election for a Plan Year shall become irrevocable as of the close of business on the date
established by the Plan Administrator, but not later than the last day of the calendar year preceding the Plan Year in which such
Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions applicable to that election is earned, and shall become effective as of the first
day of the Plan Year in which such Base Salary and/or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions is earned.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Plan Administrator may cancel a Participant’s Deferred Compensation Elections for the balance
of a Plan Year if the Participant submits evidence of an unforeseeable emergency (as defined in the Universal 409A Definition
Document) to the Plan Administrator. Any Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive, Commissions or other cash remuneration which
would have been deferred pursuant to that cancelled Deferred Compensation Election shall be paid to the Eligible Executive as if he
or she had not made that election.
A  Participant  may  revoke  or  change  a  Deferred  Compensation  Election  any  time  prior  to  the  date  such  election  becomes
irrevocable. Any such change or revocation shall be made in a form and manner determined by the Plan Administrator. Under no
circumstances may a Participant’s Deferred Compensation Election be made, modified or revoked retroactively.
(b)
If  a  Participant’s  Deferred  Compensation  Election  applicable  to  his  or  her  Base  Salary  and/or  Annual  Cash  Incentive  or
Commissions is cancelled for a Plan Year, he or she will not be permitted to elect to make Deferrals again until the next Plan Year.
(c)
If a Participant ceases to be an Executive after the date a Deferred Compensation Election becomes effective but continues to be
employed by the Company or an Affiliate, his or her Deferred Compensation Election currently in effect shall remain in force.,
(d)
Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, if an Eligible Executive:
i.
receives a withdrawal of deferred cash contributions on account of hardship from any plan which is maintained by the
Company or an Affiliate and which meets the requirements of Section 401(k) of the Code (or any successor thereto); and
ii.
is  precluded  from  making  contributions  to  such  401(k)  plan  for  at  least  six  (6)  months  after  receipt  of  the  hardship
withdrawal,
the Eligible Executive’s Deferred Compensation Election with respect to Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions in
effect at that time shall be cancelled. Any Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions payment which would have been
deferred pursuant to that Deferred Compensation Election but for the application of this Section 4.3(d) shall be paid to the Eligible
Executive as if he or she had not made that election.
4.4
Company Contributions and Other Deferrals.
(a)
Company Contributions - Restoration of Lost Matching Contribution. The amount of Lost Matching Contributions credited under the
Plan on a Participant’s behalf each calendar year shall be equal to (i) minus (ii) where:
i.
is the lesser of (a) total Qualified Future Fund Matching Contribution that would have been allocated on the Participant’s
behalf under Future Fund for the Plan Year, without giving effect to any reductions or limitations required by Sections
401(a)(17), 401(k), 402(g) and/or 415 of the Code (i.e., 5% of Total Pay), and (b)
Page | 13

the  Future  Fund  matching  contribution  that  would  have  been  allocated  on  the  participants  behalf,  had  the  participant
contributed the maximum amount permissible by law for that plan year, plus his or her Deferral under Section 4.1 for the
Plan Year; and
ii.
If the Participant is eligible to contribute to Future Fund (whether pre-tax or after-tax) during the Plan Year, the maximum
amount  of  matching  contributions  that  could  have  been  made  on  the  participants  behalf  to  Future  Fund  had  the
participant contributed the maximum amount permissible by law for that Plan Year,
In addition, if the Participant is not eligible to contribute to Future Fund during the Plan Year but is eligible to contribute to
another qualified defined contribution plan (whether pre-tax or after-tax) maintained by the Company or an Affiliate during
that Plan Year, the amount under this clause (ii) shall equal, unless otherwise provided by the Committee, the maximum
amount of matching contributions the Participant would have received under the provisions of Future Fund for that Plan
Year had he or she been eligible to contribute to Future Fund during that Plan Year, based on his or her Base Salary
and/or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions otherwise earned and payable in that Plan Year.
For purposes of this subsection (a), for the Plan Year in which the requirement to complete one (1) Year of Service is met, Total
Compensation for the entire Plan Year shall be taken into account.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of determining the Lost Matching Contributions to be credited under this Section 4.4(a),
Years of Service with respect to a Participant employed by Red Oak Sourcing, LLC, the limited liability corporation formed pursuant
to the Framework Agreement between CVS Pharmacy, Inc. and Cardinal Health 110 Inc., dated December 10, 2013 (“Cardinal”),
who immediately prior to becoming employed by Red Oak Sourcing, LLC was employed by Cardinal, shall include the period of
such Participant’s employment rendered with Cardinal.
Lost Matching Contributions shall be credited under this Section 4.4(a) with respect to a Participant who made a Bonus Deferral
Contribution  election  under  the  Omnicare,  Inc.  Deferred  Compensation  Plan  with  respect  to  the  2016  Plan  Year  but  such  Lost
Matching Contributions shall be subject to the Participant’s distribution election and the distribution provisions of the Omnicare, Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan in effect on the date of such Participant’s election.
Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  Participant  shall  not  be  eligible  to  receive  a  Lost  Matching  Contribution
following the Participant’s Termination of Employment, unless the Participant terminates due to Retirement.
For purposes of clarification, in no event shall a Participant be eligible to receive a Lost Matching Contribution if the Participant does
not make an actual deferral into the Plan for the Plan Year.
Page | 14

(b)
LTIP Deferrals.
At the sole discretion of the Committee, all or a portion of a Participant’s cash award under the LTIP may be deferred under the
Plan. Such election shall be made in accordance with the procedures established by the Plan Administrator. The deferral election
applicable to an LTIP cash award shall be made prior to the close of the calendar year preceding the first day of the performance
period applicable to that award. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such election shall become irrevocable as of the close of business of
the last day of the calendar year preceding the first day of the performance period applicable to that award. However, if such award
meets the definition of performance-based compensation (as defined under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-1(e) and any subsequent
guidance),  the  Plan  Administrator  may  permit  such  election  to  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  under  Treas.  Reg.
Section  1.409A-2(a)(8)  and  subsequent  guidance.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  previously  submitted
deferral  election  of  a  Participant’s  cash  award  under  the  LTIP  shall  be  disregarded  following  the  Participant’s  Termination  of
Employment.
(c)
Cash Retention Award Deferrals.
At the sole discretion of the Committee and subject to the procedures established by the Plan Administrator, an Eligible Executive
may elect to defer all or a portion of a cash retention award that may be otherwise paid under a cash retention program maintained
by the Company or an Affiliate. The deferral election applicable to such cash retention award shall be made in accordance with the
provisions  of  Treasury  Regulations  Section  1.409A-2(a)(5).  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  previously
submitted deferral election of a Participant’s cash retention award shall be disregarded following the Participant’s Termination of
Employment.
4.5
Deferral and Contribution Timing.
Base  Salary  Deferrals  will  be  credited  to  the  Account  of  each  Participant  as  of  the  date  of  the  pay  check  from  which  the  deferral  was
withheld. A Participant whose employment terminates during a payroll period will cease deferral withholding effective as of the first day of
the following payroll period.
Annual Cash Incentive Deferrals and Commission Deferrals will be credited to the Account of each Participant as of the day on which such
Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions, whichever is applicable, otherwise would have been paid to the Participant in cash.
Company Contributions for the Restoration of Lost Matching Contribution pursuant to Section 4.4(a) above will generally be credited to the
Participant’s Company Account as of the last day of each Plan Year following the Participant’s completion of one (1) Year of Participation
Service (as defined in Future Fund).
LTIP deferrals shall be credited to the Account of the Participant at the time designated by the Plan Administrator.
Cash  retention  awards  Deferrals  will  be  credited  to  the  Account  of  the  Participant  as  of  the  day  on  which  such  cash  retention  award
otherwise would have been paid to the Participant in cash.
Page | 15

ARTICLE V - ACCOUNTS
5.1
Establishment of Bookkeeping Accounts.
Separate bookkeeping accounts shall be maintained for each Participant. Said accounts (or subaccount(s) thereof) shall be credited with the
deferrals and contributions made by or on behalf of the Participant pursuant to the Plan and credited (or charged, as the case may be) with
the hypothetical investment results determined pursuant to this Article of the Plan.
5.2
Subaccounts.
Within each Participant’s bookkeeping account, separate subaccount(s) shall be maintained to the extent necessary for the administration of
the Plan. Generally, subaccount(s) will be set up for each year, for each Deferred Compensation Election the Participant makes, and for the
Company Contribution credited each year on behalf of a Participant.
5.3
Hypothetical Nature of Accounts.
The accounts established under this Article shall be hypothetical in nature and shall be maintained for bookkeeping purposes only so that
hypothetical gains or losses on the deferrals or contributions made to the Plan can be credited (or charged, as the case may be).
Neither the Plan nor any of the accounts, or subaccount(s), established hereunder shall hold any actual funds or assets. The right of any
person to receive one or more payments under the Plan shall be an unsecured claim against the general assets of the Company. Any
liability of the Company to any Participant, former Participant, or Beneficiary with respect to a right to payment shall be based solely upon
contractual obligations created by the Plan. The Company, an Affiliate, the Board, the Committee, or any other person shall not be deemed
to be a trustee of any amounts to be paid under the Plan. Nothing contained in the Plan, and no action taken pursuant to its provisions, shall
create  or  be  construed  to  create  a  trust  of  any  kind,  or  a  fiduciary  relationship,  between  the  Company,  an  Affiliate,  the  Board,  the
Committee, the Plan Administrator, or any other person and a Participant or any other person.
5.4
Vesting.
Deferral Account. A Participant shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested in his or her Deferral Account and Grandfathered Deferral
Account at all times. A Participant shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested in the LTIP deferrals credited on his or her behalf pursuant
to Section 4.4(b) and any cash retention award deferrals credited on his or her behalf pursuant to Section 4.4(c).
Company Account. A Participant shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested in his or her Company Account and Grandfathered Company
Account at all times.
5.5
Deferral Crediting Options.
Deferral Crediting Options are similar to investment choices in a qualified defined contribution plan, except that they are hypothetical in
nature and no funds are actually held in the Plan. Deferral Crediting Options determine the hypothetical gain or loss to be reflected in the
Participant Accounts and shall be elected by Participants in the manner determined by the Plan Administrator.
The Deferral Crediting Options offered to Participants are determined by the Plan Administrator at its sole discretion. The Plan Administrator
specifically retains the right to change the Deferral Crediting Options at any time, in its sole discretion.
In  the  event  the  Plan  Administrator  designates  more  than  one  Deferral  Crediting  Option,  each  Participant  shall  electronically  submit  a
Deferral Crediting Option election during each annual
Page | 16

enrollment period, which shall be used to measure the hypothetical investment performance of his or her Accounts, within such time period
and on such form as the Plan Administrator may prescribe. The designation of a Deferral Crediting Option shall not require the Company to
invest or earmark their general assets in any manner. If a Participant fails to make a Deferral Crediting Option, his or her Accounts shall be
deemed invested in a Deferral Crediting Option as determined by the Plan Administrator.
A Participant may change his or her election of a Deferral Crediting Option used to measure the hypothetical investment performance of his
or her Account balance within such time periods and in such manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator. The election shall be effective as
soon as administratively practicable after the date on which the election is submitted in the manner specified by the Plan Administrator.
Any  amounts  added  to  or  subtracted  from  a  Participant’s  Account  on  any  given  Valuation  Date  will  be  converted  to  hypothetical  unit
equivalents (“Hypothetical Units”) with a value per Hypothetical Unit (“Unit Price”) based on the daily closing price on said date (“Unit Price”)
for any given Deferral Crediting Option.
5.6
Hypothetical Gains or Losses.
Any hypothetical dividends, capital gains and any other income or unit activity will be reflected in the Deferral Crediting Options. The timing
of these will be the same as for the funds on which each Deferral Crediting Option is based.
The gain or loss on Participant Accounts will be calculated each Valuation Date. The Unit Price shall determine each Deferral Crediting
Option’s hypothetical value, based on the number of units within the Account for any given Deferral Crediting Option. Account balances on a
given day will be based on the previous day’s New York Stock Exchange closing price.
Page | 17

ARTICLE VI - DISTRIBUTION OF ACCOUNT
6.1
Distribution Elections - Timing of Payment.
(a)
Subject to the limitations set forth in this Article VI, each time a Participant makes a Deferred Compensation Election with respect to
a  Plan  Year  beginning  on  or  after  January  1,  2016,  the  Participant  shall  designate  on  that  applicable  Deferred  Compensation
Election, separately for Participant deferrals and Company Contributions, as adjusted pursuant to Article V, that the distribution of
such deferrals shall be made or commence, as the case may be, pursuant to Section 6.6, as of (i) the Participant’s Retirement; or
(ii) a Specific Future Year not later than the Plan Year in which the Participant attains age seventy-one (71).
A Participant may choose different options with respect to each Deferred Compensation Election. A Participant may not change the
election made pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.1, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.7 below.
i.
Retirement.  The  distribution  of  the  portion  of  a  Participant’s  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  subaccount(s))  that  is
deferred to Retirement under this Section shall commence on the first business day in the January next following his or
her Retirement, pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.6, provided, however, that with respect to a Participant who is a
Specified Employee as of the date of his or her Retirement, payment of any portion of his or her Deferral or Company
Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) that is subject to Section 409A of the Code will be delayed until the first business
day of the seventh (7
th) month following the date such Retirement occurs.
ii.
Specific Future Year. In the event a Participant elects to have the distribution of such deferrals made or commence as of
a Specific Future Year, subject to rules established by the Plan Administrator, the deferral period must be at least five (5)
Plan  Years.  The  distribution  of  the  portion  of  a  Participant’s  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  subaccount(s))  that  is
deferred to a Specific Future Year shall commence on the first business day of January in that specific year pursuant to
the provisions of Section 6.6.
(b)
Company  Contributions  shall  be  distributed  pursuant  to  the  Participant’s  distribution  election.  In  the  event  a  Participant  has  not
made a distribution election for the Company Contributions for that Plan Year, such distribution shall mirror his or her distribution
election made with respect to his or her Base Salary Deferral or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions Deferral for that Plan Year,
if any, in such order; otherwise, such distribution shall be made at the Participant’s Retirement.
6.2
Disability Distributions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a Participant has a Termination of Employment because he or she has become Disabled, as determined by
the Plan Administrator, such Participant will receive the balance of his or her Deferral Account and Company Account paid out in five (5)
annual substantially equal installments with the first payment to be made within seventy-five (75) days from the date of the Participant’s
Termination of Employment. Subsequent annual payments will be paid as of the first business day in January of each subsequent year of
the installment period.
6.3
Distributions in the Event of Death.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a Participant’s death, the Participant’s Beneficiary will receive the remaining balance of the
Participant’s Deferral Account and Company Account paid
Page | 18

in two (2) annual installments with the first payment to be made within seventy-five (75) days of the Participant’s date of death. The second
annual payment will be paid as of the first business day in January of the subsequent calendar year.
6.4
Distributions Upon Termination of Employment Other Than Retirement, Death or Disability.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event a Participant incurs a Termination of Employment from the Company and all Affiliates for any
reason other than Retirement, death or Disability, said Participant will receive his or her entire Deferral Account and Company Account
balance in a single lump sum payment. Such payment shall be made within seventy-five (75) days of the date the Participant’s Termination
of  Employment  occurs;  provided, however,  that  with  respect  to  a  Participant  who  is  a  Specified  Employee  as  of  the  date  of  his  or  her
Termination  of  Employment  for  reasons  other  than  death,  payment  of  any  portion  of  his  or  her  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  any
subaccount(s) thereof) pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.4 will be delayed until the first business day of the seventh (7
th) month
following the date such Termination of Employment occurs.
6.5
Change in Control.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  provisions  of  this  Article  VI,  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  Change  in  Control,  a  Participant  who  has  a  valid
change in control election(s) in effect shall automatically receive the balance of his or her Deferral Account and Company Account related to
that election, in cash, in a single lump sum payment. Such lump sum payment shall be paid within forty-five (45) business days after the
Change in Control occurs. If such Participant dies after such Change in Control event occurs, but before receiving such payment, it shall be
made to his or her Beneficiary.
6.6
Form of Payment.
(a)
Installments. Subject to the limitations set forth in Article VI, distributions will be made in annual (or quarterly, if the election was
made prior to October 1, 2008) installments, as elected by the Participant, for up to, and including, ten (10) years (fifteen (15) years
for an election made prior to October 1, 2008). The initial installment of an annual or quarterly payment stream will begin as of the
first business day of the January (a) next following the Participant’s date of Retirement or (b) of the Specific Future Year, as the
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of set forth in Section 6.1. Subsequent annual or quarterly payments will be as of
the first business day of each subsequent calendar year or quarter of the installment period.
Each installment will be equal to a fraction of the Account balance (or subaccount(s) thereof) as of the date the installment is paid,
with the numerator of the fraction being “1” and the denominator being the number of payments remaining in the payment schedule.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph (a), if a Participant dies before receiving payment of the entire balance of
his or her Deferral and Company Accounts under the provisions of this Section, the remaining value of such Accounts shall be
payable to his or her Beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.9.
(b)
Lump  sum.  A  Participant  may  elect  distribution  in  the  form  of  a  single  lump  sum  payment.  Except  for  Specified  Employees,
distribution shall be made as of the first business day of the January (a) next following the Participant’s date of Retirement or (b) of
the Specific Future Year, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of set forth in Section 6.1.
Page | 19

(c)
Distributions to a Participant made pursuant to Section 6.1 will occur pursuant to the Participant’s payment elections at the time he
or she submits the applicable Deferred Compensation Election. A Participant may choose different forms of payment with respect to
each Deferred Compensation Election. Company Contributions, adjusted pursuant to Article V, shall be distributed pursuant to the
Participant’s form of payment election made with respect to his or her Company Contributions for that year. If the Participant has not
made an election with respect to his or her Company Contributions, the portion of his or her Company Account attributable to such
Company contributions will be distributed in accordance with his or her form of payment election with respect to his or her Base
Salary Deferral, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions Deferrals for that year, if any, in that order; otherwise payment will be made
in  a  lump  sum  payment.  In  the  absence  of  an  election  of  the  form  of  payment  by  a  Participant  on  a  Deferred  Compensation
Election, the portion of the Participant’s Account deferred pursuant to that Deferred Compensation Election, adjusted pursuant to
the provisions of Article V, shall be paid in a single lump sum.
(d)
A Participant shall not change his or her form of payment election, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.7 below.
6.7
Change of Distribution Election.
(a)
In accordance with such procedures as the Plan Administrator may prescribe, a Participant may elect to change his or her Specific
Future Year election under Section 6.1(a)(ii) with respect to a portion of his or her Deferral Account (or an Interim Distribution date
election applicable to a portion of his or her Deferral Account or Company Account made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as
in effect  prior  to  December  31,  2008)  to a later  Specific  Future  Year  (or,  if  applicable,  a later  Interim  Distribution  date)  by duly
completing,  executing  and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  Specific  Future  Year  election  (or  Interim  Distribution  date
election) applicable to such Deferrals, subject to the following limitations:
i.
such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to the Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) then
in  effect  with  respect  to  that  portion  of  his  or  her  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  subaccount(s)  thereof),  and  such
election will not become effective until at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made; and
ii.
the new Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) shall be a calendar year that is not less than five (5) years from
the Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) then in effect.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Participant may elect to delay his or her distribution from an elected Specific Future Year to the
later of Retirement or a new Specific Future Year that is at least five (5) years from the Specific Future Year then in effect, provided
the election is made in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Section 6.7(a). A Participant may elect to delay his or her
distribution  from  an  elected  Specific  Future  Year  (or  Interim  Distribution  date)  pursuant  to  this  Section  6.7(a)  more  than  once,
provided that all such elections comply with the provisions of this Section 6.7(a).
(b)
In accordance with such procedures as the Plan Administrator may prescribe, a Participant may elect to delay the payment of a
portion of his or her Deferral or Company Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) scheduled to be paid at his or her Retirement to
his  or  her  Retirement  plus  five  (5)  calendar  years  by  duly  completing,  executing  and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new
Retirement election applicable to such deferrals; provided, however such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to
Retirement and
Page | 20

shall not become effective until at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made.
(c)
In accordance with  such  procedures  as  the  Plan  Administrator  may  prescribe,  a  Participant  may  elect  to  change  the  form  of
payment election under Section 6.6 applicable to his or her distribution under Section 6.1(a)(i) or (ii) by duly completing, executing
and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  form  of  payment  election  applicable  to  such  deferrals,  subject  to  the  following
limitations:
i.
such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to the Specific Future Year then in effect with respect to that
portion of his or her Deferral or Company Account (or subaccount(s) thereof), and such election will not become effective
until at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made; and
ii.
the distribution of that portion of his or her Deferral or Company Account (or subaccount(s) thereof) shall be deferred for
five (5) years from the date such amount would otherwise have been paid absent this election.
(d)
It  is the Company's  intent  that  the  provisions  of  Sections  6.7(a),  (b)  and  (c)  comply  with  the  subsequent  election  provisions  in
Section  409A(a)(4)(C)  of  the  Code,  related  regulations  and other  applicable  guidance,  and  this  Section  6.7  shall  be  interpreted
accordingly. The Plan Administrator may impose additional restrictions or conditions on a Participant's ability to make an election
pursuant to this Section 6.7. For avoidance of doubt, a Participant may not elect to alter the distribution of any portion of his or her
Deferral or Company Accounts (or any subaccount(s) thereof) from Retirement to a Specific Future Year or, except as provided in
paragraph (a) above, from a Specific Future Year to Retirement.
6.8
Account Valuation upon a Distribution.
With  respect  to  a  distribution  made  pursuant  to  this  Article,  the  Valuation  Date  of  a Participant’s  Account  shall  be  the  day immediately
preceding the Distribution Date.
6.9
Designation of Beneficiary.
Each Participant shall have the right to designate a Beneficiary to receive payment of his or her Account in the event of death. Any such
designation may be changed at any time by executing and submitting (either by hand or electronic submission) a new designation on a form
prescribed by the Plan Administrator.
6.10
Unclaimed Account.
If the Plan Administrator is unable to locate a Participant or Beneficiary to whom an Account is payable, such Account may be forfeited to
the  Company  upon  the  Plan  Administrator’s  determination.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing, if  subsequent  to  any  such  forfeiture,  the
Participant or Beneficiary to whom such Account is payable makes a valid claim, such forfeited Account shall be restored to the Plan and
paid by the Company.
6.11
Hardship Withdrawals.
A Participant may apply in writing to the Plan Administrator for, and the Plan Administrator may grant, a hardship withdrawal of all or any
part  of  a Participant’s  Deferral  or  Company  Account if  the Plan Administrator,  in its  sole discretion,  determines  that the  Participant  has
incurred an Unforeseeable Emergency, as defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
The Plan Administrator shall determine whether an event qualifies as a hardship within this Section, in its sole and absolute discretion. Such
request shall be made in a time and manner determined
Page | 21

by the Plan Administrator. The payment made from a Participant’s Deferral or Company Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) pursuant to
the  provisions  of  this  Section  6.11  shall  not  be  in  excess  of  the  amount  necessary  to  meet  such  financial  hardship  of  the  Participant,
including amounts necessary to pay any federal, state or local income taxes with respect to the payment and shall not be available unless
all  other  financial  resources  of  the  Participant  have  been  exhausted.  Payment  shall  be  made  in  the  month  following  the  date  the  Plan
Administrator determines that the Participant has incurred an unforeseeable severe financial hardship and grants the right to a withdrawal
pursuant to this Section 6.11.
6.12
Distribution of Grandfathered Deferral Account and the Grandfathered Company Account.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  provisions  of  this  Article  VI,  the  distribution  from  a  Participant’s  Grandfathered  Deferral  Account  and
Grandfathered Company Account (or subaccount(s)) shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004,
without regard to any amendments after October 3, 2004 which would constitute a material modification for Section 409A of the Code, as
modified in Appendix A attached hereto.
Page | 22

ARTICLE VII - ADMINISTRATION
7.1
Plan Administrator.
The Plan shall be administered by the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, appointed by the Committee as Plan Administrator. The
Plan Administrator shall be responsible for the general operation and administration of the Plan and for carrying out the provisions thereof.
The Plan Administrator may delegate to others certain aspects of the management and operations of the Plan including the employment of
advisors and the delegation of ministerial duties to qualified individuals, provided that such delegation is in writing.
7.2
General Powers of Administration.
The Plan Administrator shall have the exclusive responsibility and complete discretionary authority to control the operation, management
and administration of the Plan, with all powers necessary to enable it properly to carry out such responsibilities, including, but not limited to,
the power to interpret the Plan and any related documents, to establish procedures for making any elections called for under the Plan, to
make factual determinations regarding any and all matters arising hereunder, including, but not limited to, the right to determine eligibility for
benefits, the right to construe the terms of the Plan, the right to remedy possible ambiguities, inequities, inconsistencies or omissions, and
the right to resolve all interpretive, equitable or other questions arising under the Plan. The decisions of the Plan Administrator or such other
party as is authorized under the terms of any grantor trust on all matters shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons to the extent
permitted by law. The Plan Administrator shall have all powers necessary or appropriate to enable it to carry out its administrative duties.
Not in limitation, but in application of the foregoing, the Plan Administrator shall have the duty and power to interpret the Plan and determine
all questions that may raise hereunder as to the status and rights of Employees, Participants, Beneficiaries, and any other person. The Plan
Administrator may exercise the powers hereby granted in its sole and absolute discretion. No member of the Deferred Compensation Plans
Committee shall be personally liable for any actions taken by the Plan Administrator unless the member’s action involves gross negligence
or willful misconduct.
7.3
Costs of Administration.
The costs of administering the Plan shall be borne by the Company unless and until the Participant receives written notice of the imposition
of such administrative costs; with such costs to begin with the next Plan Year and none may be assessed retroactively for prior Plan Years.
Such costs shall be charged against the Participant’s Account and shall be uniform or proportional for all Participants. Such costs shall not
exceed the standard rates for similarly designed nonqualified plans under administration by high quality third party administrators at the time
such costs are initially imposed and thereafter.
7.4
Indemnification.
The Company shall indemnify each director, officer or employee of the Company or any Affiliate and each member of the Committee and
Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, including any subcommittee or delegates thereof, against any and all claims, losses, damages,
expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred by them, and any liability, including any amounts paid in settlement with their approval, arising
from  their  action  or  failure  to  act,  except  when  the  same  is  judicially  determined  to  be  attributable  to  their  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct, as a result of the fact that he or she is or was serving the Plan in any capacity at the request of the Company.
Page | 23

7.5
409A Compliance.
With respect to the accounts subject to Section 409A of the Code, the Plan is intended to comply with the requirements of Section 409A of
the Code and the provisions hereof shall be interpreted in a manner that satisfies the requirements of Section 409A of the Code and the
regulations thereunder, and the Plan shall be operated accordingly. Regardless of, and superseding any other provision of the Plan to the
contrary,  if  any  provision  of  the  Plan  would  otherwise  frustrate  or  conflict  with  this  intent,  the  provision  will  be  interpreted  and  deemed
amended so as to avoid this conflict.
Page | 24

ARTICLE VIII - CLAIMS PROCEDURE
8.1
Claims.
A person who believes that he or she is being denied a benefit to which he or she is entitled under the Plan (hereinafter referred to as a
“Claimant”)  may  file  a  written  request  for  such  benefit  with  the  Plan  Administrator,  setting  forth  his  or  her  claim.  The  request  must  be
addressed to the Senior Vice President, Compensation and Benefits, at the Company’s then principal place of business.
8.2
Claim Decision.
Upon receipt of a claim, the Plan Administrator or its delegate shall review and determine the claim within ninety (90) days. If the Plan
Administrator determines that additional time is needed to review the claim, the Plan Administrator will provide the Claimant with a notice of
the  extension  before  the  end  of  the  initial  ninety  (90)-day  period.  The  notice  of  extension  will  provide  the  date  by  which  the  Plan
Administrator expects to make a decision.
If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Plan Administrator shall notify the Claimant in writing of the following:
(a)
The reason or reasons for such denial;
(b)
The pertinent provisions of the Plan;
(c)
Appropriate information as to the steps to be taken if the Claimant wishes to submit the claim for review; and
(d)
The time limits for requesting a review under this Section.
8.3
Request for Review/Appeal.
Within sixty (60) days after the receipt by the Claimant of the initial written notice of a denial, the Claimant may request in writing that the
initial  determination  be  reviewed.  Such  request  must  be  addressed  to  the  Senior  Vice  President,  Compensation  and  Benefits,  at  the
Company’s then principal place of business. The Claimant or his or her duly authorized representative may, but need not, submit issues and
comments in writing for consideration by the Appeals Committee, a subcommittee of the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee. If the
Claimant does not request a review of the initial determination within such sixty (60)-day period, he or she shall be barred and stopped from
challenging the Plan Administrator’s initial determination.
8.4
Review of Decision.
Within sixty (60) days after the Plan Administrator’s receipt of a request for review, the Appeals Committee of the Plan Administrator will
review the Plan Administrator’s initial determination. After considering all materials presented by the Claimant, the Appeals Committee will
render a written decision, setting forth the reasons for the decision and containing references to the pertinent provisions of the Plan. If the
Appeals  Committee  requires  an  extension  of  the  sixty  (60)-day  time  period,  the  Appeals  Committee  will so  notify  the  Claimant  and will
render the decision as soon as possible, but no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of the request for review.
8.5
Time Limit for Bringing Legal Action.
Any legal action by the Claimant must be brought within ninety (90) days following the date of the decision on the final review under Section
8.4 above.
Page | 25

ARTICLE IX - MISCELLANEOUS
9.1
Not Contract of Employment.
The adoption and maintenance of the Plan shall not be deemed to be a contract between the Company or an Affiliate and any person and
shall not be consideration for the employment of any person. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to give any person the right to be
retained in the employ of the Company or an Affiliate or to restrict the right of the Company or an Affiliate to discharge any person at any
time  nor  shall  the  Plan  be  deemed  to  give  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate  the  right  to  require  any  person  to  remain  in  the  employ  of  the
Company or an Affiliate or to restrict any person’s right to terminate his or her employment at any time.
9.2
Non-Assignability of Benefits.
No  Participant,  Beneficiary  or  distributees  of  benefits  under  the  Plan  shall  have  any  power  or  right  to  transfer,  assign,  anticipate,
hypothecate or otherwise encumber any part or all of the amounts payable hereunder, which are expressly declared to be unassignable and
nontransferable. Any such attempted assignment or transfer shall be void. No amount payable hereunder shall, prior to actual payment
thereof, be subject to seizure by any creditor of any such Participant, Beneficiary or other distributees for the payment of any debt judgment
or other obligation, by a proceeding at law or in equity, nor transferable by operation of law in the event of the bankruptcy, insolvency or
death of such Participant, Beneficiary or other distributee hereunder.
9.3
Withholding and Deduction and Taxes.
All deferrals and payments provided for hereunder shall be subject to applicable withholding and other deductions as shall be required of the
Company under any applicable local, state or federal law. The Company may require that the Participant or Beneficiary making a deferral or
receiving payments pay to the Company the amount of any federal, state or local taxes, if any, that the Company or any Affiliate is required
to withhold with respect to such deferrals or payments or the Company or any Affiliate may deduct from other wages paid by the Company
or any Affiliate the amount of any withholding taxes due with respect to such deferrals or payments. A Participant or Beneficiary shall be
solely responsible for any tax consequences related to deferrals or payments made under the Plan. The Company shall have no obligation
to make any payment under the Plan until the Company’s or any Affiliate’s tax withholding obligations have been satisfied by the Participant
or Beneficiary.
9.4
Amendment and Termination.
The Committee or its delegate may from time to time, in its discretion, amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the provisions of the Plan;
provided, however, that no amendment may be made that would impair the rights of a Participant with respect to amounts already allocated
to his or her Account without the Participant’s consent. To the extent consistent with the rules relating to plan terminations and liquidations in
Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or otherwise consistent with Section 409A of the Code, the Committee, in its sole discretion, may
terminate the Plan and any related Deferred Compensation Election at any time and in that event the Committee may provide that, without
the prior written consent of Participants, the Participants’ Accounts shall be distributed in a single cash lump sum upon termination of the
Plan.  Unless  so  distributed  in accordance  with  the  preceding  sentence,  in  the  event  of  a  Plan  termination,  the  Plan  Administrator  shall
continue to maintain the Participants’ Accounts until distributed pursuant to the terms of the Plan and Participants shall remain one hundred
percent  (100%)  vested  in  all  amounts  credited  to  their  Accounts.  In  the  event  of  a  Plan  termination,  the  distribution  of  a  Participant’s
Grandfathered Deferral Account and Grandfathered Company Account shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as set forth on
October 3, 2004, without regard to any amendments after October 3,
Page | 26

2004 which would constitute a material modification for Section 409A of the Code, as modified in Appendix A attached hereto.
9.5
Compliance with Securities and Other Laws.
Notwithstanding any Plan provision to the contrary, the Committee may at any time impose such restrictions on the Plan and participation
therein, including limiting the amount of any deferral or the timing thereof, as the Committee may deem advisable from time to time in order
to comply or preserve compliance with any applicable laws, including any applicable state and federal securities laws and exemptions from
registration available thereunder.
9.6
No Trust Created.
Nothing contained in the Plan and no action taken pursuant to its provisions by the Company or any person, shall create, nor be construed
to create, a trust of any kind or a fiduciary relationship between the Company or an Affiliate and the Participant, Beneficiary, or any other
person.
9.7
Unsecured General Creditor Status of Employee.
The payments to the Participant, Beneficiary or any other distributees hereunder shall be made from assets which shall continue, for all
purposes, to be a part of the general, unrestricted assets of the Company. No person shall have or acquire any interest in any such assets
by virtue of the provisions of the Plan. The Company’s obligation hereunder shall be an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay money in
the future. To the extent that the Participant, Beneficiary or other distributees acquire a right to receive payments from the Company under
the provisions hereof, such right shall be no greater than the right of any unsecured general creditor of the Company. No such person shall
have or acquire any legal or equitable right, interest or claim in or to any property or assets of the Company.
In the event that, in its discretion, the Company purchases an insurance policy, or policies, insuring the life of the Employee, or any other
property,  to  allow  the  Company  to  recover  the  cost  of  providing  the  benefits,  in  whole,  or  in  part,  hereunder,  neither  the  Participant,
Beneficiary or other distributee shall have or acquire any rights whatsoever therein or in the proceeds therefrom. The Company shall be the
sole owner and beneficiary of any such policy or policies and, as such, shall possess and, may exercise all incidents of ownership therein.
No such policy, policies or other property shall be held in any trust for a Participant, Beneficiary or other distributee or held as collateral
security for any obligation of the Company hereunder. An Employee’s participation in the underwriting or other steps necessary to acquire
such policy or policies may be required by the Company and, if required, shall not be a suggestion of any beneficial interest in such policy or
policies to a Participant.
9.8
Limitation.
A Participant and his or her Beneficiary shall assume all risk in connection with any decrease in value of his or her Account, and neither the
Company nor the Committee or the Plan Administrator shall be liable or responsible therefor.
9.9
Payment to Minors and Incompetents.
If any Participant, spouse, or Beneficiary entitled to receive any benefits hereunder is a minor or is deemed by the Plan Administrator or is
adjudicated to be legally incapable of giving a valid receipt and discharge for such benefits, the benefits will be paid to the person or entity
as the Plan Administrator determines has been appointed or established to receive such payment on behalf of such person. Such payment
shall, to the extent made, be deemed a complete discharge of any payment obligation under the Plan.
Page | 27

9.10
Acceleration of or Delay in Payments.
The Plan Administrator, in its sole and absolute discretion, may elect to accelerate the time or form of payment of a benefit owed to the
Participant hereunder, provided such acceleration is permitted under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4) and any subsequent guidance. The
Plan Administrator may also, in its sole and absolute discretion, delay the time for payment of a benefit owed to the Participant hereunder, to
the extent permitted under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A- 2(b)(7) and any subsequent guidance.
9.11
Severability.
If any provision of the Plan shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions
hereof; instead, each provision shall be fully severable and the Plan shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provision had
never been included herein.
9.12
Governing Laws.
All provisions of the Plan shall be construed in accordance with the laws of Rhode Island, except to the extent preempted by federal law.
9.13
Binding Effect.
The terms of the Plan shall be binding on each Participant and his or her heirs and legal representatives and on the Company and its
successors and assigns.
Page | 28

APPENDIX A - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S
GRANDFATHERED DEFERRAL ACCOUNT AND GRANDFATHERED COMPANY
ACCOUNT
This Appendix A constitutes an integral part of the Plan and is applicable with respect to the Grandfathered Deferral Account and the Grandfathered
Company  Account  of  those  individuals  who  were  Participants  in  the  Plan  on  December  31,  2004.  The Grandfathered Deferral  Account  and
Grandfathered Company Account are subject to all the terms and conditions of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004, without regard to any Plan
amendments  after  October  3,  2004  which  would  constitute  a  material  modification  for  Section  409A  of  the  Code,  as  modified  below.  Section
references in this Appendix A correspond to appropriate Sections of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004.
ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS
Section 2.15 - Company Account means the Participant’s Grandfathered Company Account as set forth in Section 2.28.
Section 2.19 - Deferral Account means the Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account as set forth in Section 2.29 of the foregoing provisions of
the Plan.
For purposes of a Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account and Grandfathered Company Account, the term Change in Control shall have the
meaning set forth in the 1997 Incentive Compensation Plan as in effect on October 3, 2004.
ARTICLE IV - DEFERRALS AND COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS
The provisions of Section 4.03 shall continue to apply to a Participant’s Grandfathered  Deferral Account, Grandfathered  Company Account and
amounts transferred from the Melville Deferred Compensation Plan that were vested on or earlier than December 31, 2004.
ARTICLE V - MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS
The provisions of Section V as set forth in the foregoing provisions of the Plan as amended and restated effective as of December 31, 2008 shall be
applicable to a Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account and Grandfathered Company Account on and after January 1, 2009.
ARTICLE VI - PAYMENT OF BENEFIT
For purposes of this Article VI - Payment of Benefit, the term “termination of employment” or any other similar language means with respect to a
Participant the complete cessation of providing service to the Company and any Affiliate as an employee.
6.2.
Form of Payment
Effective on or after October 1, 2008, a Participant shall not elect installments in excess of ten (10) years or quarterly installments.
6.3.
Disability Distributions
A Participant shall be entitled to distribution under this Section if such Participant becomes “Disabled” as such term is defined under Section
6.03 of the Plan.
6.6.
Change of Distribution Election
On and after January 1, 2009, a change in a Specific Future Year distribution date or an Interim distribution date shall be effective only if the
new Specific Future Year distribution date or an Interim distribution date is not less than five (5) years later then the date in effect prior to the
change election.
Page | 29

APPENDIX B - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE OMNICARE, INC.
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
This Appendix B constitutes an integral part of the Plan and is applicable with respect to a Participant’s Account (“Omnicare Account”) under the
Omnicare,  Inc.  Deferred  Compensation  Plan,  effective  January  1,  2017.  The  Participants’  Omnicare  Accounts  are  subject  to  all  the  terms  and
conditions of the Omnicare Plan as set forth on January 1, 2013. Section references in this Appendix B correspond to appropriate Sections of the
Omnicare Plan as set forth on January 1, 2013.
Article 2:     Participation
Effective December 31, 2016, there shall be no new Participants in the Plan.
Article 3:     Contributions & Deferral Elections
3.1    Elections to Defer Compensation.
Effective December 31, 2016 there shall be no new Elections to defer Compensation.
3.2    Company Contributions.
Effective December 31, 2016 there shall be no Discretionary Company Contributions or Company Matching Contributions.
3.3    Investment Elections.
Effective January 1, 2017, a Participant shall be eligible to designate the investment of his or her Omnicare Account solely in accordance with the
Deferral Crediting Options of the CVS Health Corporation Deferred Compensation Plan.
Page | 30

APPENDIX C - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE AETNA SUPPLEMENTAL
401(K) PLAN AND AETNA DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
This Appendix C constitutes an integral part of the Plan and is applicable with respect to a Participant’s accounts under the Aetna Supplemental
401(k) Plan and Aetna Deferred Compensation Program (collectively, the “Aetna Accounts”), effective January 1, 2020, which have been merged
into the Plan. The Participants’ Aetna Accounts are subject to all the terms and conditions of the Plan except that the Aetna Accounts shall remain
subject to the distribution provisions of the Supplemental 401(k) Plan as set forth on January 1, 2009, as amended, and the Deferred Compensation
Program as set forth on January 1, 2008, as applicable, and as set forth below:
AETNA SUPPLEMENTAL 401(K) PLAN
Payment of Deferred Amounts
1.     Timing of Payment for Participants whose Termination from Service Occurs on or after January 1, 2005. The vested Account balance of
any Participant whose Termination from Service (“separation from service” as defined Code Section 409A) occurs on or after January 1, 2005 shall
be paid in a lump sum no later than thirty [30] days after later of (a) the date that is six (6) months following the Participant's Termination from
Service Date; or (b) the January 1 next following the Participant's Termination from Service Date.
2.     Election as to Time of Payment - Prior Participants. Each Participant who incurred a Termination from Service prior to January 1, 2005 shall
have had an opportunity to make an election, on a form and in the manner prescribed by the Company for this purpose, specifying the time at which
his or her vested Account balance is to be paid. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 3 and 4 below, payment of any such Participant's vested
Account balance shall be made to the Participant in a lump sum as soon as practicable after the Valuation Date on or next following the time
specified for payment in the election made by the Participant under this paragraph 2. In the absence of an election which complies with either
paragraph 2 or 3, any such Participant's vested Account balance shall be paid in a lump sum as soon as practicable after the Valuation Date on or
next following the Participant's Termination from Service.
3.     Time of Payment-Certain Prior Participants. This paragraph 3 applies to Participants who ceased to be Employees prior to October 1, 1996
without having made an election pursuant to paragraph 2 hereof. Payment of the Account balance of any such Participant shall be made in a lump
sum at the earlier of the commencement of the Participant's (i) final distribution from the Aetna 401(k) Plan; or (ii) required minimum distributions
following attainment of age 70½, unless the Participant has otherwise elected, prior to termination of employment, to receive payment at a later date.
4.     Payment in the Event of Participant's Death. Notwithstanding any election that may have been made by a Participant pursuant to paragraph
2 or 3, and notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, any vested Account balance that has not been paid to the Participant as of the date of the
Participant's death shall be paid to the Participant's Beneficiary in a lump sum on the Valuation Date on or next following the Participant's death.
5.     Acceleration of Payment. If a Participant experiences an "unforeseeable emergency" as defined in Section 409A, the Participant may submit
to the Administrator  a written request for a distribution,  including such documentation  as the Administrator  may require. The Administrator  shall
review the request and make a determination approving or denying the requested distribution. If approved, distribution shall be made on the first
business  day  of  the  month  following  the  approval  and  shall  be  limited  to  such  amount  as  is  reasonably  necessary  to  alleviate  the  Participant's
emergency  need,  taking  into  account  other  assets  available  to  the  Participant  to  the  extent  required  by  Section  409A.  In  addition,  and
notwithstanding any other provision of this Plan to the contrary, the Company, in its sole discretion, may accelerate the payment of vested Account
balances in any other circumstances permitted under Section 409A.
Page | 31

AETNA DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
Payment
1. Payment will begin on the specified date or event elected by the Participant for each year’s deferrals. The form of payment(s) will be made
according to the option(s) elected by the Participant for each year’s deferred funds. If the Participant failed to specify the time and form of payment
on an election form, payment shall be made in accordance with: (a) if applicable, the time and form specified by the Company in the separate written
arrangement providing for the compensation or (b) if not so specified, the time of payment shall be the Participant’s separation from service and the
form of payment shall be a single lump sum. Payments are subject to such deductions as may be required in accordance with federal and state tax
regulations.
2. Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, if a Participant is a “Specified Employee” within the meaning of Section 409A at the time of termination
of employment, any payment of “deferred compensation” hereunder to which the participant would otherwise be entitled, due to such termination of
employment, during the first six months following termination of employment, shall remain in the Participant’s bookkeeping account and be paid in a
lump sum on the six-month anniversary of the Specified Employee’s termination of employment date (or, if earlier, death). This requirement shall
only apply to the extent required by Section 409A.
3. The payment of “deferred compensation” (within the meaning of Section 409A) under this program may not be accelerated in violation of Section
409A.
4. Unless otherwise noted in the deferral election form, in the event of the Participant’s “disability” (within the meaning of Section 409A) or death
during the deferral period, payment shall be made to the Participant or the Participant’s beneficiary upon such event.
5. In case of an “unforeseeable emergency,” within the meaning of Section 409A, a Participant may submit a request for payment of amounts
already deferred to be advanced and/or a deferral election to be canceled, to the extent permitted under Section 409A. The Company shall make the
determination of unforeseeable emergency in its sole discretion consistent with the requirements of Section 409A. If approved, payment shall be
made on the first day of the month following approval and shall be limited to such amount as is reasonably necessary to alleviate the Participant’s
emergency need, taking into account other assets available to the Participant to the extent required by Section 409A.
Page | 32

Exhibit 10.27
CVS Health Corporation
Management Incentive Plan
I.    Objectives and Summary
CVS Health Corporation’s Management Incentive Plan (the “MIP”) is designed to reward Eligible Participants of CVS Health Corporation and
its subsidiaries (together, “the Company”) for their role in driving performance and to encourage Eligible Participants’ continued employment
with the Company. Funding for the payment of incentive awards will be based on actual results measured against pre-established financial
goals  and/or  operating  goals.  The  amount  of  each  incentive  award  paid  will  be  based  on  the  performance  of  the  Company  and  the
performance of the individual Eligible Participant.
The MIP shall be administered by the Management Planning and Development Committee (the “Committee”) of the Board of Directors (the
“Board”) under the provisions herein and of the 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan or any successor plan (the “ICP”), and the Committee
may delegate to officers of CVS Health the authority to perform administrative functions of the MIP as the Committee may determine and
may appoint officers and others to assist it in administering the MIP.
II.    Plan Year
The MIP is a calendar year plan, which runs from January 1 to December 31 (“Plan Year”) of each year, unless otherwise approved by the
Committee. All dates in this document occur during the current Plan Year unless otherwise stated.
III.    Eligibility
A. Eligibility for Participation
The Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation (“CEO”) or the CEO’s designee determines those employees who are eligible to
participate in the MIP except as set forth in Section III.(B), below. In general, “Eligible Participants” are employees who are not covered by
any other incentive plans and who are employed by the Company in an incentive eligible position on or before November 1 of the Plan Year.
The CEO may, for any reason and in his or her sole discretion, at any time during the Plan Year, determine an employee’s eligibility for
participation in the MIP except as set forth in Section III.(B). Eligible Participants are subject to the terms and conditions relating to incentive
awards set forth in the MIP.
B. Section 16 Officers
The  Committee  shall  determine  the  eligibility  of  Section  16  Officers  of  CVS  Health,  whom  will  also  be  included  in  the  term  “Eligible
Participants” unless otherwise noted. The Committee shall retain sole discretion to determine Section 16 Officer eligibility for an award, the
target award, and the amount of the actual award.
C. Position Change
If a position change results in an employee becoming an Eligible Participant for part of the Plan Year and other incentives during other parts
of the Plan Year, the employee may be eligible to receive an incentive award for the amount of time in each incentive eligible position,
subject to the terms of each applicable incentive plan. A position change from one MIP-eligible position to another MIP-eligible position
during the Plan Year also may result in a prorata award as described below under Section V.(B).

D. Demotions
If a previously Eligible Participant is demoted to a non-incentive eligible position due to his or her violation of CVS Health policy or his or her
performance, or if he or she voluntarily transfers to a non-incentive eligible position during the Plan Year, and is in the non-incentive eligible
position on the last day of the Plan Year, he or she will not be eligible to earn an incentive award for the Plan Year under the MIP.
E. Terminations
Unless  otherwise  stated  in  Section  VII  of  the  MIP,  if  an  Eligible  Participant’s  employment  terminates  for  any  reason  prior  to  March  1
immediately following a Plan Year, he or she will not be eligible to receive an incentive award under the MIP for the most recently completed
Plan Year.
F. Rehires
Employees who are rehired as Eligible Participants on or before November 1 of the Plan Year may be eligible for an incentive award for
such Plan Year.
IV.    MIP Funding
A. Consolidated Company Funding
MIP funding is based on consolidated Company performance, measured by MIP metrics as set forth in Exhibit A, for the given Plan
Year. Achievement of the Company’s MIP metrics will determine the total funding (the “Total Pool”) as described below.
If any of the MIP metrics perform below threshhold, no formulaic funding will be made available for the metric of the incentive award that
performed below threshold. If all MIP metrics perform below threshhold, no formulaic funding will be made available for incentive awards
and there shall be no incentive awards paid under the MIP.
B. Total Pool Funding    
The Total Pool for all business units will be fully (100%) based on consolidated Company performance.
  
The CEO (or, as to Section 16 Eligible Participants, the Committee) may, for any reason and in his or her (or its) sole discretion, adjust the
funding of the Total Pool based on (a) input from senior Company executives regarding their assessment of the overall performance of the
Company and (b) assessment of the achievement of Plan Year performance goals.
C. Individual Performance
The Total  Pool will be available for  award to  Eligible Participants  under  the  MIP,  taking  into  account  the individual contribution  of each
Eligible Participant. The amount, if any, of the incentive award for an Eligible Participant shall be detemined in the sole discretion of the
Company, which shall be final, binding and conclusive as to all parties having an interest therein. The amount, if any, of the incentive award
for a Section 16 Eligible Participant shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Committee, which shall be final, binding and conclusive
as to all parties having an interest therein.
V.    Earnings, Proration, and Payout
A. Timing
Incentive awards with respect to a Plan Year will be paid to Eligible Participants, as soon as administratively feasible following the date the
Total Pool is determined and approved, but no later than March 15 of the calendar year immediately following the Plan Year. Incentive
payments under the MIP may be subject to garnishments and other state or federal requirements.

B. Calculations
Calculations for full and partial awards for each Eligible Participant will be based on “Eligible Earnings” (defined below) for the Plan Year
while in a MIP-eligible position. Eligible Earnings will be multiplied by the individual target opportunity of the Eligible Participant. If the Eligible
Participant has been employed in multiple MIP-eligible positions during the Plan Year, then the individual opportunity for each position will
be calculated based on the respective Eligible Earnings and individual target opportunities for each such position.
Eligible Earnings include reoccurring items such as pay earned for hours worked, paid time off (e.g. vacation, sick, holiday, funeral, jury
duty, military) but will exclude one-time payments such as annual cash incentives, commissions and similar payments, and earnings
associated with equity releases and stock option exercises.
For purposes of proration under the MIP and except as otherwise provided in Section VII of the MIP, calculations will be based on the
number of days that the employee was an Eligible Participant in the MIP during the Plan Year.
C. Award Opportunity
Individual  target  award  opportunities  will  be  determined  by  position  and  may  vary  based  on  the  Eligible  Participant’s  level  in  the
organization.
D. Obligation to Pay Out Percentage of Total Pool
Eligible Participants, as a group, have a right to receive an amount at least equal to the Total Pool, but no individual Eligible Participant shall
be entitled to receive an award or any specific amount of the Total Pool. In no event will the aggregate of the total awards paid from the MIP
be  less  than  92.5%  of  the  Total  Pool.  To  discourage  unmerited  litigation,  any  party  or  class  asserting  a  challenge  or  claim  against  the
Company under any provision of the MIP, including this Section V, shall bear their own costs relating to such challenge or claim, and if
the challenge or claim is unsuccessful, such party or class shall reimburse the Company for all reasonable costs incurred by the Company
in responding to such challenge or claim.
VI.    MIP Dispute Resolution
Any  questions  by  an  Eligible  Participant  regarding  an  incentive  award  granted  under  the  MIP  shall  first  be  submitted  by  the  Eligible
Participant to his or her Human Resources Business Partner (“HRBP”) within 7 days of distribution of such incentive award, and the HRBP
shall  submit  any  correction  that  the  HRBP  deems  appropriate  to  the  Compensation  Department  by  the  first  business  day  of  April
immediately following the distribution date.
In the event of a dispute regarding an incentive award under the MIP after the Eligible Participant has submitted his or her question to the
HRBP and received a response, as provided above, the Eligible Participant may submit an appeal for resolution of such dispute to CVS
Health’s Advice and Counsel group at CVS Health, One CVS Drive, MC 1113, Woonsocket, RI 02895. Such appeal must be completed in
writing within 30 days of the distribution of the incentive award. Failure to follow these procedures or submit a question or dispute in a timely
manner may result in a waiver of the Eligible Participant’s right to dispute the MIP provision or amount of the incentive award.
VII. Eligible Participant Status
A. Performance
The  CEO  or  other  designated  executives  have  full  discretion  in  determining  the  amount,  if  any,  of  an  incentive  awarded  to  an  Eligible
Participant,  and  the  Participant’s  individual  performance  throughout  the  Plan  Year  will  be  considered  by  the  Company  in  the  final
determination of the Eligible Participant’s incentive award.

B. Leaves of Absence
An Eligible Participant on a Company-approved leave of absence at any time during the Plan Year who remains employed in an eligible
position as of the last day of the Plan Year will earn an incentive award based on Eligible Earnings (including time compensated as vacation,
myTime or Paid Time Off (“PTO”)) during the Plan Year, provided he or she meets all other eligibility criteria for an incentive award.
C. Reduction in Force, Retirement and Death
1. Reduction in Force
If an Eligible Participant is separated from employment by the Company during the Plan Year due to a reduction in force,
he  or  she  may  be  eligible,  at  the  Company’s  discretion,  to  receive  an  incentive  award  based  on  the  calculation  methodology
described in Section V.B above, provided the Eligible Participant meets all other eligibility criteria for an incentive award.
2. Retirement
If an Eligible Participant is at least age 55 and has a minimum of 10 years of service with CVS Health or a predecessor
company/subsidiary or is  at  least  age  60  and  has  a  minimum  of  5  years  of  service  with  CVS  Health  or  a  predecessor
company/subsidiary and the Eligible Participant retires during the Plan Year, he/she may be eligible to receive an incentive award
based  on  the  calculation  methodology  described  in  Section  V.B  above,  provided  he/she  meets  all  other  eligibility  criteria  for  an
incentive award. Eligible Participants who do not meet the minimum retirement requirements under this Section VII.C.2 at the time
of retirement will not be eligible for an incentive award for the Plan Year.
3. Death
In case of the death of an Eligible Participant, an incentive award may be paid to the Eligible Participant’s spouse, if living;
otherwise, in equal portions to surviving children of the Eligible Participant. If there are no surviving children, the benefit shall be
paid to the Eligible Participant’s estate. The incentive award will be based on the calculation methodology described in Section V.B.
above.
Any incentive award payable under this section VI.C shall be paid no later than March 15 of the calendar year immediately following the
Plan Year.
VIII. Miscellaneous
A. No Promise of Continued Employment
The MIP does not create an express or implied contract of employment between CVS Heath or and an Eligible Participant. Both CVS Health
and the Eligible Participant retain the right to terminate the employment relationship at will, at any time and for any reason or no reason at
all.
B. Rights are Non-Assignable
Neither the Eligible Participant, nor any beneficiary, nor any other person shall have any right to assign, in whole or in part, the
right to receive payments under the MIP. Payments are non-assignable and non-transferable, whether voluntarily or involuntarily.
C. Compliance with Applicable Law
An Eligible Participant must comply with all applicable state and federal laws and CVS Health policies to be eligible to receive an
incentive award under the MIP.
CVS Health will comply with all applicable laws concerning incentive awards; the MIP and its administration are not intended to conflict with
any applicable state or federal law.
D. Change in Control

In the event of a change in control of CVS Health, as defined in the ICP, the MIP shall remain in force. Any amendments, modifications,
termination or dissolution of the MIP by the acquiring entity may only occur prospectively and will not affect incentive targets or awards or
eligibility in place immediately before the date of the change in control or such later date as it may be modified or dissolved by the acquiring
entity.
Provisions regarding the payment of annual incentive awards that are set forth in change in control agreements with Eligible Employees
shall supersede those appearing in the MIP.
E. Withholding/Taxation
All required deductions will be withheld from the incentive awards prior to distribution. This includes all applicable federal, state, or
local  taxes,  as  well  as  any  eligible  401(k)  deductions  and  deferred  compensation  contributions,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the
applicable plans. Incentive awards that are deferred will be taxed in accordance with applicable federal and state tax law. Each Eligible
Participant shall be solely responsible for any tax consequences of his or her award hereunder.
F. MIP Amendment/Modification/Termination
CVS Health retains the right to amend, modify, or terminate the MIP at any time on or before the last day of the Plan Year for any reason,
with or without notice to Eligible Participants.
G. MIP Interpretation
CVS Health retains sole, full and final authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the administration of the Plan, construe and interpret
the Plan and award agreements and correct defects, supply omissions or reconcile inconsistencies therein and to make all other decisions
and determinations as it may deem necessary or advisable for the administration of the Plan.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning assigned to such defined term(s) in the ICP. In the event of any
conflict between the ICP and the MIP, the terms of the ICP shall govern.
H. Recoupment of Incentive Awards
Each incentive award under the MIP shall be subject to the terms of the Company’s Recoupment Policy as it exists from time to time, which
may require the Eligible Employee to immediately repay to the Company the value of any pre-tax economic benefit that he or she may
derive from the MIP.
I. Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code
The Company intends that the MIP not violate any applicable provision of, or result in any additional tax or penalty under, Section 409A of
the Internal Revenue Code (“Code”), as amended, and the regulations and guidance thereunder (collectively, “Section 409A”), and that to
the extent any provisions of the Plan do not comply with Section 409A the Company will make such changes as it deems reasonable in
order to comply with Section 409A. Payments hereunder are intended to qualify as short-term deferral payments under Section 409A. In all
events,  the  provisions  of  CVS  Health  Corporation’s  Universal  409A  Definition  Document  are  hereby  incorporated  by  reference,  and
notwithstanding the any other provision of the Plan or any Award to the contrary, to the extent required to avoid a violation of the applicable
rules under Section 409A by reason of Section 409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code (requiring certain delays for “specified employees”), payment of
any amounts subject to Section 409A shall be delayed until the first business day of the seventh (7th) month following the date of termination
of  employment.  For  purposes  of  any  provision  of  the  Plan  providing  for  the  payment  of  any  amounts  or  benefits  in  connection  with  a
termination of employment, references to an Eligible Person’s “termination of employment” (and corollary terms) shall be construed to refer
to the Eligible Person’s “separation from service” with the Company as determined under Section 409A.

J. Restrictive Covenant Agreement
Any award pursuant to the MIP is expressly subject to and contingent upon the requirement that the Eligible Participant shall have fully
executed and delivered to the Company a restrictive covenant agreement deemed appropriate by the Company; the Company may waive
such requirement in its sole discretion.  Any applicable agreement containing the restrictive covenants the Company requires in connection
with this award is referred to herein as the “Restrictive Covenant Agreement.” 
If  the  Company  requires  an  Eligible  Participant  to  execute  and  deliver  the  Restrictive  Covenant  Agreement  in connection  with  any  MIP
award, the Company shall provide such Restrictive Covenant Agreement to the Eligible Participant. The Eligible Participant must execute
and  deliver  such  agreement  by  the  deadline  set  forth  by  the  Company.  The  failure  of  an  Eligible  Participant  to  execute  and  return  the
Restrictive  Covenant  Agreement  by  the  deadline  set  forth  by  the  Company,  if  required,  shall  result  in  the  immediate  and  irrevocable
forfeiture of any MIP award.  
This  Section  VIII.J.  of  the  MIP  shall  not  constitute  the  Company’s  exclusive  remedy  for  Eligible  Participant’s  violation  of  the  Restrictive
Covenant Agreement, or failure to execute a Restrictive Covenant Agreement. The Company reserves all rights to seek all available legal or
equitable remedies in the event of Eligible Participant’s violation or threatened violation of the Restrictive Covenant Agreement, including
injunctive relief.

Exhibit 10.48
CVS Pharmacy, Inc.
Restrictive Covenant Agreement
    
I, Eva Boratto, enter into this Restrictive Covenant Agreement (“Agreement”) with CVS Pharmacy, Inc., on its own behalf and on behalf of its
subsidiaries and affiliates (“CVS”), which is effective as of the date I sign the Agreement (“Effective Date”). In consideration of the mutual promises in this
Agreement, the parties agree as follows:
1.
Consideration for Agreement. In connection with my duties and responsibilities at CVS Health Corporation or one of its subsidiaries or affiliates,
including Aetna Inc. (collectively, the “Corporation”), the Corporation will provide me with Confidential Information and/or access to the Corporation’s customers
and clients and the opportunity to develop and maintain relationships and goodwill with them. In addition, the Corporation has awarded me equity contingent on
the execution of this Agreement and compliance with its terms. In consideration of the foregoing and the mutual promises in this Agreement, I hereby agree with
CVS to comply with the terms of this Agreement.
2.
Non-Competition. During my employment by the Corporation and during the Non-Competition Period following the termination of my employment
for any reason, I will not, directly or indirectly, engage in Competition or provide Consulting or Audit Services within the Restricted Area.
a.
Competition. Engaging in “Competition” means providing services to a Competitor of the Corporation (whether as an employee, independent
contractor, consultant, principal, agent, partner, officer, director investor, or shareholder, except as a shareholder of less than one percent of a publicly traded
company) that: (i) are the same or similar in function or purpose to the services I provided to the Corporation at any time during the last year of my employment by
the Corporation; or (ii) will likely result in the disclosure of Confidential Information to a Competitor or the use of Confidential Information on behalf of a
Competitor. If a representative of the Corporation, during my employment or the Non-Competition Period, requests that I identify the company or business to
which I will be or am providing services, or with which I will be or am employed, and requests that I provide information about the services that I am or will be
providing to such entity, I shall provide the Corporation with a written statement detailing the identity of the entity and the nature of the services that I am or will
be providing to such entity with sufficient detail to allow the Corporation to independently assess whether I am or will be in violation of this Agreement. Such
statement shall be delivered to the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources Officer or his or her authorized delegate via personal delivery or overnight delivery
within five calendar days of my receipt of such request.
b.
Competitor. A “Competitor” for purposes of this Agreement shall mean any person, corporation or other entity that competes with one or
more of the business offerings of the Corporation. As of the Effective Date, the Corporation’s business offerings include: (i) pharmacy benefits management
(“PBM”), including: (a) the administration of pharmacy benefits for businesses, government agencies and health plans; (b) mail order pharmacy; (c) specialty
pharmacy; (d) the procurement of prescription drugs at a negotiated rate for dispensing; and (e) Medicare Part D services; (ii) retail, which includes the sale of
prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, beauty products and cosmetics, digital and traditional photo finishing services, digital and other online offerings,
seasonal and other general merchandise, greeting cards, convenience foods and other product lines and services which are sold by the Corporation’s retail division
(“Retail”); (iii) retail health clinics (“MinuteClinic”); (iv) the provision of pharmaceutical products and ancillary services, including specialty pharmaceutical
products and support services and the provision of related pharmacy consulting, data management services and medical supplies to long-term care facilities, other
healthcare service providers and recipients of services from such facilities (“Long-Term Care”); (v) the provision of prescription infusion drugs and related services
Page | 1

(“Infusion”); (vi) the provision of insurance (“Insurance”) including: (a) health insurance products and services; (b) managed health care products and services; (c)
dental, vision, workers compensation and employee assistance program products and services; (d) wellness products and services to employers, government
agencies, health plans, other businesses or third party payers; (e) other voluntary products that are excepted benefits under HIPAA; (vii) the creation and provision
of population health management products and services (“Health Management”); (viii) the administration of (ii) - (vii) (“Administration”); and (ix) any other
business in which Corporation is engaged or imminently will be engaged.
For the purpose of assessing whether I am engaging in “Competition” under Section 2 (a) (i) above, a person, corporation or other entity shall not be
considered a Retail Competitor if such entity derives annual gross revenues from its business in an amount which is less than 2% of the Corporation’s gross
revenues from Retail, during its most recently completed fiscal year. For avoidance of doubt, this exclusion does not apply to a determination of whether I am
engaging in “Competition” as set forth in Section 2 (a) (ii) above.
I and the Corporation acknowledge that both the Corporation’s products and services and the entities which compete with the Corporation’s products and
services evolve and an entity will be considered a Competitor if it provides products or services competitive with the products and services provided by the
Corporation within the last two years of my employment.
I agree to this enterprise-wide definition of Competition, which may prevent me from providing services to any of the Corporation’s PBM, Retail,
MinuteClinic, Long-Term Care, Health Insurance, Health Management, Administration and/or Infusion Competitors or any combination thereof during the Non-
Competition period.
c.
Consulting or Audit Services. “Consulting or Audit Services” shall mean any activity which involves providing audit review or other
consulting or advisory services with respect to any relationship or prospective relationship between the Corporation and any third party that is likely to result in the
use or disclosure of Confidential Information.
d.
Non-Competition Period. The “Non-Competition Period” shall be the period of 18 months following the termination of my employment with
the Corporation for any reason.
e.
Restricted Area. “Restricted Area” refers to those states within the United States in which the Corporation conducts its business, as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. To the extent I worked on international projects in Asia, Europe, Brazil or other countries where the Corporation may
conduct business, the Restricted Area includes those countries and those countries where the Corporation is actively planning to conduct business.
3.
Non-Solicitation. During the Non-Solicitation Period, which shall be during my employment by the Corporation and for 18 months following the
termination of my employment with the Corporation for any reason, I will not, unless a duly authorized officer of the Corporation gives me written authorization to
do so:
a.
interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with its Business Partners by soliciting or communicating (regardless of who initiates the
communication) with a Business Partner to: (i) induce or encourage the Business Partner to stop doing business or reduce its business with the Corporation, or (ii)
buy a product or service that competes with a product or service offered by the Corporation’s business. “Business Partner” means: a customer (person or entity),
prospective customer (person or entity), healthcare provider, supplier, manufacturer, agency, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care
Page | 2

facility, and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer with whom the Corporation has a business relationship and with which I had business-related contact or dealings, or
about which I received Confidential Information, in the two years prior to the termination of my employment with the Corporation. A Business Partner does not
include a customer, supplier, manufacturer, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care facility and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer which has fully and
finally ceased doing any business with the Corporation independent of any conduct or communications by me or breach of this Agreement and such full cessation
of business has been in effect for at least 1 year prior to my separation from employment with the Corporation. Nothing in this Paragraph 3(a) shall prevent me
from working as a staff pharmacist or in another retail position wherein I would be providing or selling prescriptions or other products directly to consumers.
b.
work on a Corporation account on behalf of a Business Partner or serve as the representative of a Business Partner for the Corporation.
c.
interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with any employee or contractor of the Corporation by: (i) soliciting or communicating with the
employee or contractor to induce or encourage him or her to leave the Corporation’s employ or engagement (regardless of who first initiates the communication);
(ii) helping another person or entity evaluate such employee or contractor as an employment or contractor candidate; or (iii) otherwise helping any person or entity
hire an employee or contractor away from the Corporation.
4.
Non-Disclosure of Confidential Information.
a.
Subject to Section 7 and 8 below, I will not at any time, whether during or after the termination of my employment, disclose to any person or
entity any of the Corporation’s Confidential Information, except as may be appropriately required in the ordinary course of performing my duties as an employee
of the Corporation. The Corporation’s Confidential Information includes but is not limited to the following non-public information: trade secrets; computer code
generated or developed by the Corporation; software or programs and related documentation; strategic compilations and analysis; strategic processes; business or
financial methods, practices and plans; non-public costs and prices; operating margins; marketing, merchandising and selling techniques and information; customer
lists; provider lists; details of customer agreements; pricing arrangements with pharmaceutical manufacturers, distributors or suppliers including but not limited to
any discounts and/or rebates; pharmacy reimbursement rates; premium information; payment rates; contractual forms; expansion strategies; real estate strategies;
operating strategies; sources of supply; patient records; business plans; other financial, commercial, business or technical information related to the Corporation
and confidential information of third parties which is given to the Corporation pursuant to an obligation or agreement to keep such information confidential
(collectively, “Confidential Information”). I shall not use or attempt to use any Confidential Information on behalf of any person or entity other than the
Corporation, or in any manner which may injure or cause loss, or may be calculated to injure or cause loss, whether directly or indirectly, to the Corporation. If, at
any time over the last two years of my employment at CVS, my position included access to Confidential Information, as described above, specifically related to the
Corporation’s procurement of prescription drugs, I understand and agree my employment with a pharmaceutical manufacturer, distributor or supplier
(“Pharmaceutical Entity”) would place a substantial risk of use and/or disclosure of Confidential Information with which I have been or will be entrusted during my
employment with the Corporation. In light of this risk of disclosure, I acknowledge and agree that the Corporation will be entitled to immediate injunctive relief to
prevent me from disclosing any such Confidential Information in the course of my employment with any such Pharmaceutical Entity. I agree that the disclosure of
such Confidential Information, to the Corporation’s PBM Competitors with which one may negotiate in the course of employment with such Pharmaceutical
Entity, would cause immediate and irreparable harm to the Corporation. For employees residing in Connecticut, these restrictions on use
Page | 3

or disclosure of Confidential Information will only apply for three (3) years after the end of my employment where information that does not qualify as a trade
secret is concerned; however, the restrictions will continue apply to trade secret information for as long as the information at issue remains qualified as a trade
secret.
b.
During my employment, I shall not make, use, or permit to be used, any materials of any nature relating to any matter within the scope of the
business of the Corporation or concerning any of its dealings or affairs other than for the benefit of the Corporation. I shall not, after the termination of my
employment, use or permit to be used any such materials and shall return same in accordance with
Section 5 below.
5.
Ownership and Return of the Corporation’s Property. On or before my final date of employment with the Corporation, I shall return to the
Corporation all property of the Corporation in my possession, custody or control, including but not limited to the originals and copies of any information provided
to or acquired by me in connection with the performance of my duties for the Corporation, such as files, correspondence, communications, memoranda, e-mails,
slides, records, and all other documents, no matter how produced or reproduced, all computer equipment, communication devices (including but not limited to any
mobile phone or other portable digital assistant or device), computer programs and/or files, and all office keys and access cards. I agree that all the items described
in this Section are the sole property of the Corporation.
6.
Rights to Inventions, Works.
a.
Assignment of Inventions. All inventions, original works of authorship, developments, concepts, improvements, designs, discoveries, ideas,
trademarks or trade secrets, whether patentable or otherwise protectable under similar law, made, conceived or developed by me, whether alone or jointly with
others, from the date of my initial employment by the Corporation and continuing until the end of any period during which I am employed by the Corporation,
relating or pertaining in any way to my employment with or the business of the Corporation (collectively referred to as “Inventions”) shall be promptly disclosed in
writing to the Corporation. I hereby assign to the Corporation, or its designee, all of my rights, title and interest to such Inventions. All original works of authorship
which are made by me (solely or jointly with others) within the scope of and during the period of my employment with the Corporation and which are protectable
by copyright are “works made for hire,” as that term is defined in the United States Copyright Act and as such are the sole property of the Corporation. The
decision whether to commercialize or market any Invention developed by me solely or jointly with others is within the Corporation’s sole discretion and for the
Corporation’s sole benefit and no royalty will be due to me as a result of the Corporation’s efforts to commercialize or market any such Invention.
b.
Inventions Retained and Licensed. I have attached hereto as Exhibit A, a list describing all inventions, original works of authorship,
developments, improvements, and trade secrets which were made by me prior to my employment with the Corporation (“Prior Inventions”), which belong to me
and are not assigned to the Corporation hereunder. If no such list is attached, I represent that there are no such Prior Inventions. I will not incorporate, or permit to
be incorporated, any Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest into a Corporation product, process or machine without the Corporation’s prior
written consent. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, if, in the course of my employment with the Corporation, I incorporate into a Corporation product,
process or machine a Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest, the Corporation is hereby granted and shall have a nonexclusive, royalty-free,
irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide license to make, have made, modify, use and sell such Prior Invention as part of or in connection with such product, process or
machine.
Page | 4

c.
Patent and Copyright Registrations. I will assist the Corporation, or its designee, at the Corporation’s expense, in every proper way to secure
the Corporation’s rights in the Inventions and any copyrights, patents, mask work rights or other intellectual property rights relating thereto, including, but not
limited to, the disclosure to the Corporation of all pertinent information and data with respect thereto, the execution of all applications, specifications, oaths,
assignments and all other instruments which the Corporation shall deem necessary in order to apply for and obtain such rights and in order to assign and convey to
the Corporation, its successors, assigns, and nominees the sole and exclusive rights, title and interest in and to such Inventions, and any copyrights, patents, mask
work rights or other intellectual property rights relating thereto. My obligation to execute or cause to be executed, when it is in my power to do so, any such
instrument or papers shall continue after my employment ends for any reason and/or after the termination of this Agreement. If the Corporation is unable because
of my mental or physical incapacity or for any other reason to secure my signature to apply for or to pursue any application for any United States or foreign patents
or copyright registrations covering Inventions or original works of authorship assigned to the Corporation as above, then I hereby irrevocably designate and appoint
the Corporation and its duly authorized officers and agents as my agent and attorney in fact, to act for and in my behalf and stead to execute and file any such
applications and to do all other lawfully permitted acts to further the prosecution and issuance of letters patent or copyright registrations thereon with the same
legal force and effect as if executed by me.
d.
Exception to Assignments. I understand that if I am an employee in Illinois, Kansas, North Carolina, Utah or Minnesota, I should refer to
Exhibit B (incorporated herein for all purposes) for important limitations on the scope of the provisions of this Agreement concerning assignment of Inventions. I
will advise the Corporation promptly in writing of any inventions that I believe meet the criteria in Exhibit B and that are not otherwise disclosed on Exhibit A.
7.
Cooperation.
a.
In the event I receive a subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order to testify or produce Confidential Information
or any other information or property of the Corporation, I shall promptly: (i) notify the Corporation of the item, document, or information sought by such subpoena,
deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order; (ii) furnish the Corporation with a copy of said subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or
other process or order; and (iii) provide reasonable cooperation with respect to any procedure that the Corporation may initiate to protect Confidential Information
or other interests. If the Corporation objects to the subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, process, or order, I shall cooperate to ensure that there shall be no
disclosure until the court or other applicable entity has ruled upon the objection, and then only in accordance with the ruling so made. If no such objection is made
despite a reasonable opportunity to do so, I shall be entitled to comply with the subpoena, deposition, notice, interview request, or other process or order provided
that I have fulfilled the above obligations.
b.
I will cooperate fully with the Corporation, its affiliates, and their legal counsel in connection with any action, proceeding, or dispute arising
out of matters with which I was directly or indirectly involved while serving as an employee of the Corporation, its predecessors, subsidiaries or affiliates. This
cooperation shall include, but shall not be limited to, meeting with, and providing information to, the Corporation and its legal counsel, maintaining the
confidentiality of any past or future privileged communications with the Corporation’s legal counsel (outside and in-house), and making myself available to testify
truthfully by affidavit, in depositions, or in any other forum on behalf of the Corporation. The Corporation agrees to reimburse me for any reasonable and necessary
out-of-pocket costs associated with my cooperation.
Page | 5

8.
Limitation on Restrictions. Nothing in this Agreement is intended to or shall interfere with my right to file charges or participate in a proceeding with
any appropriate federal, state or local government agency, including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”), National Labor Relations
Board (“NLRB”) or the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”); to exercise rights under Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act (“NLRA”); or to file
a charge or complaint with or participate or cooperate in an investigation or proceeding with the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”) or
comparable state or local agencies. Such agencies have authority to carry out their statutory duties by investigating a charge, issuing a determination, filing a
lawsuit, or taking any other action authorized by law. I retain the right to participate in any such action and retain the right to communicate with the NLRB, SEC,
EEOC, OSHA and comparable state or local agencies and such communication shall not be limited by any provision in this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement
limits my right to receive an award for information provided to a government agency such as the SEC and OSHA. In addition, nothing in this Agreement is
intended to interfere with or restrain the immunity provided under 18 U.S.C. § 1833(b) for confidential disclosures of trade secrets to government officials or
lawyers, solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law, or in a sealed filing in court or other proceeding.
9.
Eligibility for Severance Pay. If my employment with the Corporation terminates under circumstances in which I am eligible for severance under the
applicable severance plan (the “Severance Plan”), the Corporation will offer me severance in accordance with the Severance Plan and the length of the Non-
Competition Period will match the length of the severance period. I acknowledge that the Severance Plan sets forth pre-requisites I must meet in order to receive
severance, including but not limited to execution of the Corporation’s standard separation agreement and release of claims. In the event that the Corporation fails to
comply with its obligations to offer me severance according to the Severance Plan, then Section 2 of this Agreement shall be of no further effect. I agree that if I
decline the Corporation’s offer of severance, I shall continue to be subject to the restrictions in Section 2.
10.
Injunctive Relief. Any breach of this Agreement by me will cause irreparable damage to the Corporation and, in the event of such breach, the
Corporation shall have, in addition to any and all remedies of law, the right to an injunction, specific performance or other equitable relief to prevent the violation
of my obligations hereunder, and without providing a bond to the extent permitted by the applicable rules of civil procedure.
11.
No Right of Continued Employment. This Agreement does not create an obligation on the Corporation or any other person or entity to continue my
employment.
12.
No Conflicting Agreements. I represent that the performance of my job duties with the Corporation and my compliance with all of the terms of this
Agreement does not and will not breach any agreement to keep in confidence proprietary information acquired by me in confidence or in trust prior to my
employment by the Corporation.
13.
Entire Agreement/No Reliance/No Modifications. This Agreement and any compensation, benefit or equity plan or agreement referred to herein or
under which equity was granted, including the CVS Health Corporation Change in Control Agreement (“CIC Agreement”), to the extent those other agreements
apply to me, set forth the entire agreement between the parties hereto and fully supersede any and all prior and/or supplemental understandings, whether written or
oral, between the parties concerning the subject matter of this Agreement. This agreement shall not have any effect on any prior existing agreements between
Corporation and me regarding the arbitration of workplace legal disputes and any such agreements remain in full force and effect. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if
I am a party to the CIC Agreement, then I understand that in the event of a Change in Control, as that term is defined in the CIC, Paragraph 2 of this Agreement
shall be null and void. I agree and acknowledge that I have not relied on
Page | 6

any representations, promises or agreements of any kind in connection with my decision to accept the terms of this Agreement, except for the representations,
promises and agreements herein. Any modification to this Agreement must be made in writing and signed by me and the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources
Officer or his or her authorized representative.
14.
Beneficiaries of Global Amendment Relating to Non-Compete Covenants Applicable to Aetna Employees. I and Corporation understand,
acknowledge and agree, that if I was an employee of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates prior to the Effective Time and am a Covered Individual,
then notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement, each of my Assumed Restricted Unit Awards, Assumed Performance Unit Awards and Assumed Stock
Appreciation Rights (collectively, my “Assumed Equity Awards”) shall continue to have, and shall be subject to, the same terms and conditions as applied to the
corresponding Company Equity Award, as amended by the Global Amendment to Agreements with Non-Compete Covenants Applicable to Aetna Employees
effective November 28, 2018, as of the Effective Time (including any terms and conditions related to accelerated vesting upon a termination of the holder’s
employment in connection with or following the Merger). Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to the extent that I am subject to any Aetna Non-
Compete Covenant: (1) such Aetna Non-Compete Covenant shall not restrict me from rendering services to or otherwise being engaged with the activities of any
business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business; (2) no penalties or detriments or remedies at law
or in equity shall be asserted under this Agreement or any Aetna Non-Compete Covenant against my rights in any Assumed Equity Awards due to my rendering
services to or otherwise engaging in any business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business; and (3)
no penalties or detriments or remedies at law or in equity shall be asserted under any Aetna Non-Compete Covenant against my rendering services to or otherwise
engaging in any business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business. For avoidance of doubt, if I fail
to comply with Section 2 of this Agreement, penalties, detriments or remedies at law or in equity may be asserted against me under this Agreement but not against
my rights in any of such Assumed Equity Awards.
As used in this Section [14], the following terms have the following meanings:
“Aetna Non-Compete Covenant” means any agreement entered into by an individual with Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates prior to the Effective
Time that prohibits or restricts such person’s entitlement to render services to or otherwise be engaged with the activities of any business that competes with the
Pre-Merger Aetna Business (including, without limitation, equity award arrangements and employment arrangements).
“Assumed Performance Unit Award” means a time-vesting restricted unit award covering shares of Parent Common Stock resulting from the conversion and
assumption by Parent of a Company PSU Award by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Assumed Restricted Unit Award” means a restricted unit award covering shares of Parent Common Stock resulting from the conversion and assumption by Parent
of a Company RSU Award by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Assumed Stock Appreciation Right” means a stock appreciation right representing the right to receive a payment in shares of Parent Common Stock resulting
from the conversion and assumption by Parent of a Company Stock Appreciation Right by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Company Common Stock” means the common shares, par value $0.01 par value, of Aetna Inc.
Page | 7

“Company Equity Awards” means Company Stock Appreciation Rights, Company RSU Awards and Company PSU Awards.
“Company PSU Award” means a stock unit award with respect to shares of Company Common Stock outstanding under any Company Stock Plan that vests based
on the achievement of performance goals.
“Company RSU Award” means a restricted stock unit award with respect to shares of Company Common Stock outstanding under any Company Stock Plan that
vests solely based on the passage of time.
“Company Stock Appreciation Right” means a stock appreciation right representing the right to receive a payment in shares of Company Common Stock under any
Company Stock Plan that was outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Effective Time.
“Company Stock Plans” means the Aetna Inc. 2016 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, the Aetna Inc. 2010 Non-
Employee Director Compensation Plan, the Aetna Inc. 2000 Non-Employee Director Compensation Plan, and the Amended and Restated Aetna Inc. 2000 Stock
Incentive Plan, in each case, as amended from time to time.
“Covered Individual” means any current or former employee of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates who is subject to an Aetna Non-Compete
Covenant.
“Effective Time” means 10:00 a.m. Eastern time on November 28, 2018.
“Merger” means the merger of Hudson Merger Sub Corp. with and into Aetna Inc., which became effective at the Effective Time.
“Merger Agreement” means the Agreement and Plan of Merger among CVS Health Corporation, Hudson Merger Sub Corp. and Aetna Inc. dated December 3,
2017.
“Parent” means CVS Health Corporation
“Parent Common Stock” means the common stock, $0.01 par value, of Parent.
“Pre-Merger Aetna Business” means the business of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries and joint venture affiliates as of the Effective Time.
15.
No Waiver. Any waiver by the Corporation of a breach of any provision of this Agreement, or of any other similar agreement with any other current or
former employee of the Corporation, shall not operate or be construed as a waiver of any subsequent breach of such provision or any other provision hereof.
16.
Severability. The parties hereby agree that each provision herein shall be treated as a separate and independent clause, and the unenforceability of any
one clause shall in no way impair the enforceability of any of the other clauses herein. Moreover, if one or more of the provisions of this Agreement are for any
reason held to be excessively broad as to scope, activity, duration, subject or otherwise so as to be unenforceable at law, the parties consent to such provision or
provisions being modified or limited by the appropriate judicial body (where allowed by applicable law), so as to be enforceable to the maximum extent compatible
with the applicable law.
Page | 8

17.
Survival of Employee’s Obligations. My obligations under this Agreement shall survive the termination of my employment regardless of the manner
of such termination and shall be binding upon my heirs, personal representatives, executors, administrators and legal representatives.
18.
Corporation’s Right to Assign Agreement. The Corporation has the right to assign this Agreement to its successors and assigns without the need for
further agreement or consent by me, and all covenants and agreements hereunder shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by said successors or assigns.
19.
Non-Assignment. I shall not assign my rights and obligations under this Agreement, in whole or in part, whether by operation of law or otherwise,
without the prior written consent of the Corporation, and any such assignment contrary to the terms hereof shall be null and void and of no force or effect.
20.
Governing Law; Venue; Headings. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of Rhode Island. I
agree that any claim or dispute I may have against the corporation must be resolved by a court located in the state of Rhode Island. The headings of the sections
contained in this Agreement are for convenience only and shall not be deemed to control or affect the meaning or construction of any provision of this Agreement.
21.
Tolling. In the event I violate one of the time-limited restrictions in this Agreement, I agree that the time period for such violated restriction shall be
extended by one day for each day I have violated the restriction, up to a maximum extension equal to the length of the original period of the restricted covenant.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed this Agreement as a sealed instrument as of the date set forth below.
/s/ Eva C. Boratto
/s/ Lisa Bisaccia
Eva C. Boratto
Lisa Bisaccia
Chief Human Resources Officer
XXXXXX
CVS Health Corporation
Employee ID
Date: 6/21/2019
Page | 9

EXHIBIT A
List of Prior Inventions - See Section 6
Page | 10

EXHIBIT B
Notice Regarding Invention Assignment
1.
For an employee residing in Illinois, Kansas, or North Carolina, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention for which no equipment, supplies, facility, or trade secret
information of the Corporation was used and which was developed entirely on your own time, unless (a) the invention relates (i) to the business of the
Corporation or (ii) to the Corporation’s actual or demonstrably anticipated research or development, or (b) the invention results from any work performed by
you for the Corporation. Illinois 765ILCS1060/1-3, “Employees Patent Act”; Kansas Statutes Section 44-130; North Carolina General Statutes Article 10A,
Chapter 66, Commerce and Business, Section 66-57.1.
2.
For an employee residing in Utah, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention which was created entirely on your own time, and which is
not (a) conceived, developed, reduced to practice, or created by you (i) within the scope of your employment with the Corporation, (ii) on the Corporation’s
time, or (iii) with the aid, assistance, or use of any of the Corporation’s property, equipment, facilities, supplies, resources, or patents, trade secrets, know-
how, technology, confidential information, ideas, copy rights, trademarks and service marks and any and all rights, applications and registrations relating to
them, (b) the results of any work, services, or duties performed by you for the Corporation, (c) related to the industry or trade of the Corporation, or (d)
related to the current or demonstrably anticipated business, research, or development of the Corporation. Utah Code Sections 34-39-1 through 34-39-3,
“Employee Inventions Act.”
3.
For an employee residing in Minnesota, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention for which no equipment, supplies, facility, or trade secret
information of the Corporation was used, and which was developed entirely on your own time, and (a) which does not relate (i) directly to the business of
the  Corporation,  or  (ii)  to  the  Corporation’s  actual  or  demonstrably  anticipated  research  or  development,  or  (b)  which  does  not  result  from  any  work
performed by you for the Corporation. Minnesota Statutes 13A Section 181.78.
Page | 11

Exhibit 10.54
CVS Pharmacy, Inc.
Restrictive Covenant Agreement
    
I, Derica Rice, enter into this Restrictive Covenant Agreement (“Agreement”) with CVS Pharmacy, Inc., on its own behalf and on behalf of its
subsidiaries and affiliates (“CVS”), which is effective as of the date I sign the Agreement (“Effective Date”). In consideration of the mutual promises in this
Agreement, the parties agree as follows:
1.
Consideration for Agreement. In connection with my duties and responsibilities at CVS Health Corporation or one of its subsidiaries or affiliates,
including Aetna Inc. (collectively, the “Corporation”), the Corporation will provide me with Confidential Information and/or access to the Corporation’s customers
and clients and the opportunity to develop and maintain relationships and goodwill with them. In addition, the Corporation has awarded me equity contingent on
the execution of this Agreement and compliance with its terms. In consideration of the foregoing and the mutual promises in this Agreement, I hereby agree with
CVS to comply with the terms of this Agreement.
2.
Non-Competition. During my employment by the Corporation and during the Non-Competition Period following the termination of my employment
for any reason, I will not, directly or indirectly, engage in Competition or provide Consulting or Audit Services within the Restricted Area.
a.
Competition. Engaging in “Competition” means providing services to a Competitor of the Corporation (whether as an employee, independent
contractor, consultant, principal, agent, partner, officer, director investor, or shareholder, except as a shareholder of less than one percent of a publicly traded
company) that: (i) are the same or similar in function or purpose to the services I provided to the Corporation at any time during the last year of my employment by
the Corporation; or (ii) will likely result in the disclosure of Confidential Information to a Competitor or the use of Confidential Information on behalf of a
Competitor. If a representative of the Corporation, during my employment or the Non-Competition Period, requests that I identify the company or business to
which I will be or am providing services, or with which I will be or am employed, and requests that I provide information about the services that I am or will be
providing to such entity, I shall provide the Corporation with a written statement detailing the identity of the entity and the nature of the services that I am or will
be providing to such entity with sufficient detail to allow the Corporation to independently assess whether I am or will be in violation of this Agreement. Such
statement shall be delivered to the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources Officer or his or her authorized delegate via personal delivery or overnight delivery
within five calendar days of my receipt of such request.
b.
Competitor. A “Competitor” for purposes of this Agreement shall mean any person, corporation or other entity that competes with one or
more of the business offerings of the Corporation. As of the Effective Date, the Corporation’s business offerings include: (i) pharmacy benefits management
(“PBM”), including: (a) the administration of pharmacy benefits for businesses, government agencies and health plans; (b) mail order pharmacy; (c) specialty
pharmacy; (d) the procurement of prescription drugs at a negotiated rate for dispensing; and (e) Medicare Part D services; (ii) retail, which includes the sale of
prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, beauty products and cosmetics, digital and traditional photo finishing services, digital and other online offerings,
seasonal and other general merchandise, greeting cards, convenience foods and other product lines and services which are sold by the Corporation’s retail division
(“Retail”); (iii) retail health clinics (“MinuteClinic”); (iv) the provision of pharmaceutical products and ancillary services, including specialty pharmaceutical
products and support services and the provision of related pharmacy consulting, data management services and medical supplies to long-term care facilities, other
healthcare service providers and recipients of services from such facilities (“Long-Term Care”); (v) the provision of prescription infusion drugs and related services
Page | 1

(“Infusion”); (vi) the provision of insurance (“Insurance”) including: (a) health insurance products and services; (b) managed health care products and services; (c)
dental, vision, workers compensation and employee assistance program products and services; (d) wellness products and services to employers, government
agencies, health plans, other businesses or third party payers; (e) other voluntary products that are excepted benefits under HIPAA; (vii) the creation and provision
of population health management products and services (“Health Management”); (viii) the administration of (ii) - (vii) (“Administration”); and (ix) any other
business in which Corporation is engaged or imminently will be engaged.
For the purpose of assessing whether I am engaging in “Competition” under Section 2 (a) (i) above, a person, corporation or other entity shall not be
considered a Retail Competitor if such entity derives annual gross revenues from its business in an amount which is less than 2% of the Corporation’s gross
revenues from Retail, during its most recently completed fiscal year. For avoidance of doubt, this exclusion does not apply to a determination of whether I am
engaging in “Competition” as set forth in Section 2 (a) (ii) above.
I and the Corporation acknowledge that both the Corporation’s products and services and the entities which compete with the Corporation’s products and
services evolve and an entity will be considered a Competitor if it provides products or services competitive with the products and services provided by the
Corporation within the last two years of my employment.
I agree to this enterprise-wide definition of Competition, which may prevent me from providing services to any of the Corporation’s PBM, Retail,
MinuteClinic, Long-Term Care, Health Insurance, Health Management, Administration and/or Infusion Competitors or any combination thereof during the Non-
Competition period.
c.
Consulting or Audit Services. “Consulting or Audit Services” shall mean any activity which involves providing audit review or other
consulting or advisory services with respect to any relationship or prospective relationship between the Corporation and any third party that is likely to result in the
use or disclosure of Confidential Information.
d.
Non-Competition Period. The “Non-Competition Period” shall be the period of 18 months following the termination of my employment with
the Corporation for any reason.
e.
Restricted Area. “Restricted Area” refers to those states within the United States in which the Corporation conducts its business, as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. To the extent I worked on international projects in Asia, Europe, Brazil or other countries where the Corporation may
conduct business, the Restricted Area includes those countries and those countries where the Corporation is actively planning to conduct business.
3.
Non-Solicitation. During the Non-Solicitation Period, which shall be during my employment by the Corporation and for 18 months following the
termination of my employment with the Corporation for any reason, I will not, unless a duly authorized officer of the Corporation gives me written authorization to
do so:
a.
interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with its Business Partners by soliciting or communicating (regardless of who initiates the
communication) with a Business Partner to: (i) induce or encourage the Business Partner to stop doing business or reduce its business with the Corporation, or (ii)
buy a product or service that competes with a product or service offered by the Corporation’s business. “Business Partner” means: a customer (person or entity),
prospective customer (person or entity), healthcare provider, supplier, manufacturer, agency, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care
Page | 2

facility, and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer with whom the Corporation has a business relationship and with which I had business-related contact or dealings, or
about which I received Confidential Information, in the two years prior to the termination of my employment with the Corporation. A Business Partner does not
include a customer, supplier, manufacturer, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care facility and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer which has fully and
finally ceased doing any business with the Corporation independent of any conduct or communications by me or breach of this Agreement and such full cessation
of business has been in effect for at least 1 year prior to my separation from employment with the Corporation. Nothing in this Paragraph 3(a) shall prevent me
from working as a staff pharmacist or in another retail position wherein I would be providing or selling prescriptions or other products directly to consumers.
b.
work on a Corporation account on behalf of a Business Partner or serve as the representative of a Business Partner for the Corporation.
c.
interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with any employee or contractor of the Corporation by: (i) soliciting or communicating with the
employee or contractor to induce or encourage him or her to leave the Corporation’s employ or engagement (regardless of who first initiates the communication);
(ii) helping another person or entity evaluate such employee or contractor as an employment or contractor candidate; or (iii) otherwise helping any person or entity
hire an employee or contractor away from the Corporation.
4.
Non-Disclosure of Confidential Information.
a.
Subject to Section 7 and 8 below, I will not at any time, whether during or after the termination of my employment, disclose to any person or
entity any of the Corporation’s Confidential Information, except as may be appropriately required in the ordinary course of performing my duties as an employee
of the Corporation. The Corporation’s Confidential Information includes but is not limited to the following non-public information: trade secrets; computer code
generated or developed by the Corporation; software or programs and related documentation; strategic compilations and analysis; strategic processes; business or
financial methods, practices and plans; non-public costs and prices; operating margins; marketing, merchandising and selling techniques and information; customer
lists; provider lists; details of customer agreements; pricing arrangements with pharmaceutical manufacturers, distributors or suppliers including but not limited to
any discounts and/or rebates; pharmacy reimbursement rates; premium information; payment rates; contractual forms; expansion strategies; real estate strategies;
operating strategies; sources of supply; patient records; business plans; other financial, commercial, business or technical information related to the Corporation
and confidential information of third parties which is given to the Corporation pursuant to an obligation or agreement to keep such information confidential
(collectively, “Confidential Information”). I shall not use or attempt to use any Confidential Information on behalf of any person or entity other than the
Corporation, or in any manner which may injure or cause loss, or may be calculated to injure or cause loss, whether directly or indirectly, to the Corporation. If, at
any time over the last two years of my employment at CVS, my position included access to Confidential Information, as described above, specifically related to the
Corporation’s procurement of prescription drugs, I understand and agree my employment with a pharmaceutical manufacturer, distributor or supplier
(“Pharmaceutical Entity”) would place a substantial risk of use and/or disclosure of Confidential Information with which I have been or will be entrusted during my
employment with the Corporation. In light of this risk of disclosure, I acknowledge and agree that the Corporation will be entitled to immediate injunctive relief to
prevent me from disclosing any such Confidential Information in the course of my employment with any such Pharmaceutical Entity. I agree that the disclosure of
such Confidential Information, to the Corporation’s PBM Competitors with which one may negotiate in the course of employment with such Pharmaceutical
Entity, would cause immediate and irreparable harm to the Corporation. For employees residing in Connecticut, these restrictions on use
Page | 3

or disclosure of Confidential Information will only apply for three (3) years after the end of my employment where information that does not qualify as a trade
secret is concerned; however, the restrictions will continue apply to trade secret information for as long as the information at issue remains qualified as a trade
secret.
b.
During my employment, I shall not make, use, or permit to be used, any materials of any nature relating to any matter within the scope of the
business of the Corporation or concerning any of its dealings or affairs other than for the benefit of the Corporation. I shall not, after the termination of my
employment, use or permit to be used any such materials and shall return same in accordance with Section 5 below.
5.
Ownership and Return of the Corporation’s Property. On or before my final date of employment with the Corporation, I shall return to the
Corporation all property of the Corporation in my possession, custody or control, including but not limited to the originals and copies of any information provided
to or acquired by me in connection with the performance of my duties for the Corporation, such as files, correspondence, communications, memoranda, e-mails,
slides, records, and all other documents, no matter how produced or reproduced, all computer equipment, communication devices (including but not limited to any
mobile phone or other portable digital assistant or device), computer programs and/or files, and all office keys and access cards. I agree that all the items described
in this Section are the sole property of the Corporation.
6.
Rights to Inventions, Works.
a.
Assignment of Inventions. All inventions, original works of authorship, developments, concepts, improvements, designs, discoveries, ideas,
trademarks or trade secrets, whether patentable or otherwise protectable under similar law, made, conceived or developed by me, whether alone or jointly with
others, from the date of my initial employment by the Corporation and continuing until the end of any period during which I am employed by the Corporation,
relating or pertaining in any way to my employment with or the business of the Corporation (collectively referred to as “Inventions”) shall be promptly disclosed in
writing to the Corporation. I hereby assign to the Corporation, or its designee, all of my rights, title and interest to such Inventions. All original works of authorship
which are made by me (solely or jointly with others) within the scope of and during the period of my employment with the Corporation and which are protectable
by copyright are “works made for hire,” as that term is defined in the United States Copyright Act and as such are the sole property of the Corporation. The
decision whether to commercialize or market any Invention developed by me solely or jointly with others is within the Corporation’s sole discretion and for the
Corporation’s sole benefit and no royalty will be due to me as a result of the Corporation’s efforts to commercialize or market any such Invention.
b.
Inventions Retained and Licensed. I have attached hereto as Exhibit A, a list describing all inventions, original works of authorship,
developments, improvements, and trade secrets which were made by me prior to my employment with the Corporation (“Prior Inventions”), which belong to me
and are not assigned to the Corporation hereunder. If no such list is attached, I represent that there are no such Prior Inventions. I will not incorporate, or permit to
be incorporated, any Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest into a Corporation product, process or machine without the Corporation’s prior
written consent. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, if, in the course of my employment with the Corporation, I incorporate into a Corporation product,
process or machine a Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest, the Corporation is hereby granted and shall have a nonexclusive, royalty-free,
irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide license to make, have made, modify, use and sell such Prior Invention as part of or in connection with such product, process or
machine.
Page | 4

c.
Patent and Copyright Registrations. I will assist the Corporation, or its designee, at the Corporation’s expense, in every proper way to secure
the Corporation’s rights in the Inventions and any copyrights, patents, mask work rights or other intellectual property rights relating thereto, including, but not
limited to, the disclosure to the Corporation of all pertinent information and data with respect thereto, the execution of all applications, specifications, oaths,
assignments and all other instruments which the Corporation shall deem necessary in order to apply for and obtain such rights and in order to assign and convey to
the Corporation, its successors, assigns, and nominees the sole and exclusive rights, title and interest in and to such Inventions, and any copyrights, patents, mask
work rights or other intellectual property rights relating thereto. My obligation to execute or cause to be executed, when it is in my power to do so, any such
instrument or papers shall continue after my employment ends for any reason and/or after the termination of this Agreement. If the Corporation is unable because
of my mental or physical incapacity or for any other reason to secure my signature to apply for or to pursue any application for any United States or foreign patents
or copyright registrations covering Inventions or original works of authorship assigned to the Corporation as above, then I hereby irrevocably designate and appoint
the Corporation and its duly authorized officers and agents as my agent and attorney in fact, to act for and in my behalf and stead to execute and file any such
applications and to do all other lawfully permitted acts to further the prosecution and issuance of letters patent or copyright registrations thereon with the same
legal force and effect as if executed by me.
d.
Exception to Assignments. I understand that if I am an employee in Illinois, Kansas, North Carolina, Utah or Minnesota, I should refer to
Exhibit B (incorporated herein for all purposes) for important limitations on the scope of the provisions of this Agreement concerning assignment of Inventions. I
will advise the Corporation promptly in writing of any inventions that I believe meet the criteria in Exhibit B and that are not otherwise disclosed on Exhibit A.
7.
Cooperation.
a.
In the event I receive a subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order to testify or produce Confidential Information
or any other information or property of the Corporation, I shall promptly: (i) notify the Corporation of the item, document, or information sought by such subpoena,
deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order; (ii) furnish the Corporation with a copy of said subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or
other process or order; and (iii) provide reasonable cooperation with respect to any procedure that the Corporation may initiate to protect Confidential Information
or other interests. If the Corporation objects to the subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, process, or order, I shall cooperate to ensure that there shall be no
disclosure until the court or other applicable entity has ruled upon the objection, and then only in accordance with the ruling so made. If no such objection is made
despite a reasonable opportunity to do so, I shall be entitled to comply with the subpoena, deposition, notice, interview request, or other process or order provided
that I have fulfilled the above obligations.
b.
I will cooperate fully with the Corporation, its affiliates, and their legal counsel in connection with any action, proceeding, or dispute arising
out of matters with which I was directly or indirectly involved while serving as an employee of the Corporation, its predecessors, subsidiaries or affiliates. This
cooperation shall include, but shall not be limited to, meeting with, and providing information to, the Corporation and its legal counsel, maintaining the
confidentiality of any past or future privileged communications with the Corporation’s legal counsel (outside and in-house), and making myself available to testify
truthfully by affidavit, in depositions, or in any other forum on behalf of the Corporation. The Corporation agrees to reimburse me for any reasonable and necessary
out-of-pocket costs associated with my cooperation.
Page | 5

8.
Limitation on Restrictions. Nothing in this Agreement is intended to or shall interfere with my right to file charges or participate in a proceeding with
any appropriate federal, state or local government agency, including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”), National Labor Relations
Board (“NLRB”) or the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”); to exercise rights under Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act (“NLRA”); or to file
a charge or complaint with or participate or cooperate in an investigation or proceeding with the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”) or
comparable state or local agencies. Such agencies have authority to carry out their statutory duties by investigating a charge, issuing a determination, filing a
lawsuit, or taking any other action authorized by law. I retain the right to participate in any such action and retain the right to communicate with the NLRB, SEC,
EEOC, OSHA and comparable state or local agencies and such communication shall not be limited by any provision in this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement
limits my right to receive an award for information provided to a government agency such as the SEC and OSHA. In addition, nothing in this Agreement is
intended to interfere with or restrain the immunity provided under 18 U.S.C. § 1833(b) for confidential disclosures of trade secrets to government officials or
lawyers, solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law, or in a sealed filing in court or other proceeding.
9.
Eligibility for Severance Pay. If my employment with the Corporation terminates under circumstances in which I am eligible for severance under the
applicable severance plan (the “Severance Plan”), the Corporation will offer me severance in accordance with the Severance Plan and the length of the Non-
Competition Period will match the length of the severance period. I acknowledge that the Severance Plan sets forth pre-requisites I must meet in order to receive
severance, including but not limited to execution of the Corporation’s standard separation agreement and release of claims. In the event that the Corporation fails to
comply with its obligations to offer me severance according to the Severance Plan, then Section 2 of this Agreement shall be of no further effect. I agree that if I
decline the Corporation’s offer of severance, I shall continue to be subject to the restrictions in Section 2.
10.
Injunctive Relief. Any breach of this Agreement by me will cause irreparable damage to the Corporation and, in the event of such breach, the
Corporation shall have, in addition to any and all remedies of law, the right to an injunction, specific performance or other equitable relief to prevent the violation
of my obligations hereunder, and without providing a bond to the extent permitted by the applicable rules of civil procedure.
11.
No Right of Continued Employment. This Agreement does not create an obligation on the Corporation or any other person or entity to continue my
employment.
12.
No Conflicting Agreements. I represent that the performance of my job duties with the Corporation and my compliance with all of the terms of this
Agreement does not and will not breach any agreement to keep in confidence proprietary information acquired by me in confidence or in trust prior to my
employment by the Corporation.
13.
Entire Agreement/No Reliance/No Modifications. This Agreement and any compensation, benefit or equity plan or agreement referred to herein or
under which equity was granted, including the CVS Health Corporation Change in Control Agreement (“CIC Agreement”), to the extent those other agreements
apply to me, set forth the entire agreement between the parties hereto and fully supersede any and all prior and/or supplemental understandings, whether written or
oral, between the parties concerning the subject matter of this Agreement. This agreement shall not have any effect on any prior existing agreements between
Corporation and me regarding the arbitration of workplace legal disputes and any such agreements remain in full force and effect. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if
I am a party to the CIC Agreement, then I understand that in the event of a Change in Control, as that term is defined in the CIC, Paragraph 2 of this Agreement
shall be null and void. I agree and acknowledge that I have not relied on
Page | 6

any representations, promises or agreements of any kind in connection with my decision to accept the terms of this Agreement, except for the representations,
promises and agreements herein. Any modification to this Agreement must be made in writing and signed by me and the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources
Officer or his or her authorized representative.
14.
Beneficiaries of Global Amendment Relating to Non-Compete Covenants Applicable to Aetna Employees. I and Corporation understand,
acknowledge and agree, that if I was an employee of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates prior to the Effective Time and am a Covered Individual,
then notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement, each of my Assumed Restricted Unit Awards, Assumed Performance Unit Awards and Assumed Stock
Appreciation Rights (collectively, my “Assumed Equity Awards”) shall continue to have, and shall be subject to, the same terms and conditions as applied to the
corresponding Company Equity Award, as amended by the Global Amendment to Agreements with Non-Compete Covenants Applicable to Aetna Employees
effective November 28, 2018, as of the Effective Time (including any terms and conditions related to accelerated vesting upon a termination of the holder’s
employment in connection with or following the Merger). Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to the extent that I am subject to any Aetna Non-
Compete Covenant: (1) such Aetna Non-Compete Covenant shall not restrict me from rendering services to or otherwise being engaged with the activities of any
business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business; (2) no penalties or detriments or remedies at law
or in equity shall be asserted under this Agreement or any Aetna Non-Compete Covenant against my rights in any Assumed Equity Awards due to my rendering
services to or otherwise engaging in any business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business; and (3)
no penalties or detriments or remedies at law or in equity shall be asserted under any Aetna Non-Compete Covenant against my rendering services to or otherwise
engaging in any business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business. For avoidance of doubt, if I fail
to comply with Section 2 of this Agreement, penalties, detriments or remedies at law or in equity may be asserted against me under this Agreement but not against
my rights in any of such Assumed Equity Awards.
As used in this Section [14], the following terms have the following meanings:
“Aetna Non-Compete Covenant” means any agreement entered into by an individual with Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates prior to the Effective
Time that prohibits or restricts such person’s entitlement to render services to or otherwise be engaged with the activities of any business that competes with the
Pre-Merger Aetna Business (including, without limitation, equity award arrangements and employment arrangements).
“Assumed Performance Unit Award” means a time-vesting restricted unit award covering shares of Parent Common Stock resulting from the conversion and
assumption by Parent of a Company PSU Award by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Assumed Restricted Unit Award” means a restricted unit award covering shares of Parent Common Stock resulting from the conversion and assumption by Parent
of a Company RSU Award by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Assumed Stock Appreciation Right” means a stock appreciation right representing the right to receive a payment in shares of Parent Common Stock resulting
from the conversion and assumption by Parent of a Company Stock Appreciation Right by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Company Common Stock” means the common shares, par value $0.01 par value, of Aetna Inc.
Page | 7

“Company Equity Awards” means Company Stock Appreciation Rights, Company RSU Awards and Company PSU Awards.
“Company PSU Award” means a stock unit award with respect to shares of Company Common Stock outstanding under any Company Stock Plan that vests based
on the achievement of performance goals.
“Company RSU Award” means a restricted stock unit award with respect to shares of Company Common Stock outstanding under any Company Stock Plan that
vests solely based on the passage of time.
“Company Stock Appreciation Right” means a stock appreciation right representing the right to receive a payment in shares of Company Common Stock under any
Company Stock Plan that was outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Effective Time.
“Company Stock Plans” means the Aetna Inc. 2016 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, the Aetna Inc. 2010 Non-
Employee Director Compensation Plan, the Aetna Inc. 2000 Non-Employee Director Compensation Plan, and the Amended and Restated Aetna Inc. 2000 Stock
Incentive Plan, in each case, as amended from time to time.
“Covered Individual” means any current or former employee of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates who is subject to an Aetna Non-Compete
Covenant.
“Effective Time” means 10:00 a.m. Eastern time on November 28, 2018.
“Merger” means the merger of Hudson Merger Sub Corp. with and into Aetna Inc., which became effective at the Effective Time.
“Merger Agreement” means the Agreement and Plan of Merger among CVS Health Corporation, Hudson Merger Sub Corp. and Aetna Inc. dated December 3,
2017.
“Parent” means CVS Health Corporation
“Parent Common Stock” means the common stock, $0.01 par value, of Parent.
“Pre-Merger Aetna Business” means the business of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries and joint venture affiliates as of the Effective Time.
15.
No Waiver. Any waiver by the Corporation of a breach of any provision of this Agreement, or of any other similar agreement with any other current or
former employee of the Corporation, shall not operate or be construed as a waiver of any subsequent breach of such provision or any other provision hereof.
16.
Severability. The parties hereby agree that each provision herein shall be treated as a separate and independent clause, and the unenforceability of any
one clause shall in no way impair the enforceability of any of the other clauses herein. Moreover, if one or more of the provisions of this Agreement are for any
reason held to be excessively broad as to scope, activity, duration, subject or otherwise so as to be unenforceable at law, the parties consent to such provision or
provisions being modified or limited by the appropriate judicial body (where allowed by applicable law), so as to be enforceable to the maximum extent compatible
with the applicable law.
Page | 8

17.
Survival of Employee’s Obligations. My obligations under this Agreement shall survive the termination of my employment regardless of the manner
of such termination and shall be binding upon my heirs, personal representatives, executors, administrators and legal representatives.
18.
Corporation’s Right to Assign Agreement. The Corporation has the right to assign this Agreement to its successors and assigns without the need for
further agreement or consent by me, and all covenants and agreements hereunder shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by said successors or assigns.
19.
Non-Assignment. I shall not assign my rights and obligations under this Agreement, in whole or in part, whether by operation of law or otherwise,
without the prior written consent of the Corporation, and any such assignment contrary to the terms hereof shall be null and void and of no force or effect.
20.
Governing Law; Venue; Headings. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of Rhode Island. I
agree that any claim or dispute I may have against the corporation must be resolved by a court located in the state of Rhode Island. The headings of the sections
contained in this Agreement are for convenience only and shall not be deemed to control or affect the meaning or construction of any provision of this Agreement.
21.
Tolling. In the event I violate one of the time-limited restrictions in this Agreement, I agree that the time period for such violated restriction shall be
extended by one day for each day I have violated the restriction, up to a maximum extension equal to the length of the original period of the restricted covenant.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed this Agreement as a sealed instrument as of the date set forth below.
/s/ Derica Rice
/s/ Lisa Bisaccia
Derica Rice
Lisa Bisaccia
Chief Human Resources Officer
XXXXXXX
CVS Health Corporation
Employee ID
Date: 6/19/19
Page | 9

EXHIBIT A
List of Prior Inventions - See Section 6
Page | 10

EXHIBIT B
Notice Regarding Invention Assignment
1.
For an employee residing in Illinois, Kansas, or North Carolina, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention for which no equipment, supplies, facility, or trade secret
information of the Corporation was used and which was developed entirely on your own time, unless (a) the invention relates (i) to the business of the
Corporation or (ii) to the Corporation’s actual or demonstrably anticipated research or development, or (b) the invention results from any work performed by
you for the Corporation. Illinois 765ILCS1060/1-3, “Employees Patent Act”; Kansas Statutes Section 44-130; North Carolina General Statutes Article 10A,
Chapter 66, Commerce and Business, Section 66-57.1.
2.
For an employee residing in Utah, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention which was created entirely on your own time, and which is
not (a) conceived, developed, reduced to practice, or created by you (i) within the scope of your employment with the Corporation, (ii) on the Corporation’s
time, or (iii) with the aid, assistance, or use of any of the Corporation’s property, equipment, facilities, supplies, resources, or patents, trade secrets, know-
how, technology, confidential information, ideas, copy rights, trademarks and service marks and any and all rights, applications and registrations relating to
them, (b) the results of any work, services, or duties performed by you for the Corporation, (c) related to the industry or trade of the Corporation, or (d)
related to the current or demonstrably anticipated business, research, or development of the Corporation. Utah Code Sections 34-39-1 through 34-39-3,
“Employee Inventions Act.”
3.
For an employee residing in Minnesota, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention for which no equipment, supplies, facility, or trade secret
information of the Corporation was used, and which was developed entirely on your own time, and (a) which does not relate (i) directly to the business of
the  Corporation,  or  (ii)  to  the  Corporation’s  actual  or  demonstrably  anticipated  research  or  development,  or  (b)  which  does  not  result  from  any  work
performed by you for the Corporation. Minnesota Statutes 13A Section 181.78.
Page | 11

Exhibit 10.56
CVS Pharmacy, Inc.
Restrictive Covenant Agreement
    
I, Thomas Moriarty, enter into this Restrictive Covenant Agreement (“Agreement”) with CVS Pharmacy, Inc., on its own behalf and on behalf of its
subsidiaries and affiliates (“CVS”), which is effective as of the date I sign the Agreement (“Effective Date”). In consideration of the mutual promises in this
Agreement, the parties agree as follows:
1.
Consideration for Agreement. In connection with my duties and responsibilities at CVS Health Corporation or one of its subsidiaries or affiliates,
including Aetna Inc. (collectively, the “Corporation”), the Corporation will provide me with Confidential Information and/or access to the Corporation’s customers
and clients and the opportunity to develop and maintain relationships and goodwill with them. In addition, the Corporation has awarded me equity contingent on
the execution of this Agreement and compliance with its terms. In consideration of the foregoing and the mutual promises in this Agreement, I hereby agree with
CVS to comply with the terms of this Agreement.
2.
Limitation of Agreement; Practice of Law. If I am a licensed attorney, this Agreement is not meant to restrict my ability to practice law after I cease
to be an employee of the Corporation in violation of any applicable Rules of Professional Conduct or Ethics. As it relates to the practice of law, this Agreement
shall be interpreted consistent with and to the extent permissible under Rules 5.6, 1.6 and 1.9 of the Rules of Professional Conduct, as well as any other applicable
Rules of Professional Conduct or Ethics and shall not be interpreted to expand the scope of my duty to maintain privileged or confidential information under Rule
1.6, Rule 1.9, or any other applicable Rules of Professional Conduct or Ethics.
3.
Non-Competition. During my employment by the Corporation and during the Non-Competition Period following the termination of my employment
for any reason, I will not, directly or indirectly, engage in Competition or provide Consulting or Audit Services within the Restricted Area.
a.
Competition. Engaging in “Competition” means providing services to a Competitor of the Corporation (whether as an employee, independent
contractor, consultant, principal, agent, partner, officer, director, investor, or shareholder, except as a shareholder of less than one percent of a publicly traded
company) that: (i) are the same or similar in function or purpose to the services I provided to the Corporation at any time during the last year of my employment by
the Corporation; or (ii) will likely result in the disclosure of Confidential Information to a Competitor or the use of Confidential Information on behalf of a
Competitor. If a representative of the Corporation, during my employment or the Non-Competition Period, requests that I identify the company or business to
which I will be or am providing services, or with which I will be or am employed, and requests that I provide information about the services that I am or will be
providing to such entity, I shall provide the Corporation with a written statement detailing the identity of the entity and the nature of the services that I am or will
be providing to such entity with sufficient detail to allow the Corporation to independently assess whether I am or will be in violation of this Agreement. Such
statement shall be delivered to the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources Officer or his or her authorized delegate via personal delivery or overnight delivery
within five calendar days of my receipt of such request.
b.
Competitor. A “Competitor” for purposes of this Agreement shall mean any person, corporation or other entity that competes with one or
more of the business offerings of the Corporation. As of the Effective Date, the Corporation’s business offerings include: (i) pharmacy benefits management
(“PBM”), including: (a) the administration of pharmacy benefits for businesses, government agencies and health plans; (b) mail order pharmacy; (c) specialty
pharmacy; (d) the procurement of prescription drugs at a negotiated rate for dispensing; and (e) Medicare Part D services; (ii) retail, which includes the sale of
prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, beauty products and cosmetics, digital and
Page | 1

traditional photo finishing services, digital and other online offerings, seasonal and other general merchandise, greeting cards, convenience foods and other product
lines and services which are sold by the Corporation’s retail division (“Retail”); (iii) retail health clinics (“MinuteClinic”); (iv) the provision of pharmaceutical
products and ancillary services, including specialty pharmaceutical products and support services and the provision of related pharmacy consulting, data
management services and medical supplies to long-term care facilities, other healthcare service providers and recipients of services from such facilities (“Long-
Term Care”); (v) the provision of prescription infusion drugs and related services (“Infusion”); (vi) the provision of insurance (“Insurance”) including: (a) health
insurance products and services; (b) managed health care products and services; (c) dental, vision, workers’ compensation and employee assistance program
products and services; (d) wellness products and services to employers, government agencies, health plans, other businesses or third party payers; and (e) other
voluntary products that are excepted benefits under HIPAA; (vii) the creation and provision of population health management products and services (“Health
Management”); (viii) the administration of (ii) - (vii) (“Administration”); and (ix) any other business in which Corporation is engaged or imminently will be
engaged.
For the purpose of assessing whether I am engaging in “Competition” under Section 3(a) (i) above, a person, corporation or other entity shall not be
considered a Retail Competitor if such entity derives annual gross revenues from its business in an amount which is less than 2% of the Corporation’s gross
revenues from Retail, during its most recently completed fiscal year. For avoidance of doubt, this exclusion does not apply to a determination of whether I am
engaging in “Competition” as set forth in Section 3 (a) (ii) above.
I and the Corporation acknowledge that both the Corporation’s products and services and the entities which compete with the Corporation’s products and
services evolve and an entity will be considered a Competitor if it provides products or services competitive with the products and services provided by the
Corporation within the last two years of my employment.
I agree to this enterprise-wide definition of Competition which may prevent me from providing services to any of the Corporation’s PBM, Retail,
MinuteClinic, Long-Term Care, Insurance, Health Management, Administration and/or Infusion Competitors or any combination thereof during the Non­-
Competition period.
c.
Consulting or Audit Services. “Consulting or Audit Services” shall mean any activity which involves providing audit review or other
consulting or advisory services with respect to any relationship or prospective relationship between the Corporation and any third party that is likely to result in the
use or disclosure of Confidential Information.
d.
Non-Competition Period. The “Non-Competition Period” shall be the period of 18 months following the termination of my employment with
the Corporation for any reason.
e.
Restricted Area. “Restricted Area” refers to those states within the United States in which the Corporation conducts its business, as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. To the extent I worked on international projects in Asia, Europe, Brazil or other countries where the Corporation may
conduct business, the Restricted Area includes those countries and those countries where the Corporation is actively planning to conduct business.
Page | 2

4.
Non-Solicitation. During the Non-Solicitation Period, which shall be during my employment by the Corporation and for 18 months following the
termination of my employment with the Corporation for any reason, I will not, unless a duly authorized officer of the Corporation gives me written authorization to
do so:
a.
interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with its Business Partners by soliciting or communicating (regardless of who initiates the
communication) with a Business Partner to: (i) induce or encourage the Business Partner to stop doing business or reduce its business with the Corporation, or (ii)
buy a product or service that competes with a product or service offered by the Corporation’s business. “Business Partner” means: a customer (person or entity),
prospective customer (person or entity), healthcare provider, supplier, manufacturer, agency, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care facility, and/or
pharmaceutical manufacturer with whom the Corporation has a business relationship and with which I had business-related contact or dealings, or about which I
received Confidential Information, in the two years prior to the termination of my employment with the Corporation. A Business Partner does not include a
customer, supplier, manufacturer, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care facility and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer which has fully and finally ceased
doing any business with the Corporation independent of any conduct or communications by me or breach of this Agreement and such full cessation of business has
been in effect for at least 1 year prior to my separation from employment with the Corporation. Nothing in this Section 3(a) shall prevent me from working as a
staff pharmacist or in another retail position wherein I would be providing or selling prescriptions or other products directly to consumers.
b.
work on a Corporation account on behalf of a Business Partner or serve as the representative of a Business Partner for the Corporation.
c.
interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with any employee or contractor of the Corporation by: (i) soliciting or communicating with the
employee or contractor to induce or encourage him or her to leave the Corporation’s employ or engagement (regardless of who first initiates the communication);
(ii) helping another person or entity evaluate such employee or contractor as an employment or contractor candidate; or (iii) otherwise helping any person or entity
hire an employee or contractor away from the Corporation.
5.
Non-Disclosure of Confidential Information.
a.
Subject to Sections 8 and 9 below, I will not at any time, whether during or after the termination of my employment, disclose to any person or
entity any of the Corporation’s Confidential Information, except as may be appropriately required in the ordinary course of performing my duties as an employee
of the Corporation. The Corporation’s Confidential Information includes but is not limited to the following non-public information: trade secrets; computer code
generated or developed by the Corporation; software or programs and related documentation; strategic compilations and analysis; strategic processes; business or
financial methods, practices and plans; non-public costs and prices; operating margins; marketing, merchandising and selling techniques and information; customer
lists; provider lists details of customer agreements; pricing arrangements with pharmaceutical manufacturers, distributors or suppliers including but not limited to
any discounts and/or rebates; pharmacy reimbursement rates; premium information; payment rates; contractual forms; expansion strategies; real estate strategies;
operating strategies; sources of supply; patient records; business plans; other financial, commercial, business or technical information related to the Corporation
and confidential information of third parties which is given to the Corporation pursuant to an obligation or agreement to keep such information confidential
(collectively, “Confidential Information”). I shall not use or attempt to use any Confidential Information on behalf of any person or entity other than the
Corporation, or in any manner which may injure or cause, loss or may be calculated to injure or cause loss, whether directly or indirectly,
Page | 3

to the Corporation. If, at any time over the last two years of my employment at CVS, my position included access to Confidential Information, as described above,
specifically related to the Corporation’s procurement of prescription drugs, I understand and agree my employment with a pharmaceutical manufacturer, distributor
or supplier (“Pharmaceutical Entity”) would place a substantial risk of use and/or disclosure of Confidential Information with which I have been or will be entrusted
during my employment with the Corporation. In light of this risk of disclosure, I acknowledge and agree that the Corporation will be entitled to immediate
injunctive relief to prevent me from disclosing any such Confidential Information in the course of my employment with any such Pharmaceutical Entity, in the
event I have disclosed or am at a substantial risk of disclosing, such Confidential Information in the course of my duties for such Pharmaceutical Entity. I agree that
the disclosure of such Confidential Information, to Corporation’s PBM Competitors with which one may negotiate in the course of employment with such
Pharmaceutical Entity, would cause immediate and irreparable harm to the Corporation. For employees residing in Connecticut, these restrictions on use or
disclosure of Confidential Information will only apply for three (3) years after the end of my employment where information that does not qualify as a trade secret
is concerned; however, the restrictions will continue to apply to trade secret information for as long as the information at issue remains qualified as a trade secret.
b.
During my employment, I shall not make, use, or permit to be used, any materials of any nature relating to any matter within the scope of the
business of the Corporation or concerning any of its dealings or affairs other than for the benefit of the Corporation. I shall not, after the termination of my
employment, use or permit to be used any such materials and shall return same in accordance with Section 6 below.
6.
Ownership and Return of the Corporation’s Property. On or before my final date of employment with the Corporation, I shall return to the
Corporation all property of the Corporation in my possession, custody or control, including but not limited to the originals and copies of any information provided
to or acquired by me in connection with the performance of my duties for the Corporation, such as files, correspondence, communications, memoranda, e-mails,
slides, records, and all other documents, no matter how produced or reproduced, all computer equipment, communication devices (including but not limited to any
mobile phone or other portable digital assistant or device), computer programs and/or files, and all office keys and access cards. I agree that all the items described
in this Section are the sole property of the Corporation.
7.
Rights to Inventions, Works.
a.
Assignment of Inventions. All inventions, original works of authorship, developments, concepts, improvements, designs, discoveries, ideas,
trademarks or trade secrets, whether patentable or otherwise protectable under similar law, made, conceived or developed by me, whether alone or jointly with
others, from the date of my initial employment by the Corporation and continuing until the end of any period during which I am employed by the Corporation,
relating or pertaining in any way to my employment with or the business of the Corporation (collectively referred to as “Inventions”) shall be promptly disclosed in
writing to the Corporation. I hereby assign to the Corporation, or its designee, all of my rights, title and interest to such Inventions. All original works of authorship
which are made by me (solely or jointly with others) within the scope of and during the period of my employment with the Corporation and which are protectable
by copyright are “works made for hire,” as that term is defined in the United States Copyright Act and as such are the sole property of the Corporation. The
decision whether to commercialize or market any Invention developed by me solely or jointly with others is within the Corporation’s sole discretion and for the
Corporation’s sole benefit and no royalty will be due to me as a result of the Corporation’s efforts to commercialize or market any such Invention.
Page | 4

b.
Inventions Retained and Licensed. I have attached hereto as Exhibit A, a list describing all inventions, original works of authorship,
developments, improvements, and trade secrets which were made by me prior to my employment with the Corporation (“Prior Inventions”), which belong to me
and are not assigned to the Corporation hereunder. If no such list is attached, I represent that there are no such Prior Inventions. I will not incorporate, or permit to
be incorporated, any Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest into a Corporation product, process or machine without the Corporation’s prior
written consent. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, if, in the course of my employment with the Corporation, I incorporate into a Corporation product,
process or machine a Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest, the Corporation is hereby granted and shall have a nonexclusive, royalty-free,
irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide license to make, have made, modify, use and sell such Prior Invention as part of or in connection with such product, process or
machine.
c.
Patent and Copyright Registrations. I will assist the Corporation, or its designee, at the Corporation’s expense, in every proper way to secure
the Corporation’s rights in the Inventions and any copyrights, patents, mask work rights or other intellectual property rights relating thereto, including, but not
limited to, the disclosure to the Corporation of all pertinent information and data with respect thereto, the execution of all applications, specifications, oaths,
assignments and all other instruments which the Corporation shall deem necessary in order to apply for and obtain such rights and in order to assign and convey to
the Corporation, its successors, assigns, and nominees the sole and exclusive rights, title and interest in and to such Inventions, and any copyrights, patents, mask
work rights or other intellectual property rights relating thereto. My obligation to execute or cause to be executed, when it is in my power to do so, any such
instrument or papers shall continue after my employment ends for any reason and/or after the termination of this Agreement. If the Corporation is unable because
of my mental or physical incapacity or for any other reason to secure my signature to apply for or to pursue any application for any United States or foreign patents
or copyright registrations covering Inventions or original works of authorship assigned to the Corporation as above, then I hereby irrevocably designate and
appoint the Corporation and its duly authorized officers and agents as my agent and attorney in fact, to act for and in my behalf and stead to execute and file any
such applications and to do all other lawfully permitted acts to further the prosecution and issuance of letters patent or copyright registrations thereon with the same
legal force and effect as if executed by me.
d.
Exception to Assignments. I understand that if I am an employee in Illinois, Kansas, North Carolina, Utah or Minnesota, I should refer to
Exhibit B (incorporated herein for all purposes) for important limitations on the scope of the provisions of this Agreement concerning assignment of Inventions. I
will advise the Corporation promptly in writing of any inventions that I believe meet the criteria in Exhibit B and that are not otherwise disclosed on Exhibit A.
8.
Cooperation.
a.
In the event I receive a subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order to testify or produce Confidential Information
or any other information or property of the Corporation, I shall promptly: (i) notify the Corporation of the item, document, or information sought by such subpoena,
deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order; (ii) furnish the Corporation with a copy of said subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or
other process or order; and (iii) provide reasonable cooperation with respect to any procedure that the Corporation may initiate to protect Confidential Information
or other interests. If the Corporation objects to the subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, process, or order, I shall cooperate to ensure that there shall be no
disclosure until the court or other applicable entity has ruled upon the objection, and then only in accordance with the ruling so made. If no such objection is made
despite a reasonable opportunity to do so, I shall be entitled to comply with the subpoena, deposition, notice, interview request, or other process or order provided
that I have fulfilled the above obligations.
Page | 5

b.
I will cooperate fully with the Corporation, its affiliates, and their legal counsel in connection with any action, proceeding, or dispute arising
out of matters with which I was directly or indirectly involved while serving as an employee of the Corporation, its predecessors, subsidiaries or affiliates. This
cooperation shall include, but shall not be limited to, meeting with, and providing information to, the Corporation and its legal counsel, maintaining the
confidentiality of any past or future privileged communications with the Corporation’s legal counsel (outside and in-house), and making myself available to testify
truthfully by affidavit, in depositions, or in any other forum on behalf of the Corporation. The Corporation agrees to reimburse me for any reasonable and necessary
out-of-pocket costs associated with my cooperation.
9.
Limitation on Restrictions. Nothing in this Agreement is intended to or shall interfere with my right to file charges or participate in a proceeding with
any appropriate federal, state or local government agency, including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”), National Labor Relations
Board (“NLRB”) or the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”); to exercise rights under Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act (“NLRA”); or to file
a charge or complaint with or participate or cooperate in an investigation or proceeding with the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”) or
comparable state or local agencies. Such agencies have authority to carry out their statutory duties by investigating a charge, issuing a determination, filing a
lawsuit, or taking any other action authorized by law. I retain the right to participate in any such action and retain the right to communicate with the NLRB, SEC,
EEOC, OSHA and comparable state or local agencies and such communication shall not be limited by any provision in this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement
limits my right to receive an award for information provided to a government agency such as the SEC and OSHA. In addition, nothing in this Agreement is
intended to interfere with or restrain the immunity provided under 18 U.S.C. § 1833(b) for confidential disclosures of trade secrets to government officials or
lawyers, solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law, or in a sealed filing in court or other proceeding.
10.
Eligibility for Severance Pay. If my employment with the Corporation terminates under circumstances in which I am eligible for severance under the
applicable severance plan (the “Severance Plan”), the Corporation will offer me severance in accordance with the Severance Plan and the length of the Non-
Competition Period will match the length of the severance period, not to exceed 18 months. I acknowledge that I must meet certain requirements in order to receive
severance, including but not limited to execution of the Corporation’s standard separation agreement and release of claims and any requirements expressed in the
Severance Plan. I agree that if I decline the Corporation’s offer of severance, I shall continue to be subject to the restrictions in Section 3.
11.
Injunctive Relief. Any breach of this Agreement by me will cause irreparable damage to the Corporation and, in the event of such breach, the
Corporation shall have, in addition to any and all remedies of law, the right to an injunction, specific performance or other equitable relief to prevent the violation
of my obligations hereunder, and without providing a bond to the extent permitted by the applicable rules of civil procedure.
12.
No Right of Continued Employment. This Agreement does not create an obligation on the Corporation or any other person or entity to continue my
employment.
13.
No Conflicting Agreements. I represent that the performance of my job duties with the Corporation and my compliance with all of the terms of this
Agreement does not and will not breach any agreement to keep in confidence proprietary information acquired by me in confidence or in trust prior to my
employment by the Corporation.
Page | 6

14.
Entire Agreement/No Reliance/No Modifications. This Agreement and any compensation, benefit or equity plan or agreement referred to herein or
under which equity was granted, including the CVS Health Corporation Change in Control Agreement (“CIC Agreement”), to the extent those other agreements
apply to me, set forth the entire agreement between the parties hereto and fully supersede any and all prior and/or supplemental understandings, whether written or
oral, between the parties concerning the subject matter of this Agreement. This agreement shall not have any effect on any prior existing agreements between
Corporation and me regarding the arbitration of workplace legal disputes and any such agreements remain in full force and effect. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if
I am a party to the CIC Agreement, then I understand that in the event of a Change in Control, as that term is defined in the CIC, Paragraph 3 of this Agreement
shall be null and void. I agree and acknowledge that I have not relied on any representations, promises or agreements of any kind in connection with my decision to
accept the terms of this Agreement, except for the representations, promises and agreements herein. Any modification to this Agreement must be made in writing
and signed by me and the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources Officer or his or her authorized representative.
15.
Beneficiaries of Global Amendment Relating to Non-Compete Covenants Applicable to Aetna Employees. I and Corporation understand,
acknowledge and agree, that if I was an employee of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates prior to the Effective Time and am a Covered Individual,
then notwithstanding the provisions of this Agreement, each of my Assumed Restricted Unit Awards, Assumed Performance Unit Awards and Assumed Stock
Appreciation Rights (collectively, my “Assumed Equity Awards”) shall continue to have, and shall be subject to, the same terms and conditions as applied to the
corresponding Company Equity Award, as amended by the Global Amendment to Agreements with Non-Compete Covenants Applicable to Aetna Employees
effective November 28, 2018, as of the Effective Time (including any terms and conditions related to accelerated vesting upon a termination of the holder’s
employment in connection with or following the Merger). Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to the extent that I am subject to any Aetna Non-
Compete Covenant: (1) such Aetna Non-Compete Covenant shall not restrict me from rendering services to or otherwise being engaged with the activities of any
business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business; (2) no penalties or detriments or remedies at law
or in equity shall be asserted under this Agreement or any Aetna Non-Compete Covenant against my rights in any Assumed Equity Awards due to my rendering
services to or otherwise engaging in any business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business; and (3)
no penalties or detriments or remedies at law or in equity shall be asserted under any Aetna Non-Compete Covenant against my rendering services to or otherwise
engaging in any business or organization that does not conduct or engage in the same business as the Pre-Merger Aetna Business. For avoidance of doubt, if I fail
to comply with Section 3 of this Agreement, penalties, detriments or remedies at law or in equity may be asserted against me under this Agreement but not against
my rights in any of such Assumed Equity Awards.
As used in this Section 15, the following terms have the following meanings:
“Aetna Non-Compete Covenant” means any agreement entered into by an individual with Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates prior to the Effective
Time that prohibits or restricts such person’s entitlement to render services to or otherwise be engaged with the activities of any business that competes with the
Pre-Merger Aetna Business (including, without limitation, equity award arrangements and employment arrangements).
“Assumed Performance Unit Award” means a time-vesting restricted unit award covering shares of Parent Common Stock resulting from the conversion and
assumption by Parent of a Company PSU Award by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
Page | 7

“Assumed Restricted Unit Award” means a restricted unit award covering shares of Parent Common Stock resulting from the conversion and assumption by Parent
of a Company RSU Award by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Assumed Stock Appreciation Right” means a stock appreciation right representing the right to receive a payment in shares of Parent Common Stock resulting
from the conversion and assumption by Parent of a Company Stock Appreciation Right by virtue of the Merger in accordance with the Merger Agreement.
“Company Common Stock” means the common shares, par value $0.01 par value, of Aetna Inc.
“Company Equity Awards” means Company Stock Appreciation Rights, Company RSU Awards and Company PSU Awards.
“Company PSU Award” means a stock unit award with respect to shares of Company Common Stock outstanding under any Company Stock Plan that vests based
on the achievement of performance goals.
“Company RSU Award” means a restricted stock unit award with respect to shares of Company Common Stock outstanding under any Company Stock Plan that
vests solely based on the passage of time.
“Company Stock Appreciation Right” means a stock appreciation right representing the right to receive a payment in shares of Company Common Stock under any
Company Stock Plan that was outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Effective Time.
“Company Stock Plans” means the Aetna Inc. 2016 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan, the Aetna Inc. 2010 Non-
Employee Director Compensation Plan, the Aetna Inc. 2000 Non-Employee Director Compensation Plan, and the Amended and Restated Aetna Inc. 2000 Stock
Incentive Plan, in each case, as amended from time to time.
“Covered Individual” means any current or former employee of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries or joint venture affiliates who is subject to an Aetna Non-Compete
Covenant.
“Effective Time” means 10:00 a.m. Eastern time on November 28, 2018.
“Merger” means the merger of Hudson Merger Sub Corp. with and into Aetna Inc., which became effective at the Effective Time.
“Merger Agreement” means the Agreement and Plan of Merger among CVS Health Corporation, Hudson Merger Sub Corp. and Aetna Inc. dated December 3,
2017.
“Parent” means CVS Health Corporation
“Parent Common Stock” means the common stock, $0.01 par value, of Parent.
“Pre-Merger Aetna Business” means the business of Aetna Inc., its subsidiaries and joint venture affiliates as of the Effective Time.
16.
No Waiver. Any waiver by the Corporation of a breach of any provision of this Agreement, or of any other similar agreement with any other current or
former employee of the Corporation, shall not operate or be construed as a waiver of any subsequent breach of such provision or any other provision hereof.
Page | 8

17.
Severability. The parties hereby agree that each provision herein shall be treated as a separate and independent clause, and the unenforceability of any
one clause shall in no way impair the enforceability of any of the other clauses herein. Moreover, if one or more of the provisions of this Agreement are for any
reason held to be excessively broad as to scope, activity, duration, subject or otherwise so as to be unenforceable at law, the parties consent to such provision or
provisions being modified or limited by the appropriate judicial body (where allowed by applicable law), so as to be enforceable to the maximum extent compatible
with the applicable law.
18.
Survival of Employee’s Obligations. My obligations under this Agreement shall survive the termination of my employment regardless of the manner
of such termination and shall be binding upon my heirs, personal representatives, executors, administrators and legal representatives.
19.
Corporation’s Right to Assign Agreement. The Corporation has the right to assign this Agreement to its successors and assigns without the need for
further agreement or consent by me, and all covenants and agreements hereunder shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by said successors or assigns.
20.
Non-Assignment. I shall not assign my rights and obligations under this Agreement, in whole or in part, whether by operation of law or otherwise,
without the prior written consent of the Corporation,
and any such assignment contrary to the terms hereof shall be null and void and of no force or effect.
21.
Governing Law; Venue; Headings. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of Rhode Island. I
agree that any claim or dispute I may have against the Corporation must be resolved by a court located in the state of Rhode Island. The headings of the sections
contained in this Agreement are for convenience only and shall not be deemed to control or affect the meaning or construction of any provision of this Agreement.
22.
Tolling. In the event I violate one of the time-limited restrictions in this Agreement, I agree that the time period for such violated restriction shall be
extended by one day for each day I have violated the restriction, up to a maximum extension equal to the length of the original period of the restricted covenant.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed this Agreement as a sealed instrument as of the date set forth below.
/s/ Thomas Moriarty
/s/ Lisa Bisaccia
Thomas Moriarty
Lisa Bisaccia
Chief Human Resources Officer
XXXXXXX
CVS Health Corporation
Employee ID
Date: 7/8/19
Page | 9

EXHIBIT A
List of Prior Inventions - See Section 7
Page | 10

EXHIBIT B
Notice Regarding Invention Assignment
1.
For an employee residing in Illinois, Kansas, or North Carolina, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention for which no equipment, supplies, facility, or trade secret
information of the Corporation was used and which was developed entirely on your own time, unless (a) the invention relates (i) to the business of the
Corporation or (ii) to the Corporation’s actual or demonstrably anticipated research or development, or (b) the invention results from any work performed by
you for the Corporation. Illinois 765ILCS1060/1-3, “Employees Patent Act”; Kansas Statutes Section 44-130; North Carolina General Statutes Article 10A,
Chapter 66, Commerce and Business, Section 66-57.1.
2.
For an employee residing in Utah, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention which was created entirely on your own time, and which is
not (a) conceived, developed, reduced to practice, or created by you (i) within the scope of your employment with the Corporation, (ii) on the Corporation’s
time, or (iii) with the aid, assistance, or use of any of the Corporation’s property, equipment, facilities, supplies, resources, or patents, trade secrets, know-
how, technology, confidential information, ideas, copy rights, trademarks and service marks and any and all rights, applications and registrations relating to
them, (b) the results of any work, services, or duties performed by you for the Corporation, (c) related to the industry or trade of the Corporation, or (d)
related to the current or demonstrably anticipated business, research, or development of the Corporation. Utah Code Sections 34-39-1 through 34-39-3,
“Employee Inventions Act.”
3.
For an employee residing in Minnesota, you are hereby advised:
Notice. No provision in this Agreement requires you to assign any of your rights to an invention for which no equipment, supplies, facility, or trade secret
information of the Corporation was used, and which was developed entirely on your own time, and (a) which does not relate (i) directly to the business of
the  Corporation,  or  (ii)  to  the  Corporation’s  actual  or  demonstrably  anticipated  research  or  development,  or  (b)  which  does  not  result  from  any  work
performed by you for the Corporation. Minnesota Statutes 13A Section 181.78.
Page | 11

Exhibit 21.1
Subsidiaries of CVS Health Corporation
Listed below are subsidiaries under CVS Health Corporation at December 31, 2019 with their jurisdictions of organization shown in parentheses. Subsidiaries
excluded from the list below are not insurance companies and would not, in the aggregate, constitute a “significant subsidiary” of CVS Health Corporation, as that
term is defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.
•
CVS Foreign, Inc. (New York)
◦
CVS Caremark Indemnity Ltd. (Bermuda)
◦
CVS International, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (Rhode Island)
•
Aetna Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Health of California Inc. (California)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Florida)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Georgia)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Maine)
•
Aetna Health of Michigan Inc. (Michigan)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (New Jersey)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (New York)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (New York)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Texas)
•
Aetna Better Health of California Inc. (California)
•
Aetna Health of Ohio Inc. (Ohio)
•
Aetna Better Health of Texas Inc. (Texas)
•
Aetna Better Health of Washington, Inc. (Washington)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Georgia)
•
Aetna HealthAssurance Pennsylvania, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Aetna Dental of California Inc. (California)
•
Aetna Dental Inc. (New Jersey)
•
Aetna Dental Inc. (Texas)
•
Aetna Rx Home Delivery, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Health Management, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Ireland Inc. (Delaware)
•
Aetna Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
•
Cofinity, Inc. (Delaware)
•
@Credentials Inc. (Delaware)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Illinois)
•
Aetna Better Health of Kansas Inc. (Kansas)
•
Aetna Better Health, Inc. (Louisiana)
•
Aetna Florida Inc. (Florida)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Ohio)
•
Aetna Better Health of Oklahoma Inc. (Oklahoma)
•
Aetna Better Health of Nevada Inc. (Nevada)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (New Jersey)
•
Aetna Better Health of North Carolina Inc. (North Carolina)
•
Aetna Network Services LLC (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Risk Assurance Company of Connecticut Inc. (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Student Health Agency Inc. (Massachusetts)
•
Delaware Physicians Care, Incorporated (Delaware)
•
Schaller Anderson Medical Administrators, Incorporated (Delaware)
•
Aetna Medicaid Administrators LLC (Arizona)
•
iTriage, LLC (Delaware)

•
bswift LLC (Delaware)
•
Prodigy Health Group, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Niagara Re, Inc. (New York)
•
Performax, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Scrip World, LLC (Utah)
•
Precision Benefit Services, Inc. (Delaware)
•
American Health Holding, Inc. (Ohio)
•
Meritain Health, Inc. (New York)
•
Administrative Enterprises, Inc. (Arizona)
•
U.S Healthcare Holdings, LLC (Ohio)
•
Prime Net, Inc. (Ohio)
•
Professional Risk Management, Inc. (Ohio)
•
ADMINCO, Inc. (Arizona)
•
Aetna Pharmacy Management Services LLC (Delaware)
•
Coventry Transplant Network, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Aetna Health of Iowa Inc. (Iowa)
•
Coventry Health Care of Nebraska, Inc. (Nebraska)
•
Aetna Health Inc. (Louisiana)
•
HealthAssuance Pennsylvania, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Coventry Prescription Management Services Inc. (Nevada)
•
Coventry Health and Life Insurance Company (Missouri)
•
Aetna Better Health of Kentucky Insurance Company (Kentucky)
•
Coventry Health Care of Virginia, Inc. (Virginia)
•
Coventry Health Care of Missouri, Inc. (Missouri)
•
Aetna Better Health of Missouri LLC (Missouri)
•
Coventry Health Care of Illinois, Inc. (Illinois)
•
Coventry Health Care of West Virginia, Inc. (West Virginia)
•
Coventry HealthCare Management Corporation (Delaware)
•
Coventry Health Care of Kansas, Inc. (Kansas)
•
Coventry Health Care National Accounts, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Aetna Better Health of Michigan Inc. (Michigan)
•
Aetna Health of Utah Inc. (Utah)
•
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Tennessee)
•
Coventry Health Care National Network, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Coventry Consumer Advantage, Inc. (Delaware)
•
MHNet Specialty Services, LLC (Maryland)
•
Mental Health Network of New York IPA, Inc. (New York)
•
Mental Health Associates, Inc. (Louisiana)
•
MHNet of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
•
MHNet Life and Health Insurance Company (Texas)
•
Group Dental Service, Inc. (Maryland)
•
Group Dental Service of Maryland, Inc. (Maryland)
•
Florida Health Plan Administrators, LLC (Florida)
•
Aetna Better Health of Florida Inc. (Florida)
•
Carefree Insurance Services, Inc. (Florida)
•
Coventry Health Plan of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
•
First Health Group Corp. (Delaware)
•
First Health Life & Health Insurance Company (Texas)
•
Claims Administration Corp. (Maryland)
•
Coventry Health Care Workers Compensation, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Coventry Rehabilitation Services, Inc. (Delaware)
•
First Script Network Services, Inc. (Nevada)
•
FOCUS HealthCare Management, Inc. (Tennessee)
•
Medical Examinations of New York, P.C. (New York)
•
MetraComp, Inc. (Connecticut)
•
Continental Life Insurance Company of Brentwood, Tennessee (Tennessee)
•
American Continental Insurance Company (Tennessee)
•
Aetna Life Insurance Company (Connecticut)
•
AHP Holdings, Inc. (Connecticut)

•
Aetna Insurance Company of Connecticut (Connecticut)
•
AE Fourteen, Incorporated (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Life Assignment Company (Connecticut)
•
Aetna ACO Holdings Inc. (Delaware)
•
Innovation Health Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
•
Innovation Health Insurance Company (Virginia)
•
Innovation Health Plan, Inc. (Virginia)
•
Texas Health + Aetna Health Insurance Holding Company LLC (Texas)
•
Texas Health + Aetna Health Insurance Company (Texas)
•
Texas Health + Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Texas)
•
Banner Health and Aetna Health Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
•
Banner Health and Aetna Health Insurance Company (Arizona)
•
Banner Health and Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Arizona)
•
Sutter Health and Aetna Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
•
Sutter Health and Aetna Administrative Services LLC (Delaware)
•
Sutter Health and Aetna Insurance Company (California)
•
Allina Health and Aetna Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
•
Allina Health and Aetna Insurance Company (Minnesota)
•
PE Holdings, LLC (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Resources LLC (Delaware)
•
Canal Place, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Ventures, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Multi-Strategy 1099 Fund, LLC (Delaware)
•
Phoenix Data Solutions LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Financial Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Asset Advisors, LLC (Delaware)
•
U.S. Healthcare Properties, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Aetna Capital Management, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Partners Diversified Fund, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Workers’ Comp Access, LLC (Delaware)
•
Aetna Behavioral Health, LLC (Delaware)
•
Managed Care Coordinators, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Horizon Behavioral Services, LLC (Delaware)
•
Employee Assistance Services, LLC (Kentucky)
•
Health and Human Resource Center, Inc. (California)
•
Resources for Living, LLC (Texas)
•
The Vasquez Group Inc. (Illinois)
•
Work and Family Benefits, Inc. (New Jersey)
•
Aetna Card Solutions, LLC (Connecticut)
•
PayFlex Holdings, Inc. (Delaware)
•
PayFlex Systems USA, Inc. (Nebraska)
•
Aetna Health and Life Insurance Company (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Health Insurance Company (Pennsylvania)
•
Aetna Health Insurance Company of New York (New York)
•
AUSHC Holdings, Inc. (Connecticut)
•
PHPSNE Parent Corporation (Delaware)
•
Active Health Management, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Health Data & Management Solutions, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Aetna Integrated Informatics, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Health Re, Inc. (Vermont)
•
ASI Wings, LLC (Delaware)
•
Healthagen LLC (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Corporate Services LLC (Delaware)
•
Echo Merger Sub, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Aetna International Inc. (Connecticut)
•
Aetna Life & Casualty (Bermuda) Ltd. (Bermuda)
•
Aetna Global Holdings Limited (England & Wales)
•
Aetna Insurance (Hong Kong) Limited(Hong Kong)
•
Virtual Home Healthcare L.L.C. (Dubai)

•
Aetna Korea Ltd. (South Korea)
•
Minor Health Enterprise Co, Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Health Care Management Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Aetna Services (Thailand) Limited (Thailand)
•
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
•
Aetna Holdings (Thailand) Limited (Thailand)
•
Health Care Management Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Minor Health Enterprise Co, Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (Bermuda) Limited (Bermuda)
•
Goodhealth Worldwide (Global) Limited (Bermuda)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (Europe) Limited (England & Wales)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (Asia Pacific) Limited (Hong Kong)
•
Goodhealth Worldwide (Asia) Limited (Hong Kong)
•
Aetna Global Benefits Limited (DIFC, UAE)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (Middle East) LLC (UAE)
•
Pt. Aetna Global Benefits Indonesia (Indonesia)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (Bahamas) Limited (Bahamas)
•
Spinnaker Topco Limited (Bermuda)
•
Spinnaker Bidco Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Holdco (UK) Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (UK) Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Insurance Company Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Insurance (Singapore) Pte. Ltd. (Singapore)
•
Aetna Health Insurance Company of Europe DAC (Ireland)
•
Aetna (Shanghai) Enterprise Services Co. Ltd. (China)
•
Aetna (Beijing) Enterprise Management Services Co., Ltd. (China)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (Singapore) PTE. LTD. (Singapore)
•
Indian Health Organisation Private Limited (India)
•
PT Aetna Management Consulting (Indonesia)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (continued)
•
Alabama CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Alabama)
•
Alaska CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Alaska)
•
American Drug Stores Delaware, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Arkansas CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Arkansas)
•
CareCenter Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Caremark Rx, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Accordant Health Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
AdvancePCS SpecialtyRx, LLC (Delaware)
◦
AdvanceRx.com, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS Health, L.L.C. (Delaware)
▪
Caremark IPA, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
Caremark PhC, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark Ulysses Holding Corp. (New York)
◦
MemberHealth LLC (Delaware)
◦
UAC Holding, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Arizona Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Arizona)
◦
Caremark Arizona Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Caremark California Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Florida Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Florida)
◦
Caremark Florida Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Florida)
◦
Caremark Hawaii Mail Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Hawaii)
◦
Caremark Hawaii Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Hawaii)
◦
Caremark Illinois Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Illinois)
◦
CVS Caremark Advanced Technology Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Illinois)

◦
Caremark Illinois Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Irving Resource Center, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Kansas Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Kansas)
◦
Caremark Logistics, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Caremark Louisiana Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Louisiana)
◦
Caremark Maryland Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Maryland)
◦
Caremark Massachusetts Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Massachusetts)
◦
Caremark Michigan Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Michigan)
◦
Caremark Minnesota Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
Caremark New Jersey Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (New Jersey)
◦
Caremark North Carolina Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (North Carolina)
◦
Caremark Ohio Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
Caremark Pennsylvania Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
Caremark Redlands Pharmacy, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Repack, LLC (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Tennessee Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Tennessee)
◦
Caremark Texas Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Texas Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Washington Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Washington)
◦
Central Rx Services, LLC (Nevada)
◦
CVS Caremark TN SUTA, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Generation Health, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
NovoLogix, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS Alabama Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Alabama)
◦
CaremarkPCS, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CVS Caremark Part D Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Eckerd Corporation of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
Express Pharmacy Services of PA, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Ocean Acquisition Sub, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Coram LLC (Delaware)
◦
Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
T2 Medical, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Alabama (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Florida (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Greater D.C. (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Greater New York (New York)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Indiana (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Mississippi (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Nevada (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Northern California (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Southern California (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Southern Florida (Delaware)
▪
Coram Specialty Infusion Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Coram Rx, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Coram Healthcare Corporation of North Texas (Delaware)
◦
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Utah (Delaware)
◦
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Massachusetts (Delaware)
▪
Coram Alternate Site Services, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Geneva Woods Management, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Part D Holding Company, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Accendo Insurance Company (Utah)
◦
Silverscript Insurance Company (Tennessee)
◦
Connecticut CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Connecticut)
◦
CVS 2948 Henderson, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
CVS AL Distribution, L.L.C. (Alabama)
◦
CVS Albany, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
CVS AOC Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CVS AOC Corporation (California)
◦
CVS Care Concierge, LLC (Delaware)

◦
CVS Health Solutions LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Indiana, L.L.C. (Indiana)
◦
CVS International, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CCI Foreign, S.à R.L. (R.C.S. Luxembourg)
▪
Beauty Holdings, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Pamplona Saúde e Beleza LTDA (Brazil)
◦
CVS Kidney Care, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Health Services LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Advanced Technologies LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Home Dialysis LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Manchester NH, L.L.C. (New Hampshire)
◦
CVS Media Exchange LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Michigan, L.L.C. (Michigan)
◦
CVS Orlando FL Distribution, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
CVS PA Distribution, L.L.C. (Pennsylvania)
◦
CVS PR Center, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Puerto Rico CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
Caremark Puerto Rico, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
Caremark Puerto Rico Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
CVS RS Arizona, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Arizona CVS Stores, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS 3268 Gilbert, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS 3745 Peoria, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS Gilbert 3272, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS Rx Services, Inc. (New York)
◦
Busse CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Goodyear CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Sheffield Avenue CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
South Wabash CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Thomas Phoenix CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Washington Lamb CVS, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
CVS SC Distribution, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
CVS State Capital, L.L.C. (Maine)
◦
CVS TN Distribution, L.L.C. (Tennessee)
◦
CVS Transportation, L.L.C. (Indiana)
◦
CVS Vero FL Distribution, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
D.A.W., LLC (Massachusetts)
◦
Delaware CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Digital eHealth, LLC (Rhode Island)
◦
District of Columbia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (District of Columbia)
◦
Enterprise Patient Safety Organization, LLC (Rhode Island)
◦
E.T.B., INC. (Texas)
◦
Garfield Beach CVS, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Georgia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Georgia)
◦
German Dobson CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Grand St. Paul CVS, L.L.C. (Minnesota)
◦
Highland Park CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Holiday CVS, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
Hook-SupeRx, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Idaho CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Idaho)
◦
Iowa CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Iowa)
◦
Kansas CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Kansas)
◦
Kentucky CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Kentucky)
◦
Longs Drug Stores California, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Louisiana CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Louisiana)
◦
Maryland CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Maryland)
◦
Melville Realty Company, Inc. (New York)
◦
CVS Bellmore Avenue, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
MinuteClinic, L.L.C. (Delaware)

◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Alabama, L.L.C. (Alabama)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Arizona, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Florida, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Georgia, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Hawaii, L.L.C. (Hawaii)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Illinois, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Kentucky, L.L.C. (Kentucky)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Louisiana, L.L.C. (Louisiana)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Maine, L.L.C. (Maine)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Maryland, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Massachusetts, LLC (Massachusetts)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Nebraska, L.L.C. (Nebraska)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of New Hampshire, L.L.C. (New Hampshire)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of New Mexico, L.L.C. (New Mexico)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Ohio, LLC (Ohio)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Oklahoma, LLC (Oklahoma)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Oregon, LLC (Oregon)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Pennsylvania, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Rhode Island, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of South Carolina, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Texas, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Utah, L.L.C. (Utah)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Virginia, LLC (Virginia)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Washington, LLC (Oregon)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Wisconsin, L.L.C. (Wisconsin)
◦
MinuteClinic Online Diagnostic Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Physician Practice of Texas (Texas)
◦
MinuteClinic Telehealth Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Mississippi CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Mississippi)
◦
Missouri CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Missouri)
◦
Montana CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Montana)
◦
Nebraska CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Nebraska)
◦
New Jersey CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (New Jersey)
◦
North Carolina CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (North Carolina)
◦
Ohio CVS Stores, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
Oklahoma CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Oklahoma)
◦
Omnicare, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
ACS ACQCO CORP. (Delaware)
▪
Advanced Care Scripts, Inc. (Florida)
◦
Omnicare Holding Company (Delaware)
▪
Evergreen Pharmaceutical of California, Inc. (California)
▪
JHC Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy, LLC (Alaska)
◦
Geneva Woods Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Retail Pharmacy LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods LTC Pharmacy, LLC
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Wyoming, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Washington, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Alaska, LLC (Delaware)
▪
AMC - Tennessee, LLC (Delaware)
▪
CHP Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
•
Home Pharmacy Services, LLC (Missouri)
▪
CP Acquisition, LLC (Oklahoma)
▪
Managed Healthcare, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Med World Acquisition Corp. (Delaware)
▪
Medical Arts Health Care, LLC (Georgia)
▪
MHHP Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
NCS Healthcare, LLC (Delaware)
•
NCS Healthcare of South Carolina, LLC (Ohio)

•
NCS Healthcare of Tennessee, LLC (Ohio)
•
NCS Healthcare of Kentucky, Inc. (Oh
•
NCS Healthcare of Montana, LLC (Ohio)
•
NCS Healthcare of New Mexico, LLC (Ohio)
•
UNI-Care Health Services of Maine, LLC (New Hampshire)
▪
NeighborCare, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
•
Three Forks Apothecary, LLC (Kentucky)
•
NeighborCare Holdings, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Kentucky LLC (Delaware)
◦
NeighborCare Services Corporation (Delaware)
▪
D & R Pharmaceutical Services LLC (Kentucky)
▪
NeighborCare Pharmacy Services, Inc. (Delaware)
•
APS Acquisition LLC (Delaware)
•
ASCO HealthCare, LLC (Maryland)
•
Badger Acquisition LLC (Delaware)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Minnesota LLC (Delaware)
▪
Merwin Long Term Care, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Ohio LLC (Delaware)
•
Best Care LTC Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
•
Care Pharmaceutical Services, LP (Delaware)
•
CCRx Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Continuing Care Rx, LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
CCRx of North Carolina LLC (Delaware)
•
Compscript, LLC (Florida)
◦
Campo’s Medical Pharmacy, LLC (Louisiana)
•
Enloe Drugs, LLC (Delaware)
•
Evergreen Pharmaceutical, LLC (Washington)
•
Home Care Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
•
Interlock Pharmacy Systems, LLC (Missouri)
•
Langsam Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
LCPS Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacy of Tennessee LLC (Delaware)
•
Lobos Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
•
Lo-Med Prescription Services, LLC (Ohio)
◦
ZS Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
•
NCS Healthcare of Illinois, LLC (Ohio)
•
NCS Healthcare of Iowa, LLC (Ohio)
◦
Martin Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
•
NCS Healthcare of Kansas, LLC (Ohio)
•
NCS Healthcare of Ohio, LLC (Ohio)
•
NCS Healthcare of Wisconsin, LLC (Ohio)
•
North Shore Pharmacy Services LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare Indiana Partnership Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare of New York, LLC (Delaware)
◦
NeighborCare of Indiana, LLC (Indiana)
▪
Grandview Pharmacy, LLC (Indiana)
◦
NeighborCare of Virginia, LLC (Virginia)
•
Omnicare Pharmacies of Pennsylvania West LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
Omnicare Pharmacies of Pennsylvania East LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare Pharmacy and Supply Services LLC (South Dakota)
•
Omnicare Pharmacy of the Midwest, LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare Property Management, LLC (Delaware)
•
Pharmacy Consultants, LLC (South Carolina)
•
PRN Pharmaceutical Services, LP (Delaware)
•
Roeschen’s Healthcare LLC (Wisconsin)

◦
PP Acquisition Company LLC (Delaware)
•
Specialized Pharmacy Services, LLC (Michigan)
•
Value Health Care Services LLC (Delaware)
•
VAPS Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
•
Westhaven Services Co, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NIV Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
OCR Services, LLC (Delaware)
•
Shore Pharmaceutical Providers, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of Nevada, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacies of the Great Plains Holding, LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare of Nebraska LLC (Delaware)
▪
Pharmacy Associates of Glenn Falls, LLC (New York)
▪
Sterling Healthcare Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Superior Care Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
▪
TCPI Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
UC Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Weber Medical Systems LLC (Delaware)
▪
Williamson Drug Company, LLC (Virginia)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (continued)
◦
Oregon CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Oregon)
◦
Pennsylvania CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Pennsylvania)
◦
ProCare Pharmacy Direct, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
ProCare Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Rhode Island)
◦
Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Rhode Island CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Rhode Island)
◦
South Carolina CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
Tennessee CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Tennessee)
◦
Utah CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Utah)
◦
Vermont CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Vermont)
◦
Virginia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Virginia)
◦
Warm Springs Road CVS, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
Washington CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Washington)
◦
Wellpartner, LLC (Delaware)
◦
West Virginia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (West Virginia)
◦
Wisconsin CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Wisconsin)
◦
Woodward Detroit CVS, L.L.C. (Michigan)

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the following Registration Statements:
(1) Registration Statement (Form S-3ASR No. 333-217596) of CVS Health Corporation, and
(2) Registration Statements (Form S-8 Nos. 333-230035, 333-228622, 333-167746, 333-217853, 333-208805, 333-141481, 333-139470, 333-63664, 333-
91253, 333-49407, 333-34927, and 333-28043) of CVS Health Corporation;
of our reports dated February 18, 2020, with respect to the consolidated financial statements of CVS Health Corporation and the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting of CVS Health Corporation included in this Annual Report (Form 10-K) of CVS Health Corporation for the year ended December 31,
2019.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
Boston, Massachusetts 
February 18, 2020

Exhibit 31.1
Certification
I, Larry J. Merlo, President and Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of CVS Health Corporation;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date:
February 18, 2020
By:
/S/     LARRY J. MERLO
Larry J. Merlo
President and Chief Executive Officer

Exhibit 31.2
Certification
 
I, Eva C. Boratto, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CVS Health Corporation, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of CVS Health Corporation;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 18, 2020
By:
/S/     EVA C. BORATTO
Eva C. Boratto
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

Exhibit 32.1
 
CERTIFICATION
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the Annual Report of CVS Health Corporation (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the
period ended December 31, 2019 (the “Report”) solely for the purpose of complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
I, Larry J. Merlo, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company, certify that, to the best of my knowledge:
1. the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act; and
2. the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: February 18, 2020
/S/    LARRY J. MERLO
Larry J. Merlo
President and Chief Executive Officer
 

Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATION
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the Annual Report of CVS Health Corporation (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the
period ended December 31, 2019 (the “Report”) solely for the purpose of complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
I, Eva C. Boratto, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company, certify that, to the best of my knowledge:
1. the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act; and
2. the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: February 18, 2020
/S/    EVA C. BORATTO
Eva C. Boratto
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
