UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
        (Mark One)
☑ 
 ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020
or
☐ 
 TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from _________ to_________
Commission file number: 001-01011
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
05-0494040
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
One CVS Drive,
Woonsocket,
Rhode Island
02895
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(401) 765-1500
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share
CVS
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
☑
Yes
☐
No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
☐
Yes
☑
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90 days.
☑
Yes
☐
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405
of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files).
☑
Yes
☐
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or
an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging
growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☑
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised
financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over
financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report.
☑
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).
☐
Yes
☑
No
The aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates was approximately $84,719,366,378 as of June 30, 2020, based on the closing price of the
common stock on the New York Stock Exchange. For purposes of this calculation, only executive officers and directors are deemed to be affiliates of the registrant.
As of February 8, 2021, the registrant had 1,311,354,926 shares of common stock outstanding.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The following materials are incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K:
Information contained in the definitive proxy statement for CVS Health Corporation’s 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 (the “Proxy Statement”), is incorporated by reference in Parts III and IV to the extent
described therein.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
Item 1:
Business
2
Item 1A:
Risk Factors
32
Item 1B:
Unresolved Staff Comments
61
Item 2:
Properties
61
Item 3:
Legal Proceedings
61
Item 4:
Mine Safety Disclosures
62
Information about our Executive Officers
63
Part II
Item 5:
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
64
Item 6:
Reserved
65
Item 7:
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
66
Item 7A:
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
97
Item 8:
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
100
Item 9:
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
176
Item 9A:
Controls and Procedures
176
Item 9B:
Other Information
177
Part III
Item 10:
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
177
Item 11:
Executive Compensation
177
Item 12:
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
177
Item 13:
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
178
Item 14:
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
178
Part IV
Item 15:
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
179
Item 16:
Form 10-K Summary
183
Signatures
184

Unless the context otherwise requires, references to the terms “we,” “our” or “us” used throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “10-K”) refer to CVS
Health Corporation (a Delaware corporation) (“CVS Health”) and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”). References to competitors and other companies
throughout this 10-K, including the information incorporated herein by reference, are for illustrative or comparison purposes only and do not indicate that these
companies are the Company’s or any segment’s only competitors or closest competitors.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Reform Act”) provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements, so long as (1) those statements
are identified as forward-looking, and (2) the statements are accompanied by meaningful cautionary statements that identify important factors that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those discussed in the statement. We want to take advantage of these safe harbor provisions.
Certain information contained in this 10-K is forward-looking within the meaning of the Reform Act or SEC rules. This information includes, but is not limited to:
“Outlook for 2021” of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) included in Item 7, “Quantitative and
Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” included in Item 7A, “Government Regulation” included in Item 1, and “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A. In
addition, throughout this 10-K and our other reports and communications, we use the following words or variations or negatives of these words and similar
expressions when we intend to identify forward-looking statements:
· Anticipates
· Believes
· Can
· Continue
· Could
· Estimates
· Evaluate
· Expects
· Explore
· Forecast
· Guidance
· Intends
· Likely
· May
· Might
· Outlook
· Plans
· Potential
· Predict
· Probable
· Projects
· Seeks
· Should
· View
· Will
All statements addressing the future operating performance of CVS Health or any segment or any subsidiary and/or future events or developments, including
statements relating to the projected impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) on the Company’s businesses, investment portfolio, operating results, cash
flows and/or financial condition, statements relating to corporate strategy, statements relating to future revenue, operating income or adjusted operating income,
earnings per share or adjusted earnings per share, Pharmacy Services segment business, sales results and/or trends and/or operations, Retail/LTC segment
business, sales results and/or trends and/or operations, Health Care Benefits segment business, sales results and/or trends, medical cost trends, medical
membership, Medicare Part D membership, medical benefit ratios and/or operations, incremental investment spending, interest expense, effective tax rate,
weighted-average share count, cash flow from operations, net capital expenditures, cash available for debt repayment, integration synergies, net synergies,
integration costs, enterprise modernization, transformation, leverage ratio, cash available for enhancing shareholder value, inventory reduction, turn rate and/or
loss rate, debt ratings, the Company’s ability to attract or retain customers and clients, store development and/or relocations, new product development, and the
impact of industry and regulatory developments, as well as statements expressing optimism or pessimism about future operating results or events, are forward-
looking statements within the meaning of the Reform Act.
Forward-looking statements rely on a number of estimates, assumptions and projections concerning future events, and are subject to a number of significant risks
and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements. Many of these risks and uncertainties and other
factors are outside our control. Certain of these risks and uncertainties and other factors are described under “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K;
these are not the only risks and uncertainties we face. There can be no assurance that the Company has identified all the risks that affect it. Additional risks and
uncertainties not presently known to the Company or that the Company currently believes to be immaterial also may adversely affect the Company’s businesses. If
any of those risks or uncertainties develops into actual events, those events or circumstances could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s businesses,
operating results, cash flows, financial condition and/or stock price, among other effects.
You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date of this 10-K, and we disclaim any
intention or obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, uncertainties or otherwise.
1

Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1. Business.
Overview
CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”), is a diversified health services
company united around a common purpose of helping people on their path to better health. In an increasingly connected and digital world, we are meeting people
wherever they are and changing health care to meet their needs. The Company has more than 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 walk-in medical clinics, a
leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 105 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving more than one million
patients per year and expanding specialty pharmacy services. We also serve an estimated 34 million people through traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan
(“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall health care
costs.
On November 28, 2018 (the “Aetna Acquisition Date”), the Company acquired Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”). As a result of the acquisition of Aetna (the “Aetna
Acquisition”), the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment. Certain aspects of Aetna’s operations, including products for which the Company no longer
solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products, are included in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment. The
consolidated financial statements reflect Aetna’s results subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
The Company has four reportable segments: Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC, Health Care Benefits and Corporate/Other.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world. Beginning in March 2020, the effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic began to emerge in the U.S. The Company executed preparedness plans to maintain continuity of its operations, including transitioning many
office-based colleagues to a remote work environment and installing protective equipment in our retail pharmacies. The Company also provided enhanced benefits
to its colleagues, including bonuses to frontline colleagues, dependent care financial assistance, paid sick leave for part-time colleagues and paid time off to
colleagues who test positive or are quarantined due to exposure to COVID-19.
Our strong local presence and scale in communities across the country enabled us to play an indispensable role in the national response to COVID-19, as well as
provide seamless support for our customers wherever they needed us: in our CVS locations, in their homes, and virtually. The Company offered COVID-19
diagnostic testing at more than 4,000 CVS Pharmacy  locations as of December 31, 2020 and launched critical diagnostic testing for the vulnerable senior
population in long-term care facilities in partnership with three states. The Company was also selected to administer COVID-19 vaccines in both long-term care
facilities and its retail pharmacies. The Company began administering COVID-19 vaccinations in long-term care facilities and in certain of its retail pharmacies
during December 2020 and February 2021, respectively, and expects to play a significant role in COVID-19 vaccine administration in the future. In the Health Care
Benefits segment, the Company also expanded benefit coverage to its members, including cost-sharing waivers for COVID-19 related treatments, as well as
assistance to members through premium credits, telehealth cost-sharing waivers and other investments.
The impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition in the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as
information regarding certain expected impacts of COVID-19 on the Company, is discussed throughout this 10-K.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease
management services and medical spend management. The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions,
government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care (“Managed Medicaid”) plans, plans offered on public health insurance exchanges
(“Public Exchanges”) and private health insurance exchanges (“Private Exchanges” and together with Public Exchanges, “Insurance Exchanges”) and other
sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States. The
®
2

Pharmacy Services segment includes retail specialty pharmacy stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding
pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s PBM filled or managed 2.1 billion
prescriptions on a 30-day equivalent basis.
PBM Services
The Company dispenses prescription drugs directly through its mail order dispensing and specialty mail order pharmacies and through pharmacies in its retail
network. All prescriptions processed by the Company are analyzed, processed and documented by the Company’s proprietary prescription management systems.
These systems provide essential features and functionality to allow plan members to utilize their prescription drug benefits. These systems also streamline the
process by which prescriptions are processed by staff and network pharmacists by enhancing review of various items through automation, including plan eligibility,
early refills, duplicate dispensing, appropriateness of dosage, drug interactions or allergies, over-utilization and potential fraud.
Plan Design Offerings and Administration
The Company administers pharmacy benefit plans for clients who contract with it to facilitate prescription drug coverage and claims processing for their eligible
plan members. The Company assists its PBM clients in designing pharmacy benefit plans that help improve health outcomes while minimizing the costs to the
client. The Company also assists PBM clients in monitoring the effectiveness of their plans through frequent, informal communications, the use of proprietary
software, as well as through formal annual, quarterly and sometimes monthly performance reviews.
The Company makes recommendations to help PBM clients design benefit plans that promote the use of lower cost, clinically appropriate drugs and helps its PBM
clients control costs by recommending plan designs that encourage the use of generic equivalents of brand name drugs when such equivalents are available. Clients
also have the option, through plan design, to further lower their pharmacy benefit plan costs by setting different member payment levels for different products on
their drug lists or “formularies,” which helps guide members to choose lower cost alternatives through appropriate financial incentives.
Formulary Management
The Company utilizes an independent panel of doctors, pharmacists and other medical experts, referred to as the CVS Caremark National Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committee, to review and approve the selection of drugs that meet the Company’s standards of safety and efficacy for inclusion on one of the
Company’s template formularies. The Company’s formularies provide recommended products in numerous drug classes to help ensure member access to clinically
appropriate drugs with alternatives within a class under the client’s pharmacy benefit plan, while helping to drive the lowest net cost for clients that select one of
the Company’s formularies. To help improve clinical outcomes for members and clients, the Company conducts ongoing, independent reviews of all drugs,
including those appearing on the formularies and generic equivalent products. Many of the Company’s clients choose to adopt a template formulary offering as part
of their plan design. PBM clients are given capabilities to offer real time benefits information for a member’s specific plan design, provided digitally at the point of
prescribing, at the pharmacy and directly to members.
Retail Pharmacy Network Management Services
The Company maintains a national network of approximately 66,000 retail pharmacies, consisting of approximately 40,000 chain pharmacies (which includes CVS
Pharmacy locations) and approximately 26,000 independent pharmacies, in the United States, including Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam and the U.S.
Virgin Islands. When a customer fills a prescription in a retail pharmacy, the pharmacy sends prescription data electronically to the Company from the point-of-
sale. This data interfaces with the Company’s proprietary prescription management systems, which verify relevant plan member data and eligibility, while also
performing a drug utilization review to help evaluate clinical appropriateness and safety and confirming that the pharmacy will receive payment for the
prescription. The Company also offers a performance program for non-Medicare customers, which can be implemented with either the Company’s broad, national
network or with any managed network (as allowed by applicable laws and regulations). Under the program, high performing pharmacies are eligible to receive an
incremental positive performance payment. The program aligns with key Healthcare Effectiveness Data Information Set measures utilized by the U.S. Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) and is funded by client fees. 
Mail Order Pharmacy Services
The Pharmacy Services segment operates mail order dispensing pharmacies in the United States. Plan members or their prescribers submit prescriptions or refill
requests, primarily for maintenance medications, to these pharmacies, and staff pharmacists review these prescriptions and refill requests with the assistance of the
Company’s prescription management systems. This review may involve communications with the prescriber and, with the prescriber’s approval when required, can
result in generic substitution, therapeutic interchange or other actions designed to help reduce cost and/or improve quality of
3

treatment. The Company’s mail order dispensing pharmacies have been awarded Mail Service Pharmacy accreditation from URAC, a health care accrediting
organization that establishes quality standards for the health care industry.
Specialty Pharmacy and Infusion Services
The Pharmacy Services segment operates specialty mail order pharmacies, retail specialty pharmacy stores and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services
in the United States. The specialty mail order pharmacies are used for delivery of advanced medications to individuals with chronic or genetic diseases and
disorders. The Company’s specialty mail order pharmacies also have been awarded Specialty Pharmacy accreditation from URAC. Substantially all of the
Company’s specialty mail order pharmacies also have been accredited by The Joint Commission, which is an independent, not-for-profit organization that accredits
and certifies health care programs and organizations in the United States.
Clinical Services
The Company offers multiple clinical programs and services to help clients manage overall pharmacy and health care costs in a clinically appropriate manner.
These programs are primarily designed to promote better health outcomes and to help target inappropriate medication utilization and non-adherence to medication,
each of which may result in adverse medical events that negatively affect member health and client pharmacy and medical spend. These programs include
utilization management (“UM”), medication management, quality assurance, adherence and counseling programs to complement the client’s plan design and
clinical strategies. To help address prescription opioid abuse and misuse, the Company introduced an industry-leading UM approach that limits to seven days the
supply of opioids dispensed for certain acute prescriptions for patients who are new to therapy, limits the daily dosage of opioids dispensed based on the strength of
the opioid and requires the use of immediate-release formulations of opioids before extended-release opioids are dispensed. The Company’s Pharmacy Advisor
program facilitates pharmacist counseling, both face-to-face and over the telephone, to help participating plan members with certain chronic diseases, such as
diabetes and cardiovascular conditions, to identify gaps in care, adhere to their prescribed medications and manage their health conditions. The Company also has
digital connectivity that helps to lower drug costs for patients by providing expanded visibility to lower cost alternatives through enhanced analytics and data
sharing.
Disease Management Programs
The Company’s clinical programs and services utilize advanced protocols and offer clients convenience in working with health care providers (“providers”) and
other third parties. The Company’s UM program covers diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Parkinson’s disease, seizure disorders and multiple sclerosis and is
accredited by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (“NCQA”), a private, not-for-profit organization that evaluates, accredits and certifies a wide range of
health care organizations.
Medical Benefit Management
The Company’s NovoLogix online preauthorization tool helps identify and capture cost savings opportunities for specialty drugs billed under the medical benefit
by identifying outliers to appropriate dosages and costs, and helps to ensure clinically appropriate use of specialty drugs.
Group Purchasing Organization Services
The Company operates a group purchasing organization that negotiates pricing for the purchase of pharmaceuticals and rebates with pharmaceutical manufacturers
on behalf of its participants. The Company also provides various administrative, management and reporting services to pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Pharmacy Services Information Systems
The Pharmacy Services segment’s claim adjudication platform incorporates architecture that centralizes the data generated from filling mail order prescriptions,
adjudicating retail pharmacy claims and delivering other solutions to PBM clients. The Health Engagement Engine  technology and proprietary clinical algorithms
help connect the various parts of the enterprise and serve an essential role in cost management and health improvement, leveraging cloud-native technologies and
practices. This capability transforms pharmacy data into actionable interventions at key points of care, including in retail, mail and specialty pharmacies as well as
in customer care call center operations, leveraging our enterprise data platform to improve the quality of care. The technology leverages assisted artificial
intelligence to deliver insights to the business and bring automation to otherwise manual tasks. Specialty services also connects with our claim adjudication
platform and various health plan adjudication platforms with a centralized architecture servicing many clients and members. Operating services, such as Specialty
Expedite , provide an interconnected onboarding solution for specialty medications and branding solutions ranging from fulfillment to total patient management.
These services are managed through our new innovative specialty workflow and web platform.
®
® 
®
®
4

Pharmacy Services Clients
The Company’s Pharmacy Services clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, Medicare Part D
plans, Managed Medicaid plans and plans offered on Insurance Exchanges and other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States. Pharmaceuticals
are provided to eligible members in benefit plans maintained by clients and utilize the Company’s information systems, among other things, to help perform safety
checks, drug interaction screening and identify opportunities for generic substitution. Substantially all of the Pharmacy Services segment’s revenues are generated
from dispensing and managing prescription drugs to eligible members in benefit plans maintained by clients. In 2018, revenues from Aetna accounted for
approximately 9.8% of the Company’s consolidated total revenues. On the Aetna Acquisition Date, Aetna became a wholly-owned subsidiary of CVS Health.
Subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date, revenues from Aetna continue to be reported in the Pharmacy Services segment; however, these revenues are eliminated
in the consolidated financial statements.
Pharmacy Services Seasonality
The majority of Pharmacy Services segment revenues are not seasonal in nature.
Pharmacy Services Competition
The Company believes the primary competitive factors in the pharmacy services industry include: (i) the ability to negotiate favorable discounts from drug
manufacturers as well as to negotiate favorable discounts from, and access to, retail pharmacy networks; (ii) the ability to identify and apply effective cost
management programs utilizing clinical strategies, including the development and utilization of preferred formularies; (iii) the ability to market PBM products and
services; (iv) the commitment to provide flexible, clinically-oriented services to clients and be responsive to clients’ needs; (v) the quality, scope and costs of
products and services offered to clients and their members; and (vi) operational excellence in delivering services. The Pharmacy Services segment has a significant
number of competitors offering PBM services, including large, national PBM companies (e.g., Prime Therapeutics and MedImpact), PBMs owned by large
national health plans (e.g., the Express Scripts business of Cigna Corporation and the OptumRx business of UnitedHealth) and smaller standalone PBMs.
Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of health and wellness products and general merchandise, provides health care services
through its MinuteClinic  walk-in medical clinics, provides medical diagnostic testing, administers vaccinations for illnesses such as influenza, COVID-19 and
shingles and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations, which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other
ancillary services to chronic care facilities and other care settings. As of December 31, 2020, the Retail/LTC segment operated more than 9,900 retail locations,
approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and on-site pharmacies. During the year ended
December 31, 2020, the Retail/LTC segment filled 1.5 billion prescriptions on a 30-day equivalent basis. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company
dispensed approximately 27.1% of the total retail pharmacy prescriptions in the United States.
Retail/LTC Products and Services
A typical retail store sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of high-quality, nationally advertised brand name and proprietary brand merchandise. Front
store categories include over-the-counter drugs, consumer health products, beauty products and personal care products. LTC operations include distribution of
prescription drugs and related consulting and ancillary services. The Company purchases merchandise from numerous manufacturers and distributors. The
Company believes that competitive sources are readily available for substantially all of the products carried in its retail stores and the loss of any one supplier
would not likely have a material effect on the Retail/LTC segment. The Company’s MinuteClinic locations offer a variety of health care services.
®
5

Retail/LTC revenues by major product group are as follows:
Percentage of Revenues
2020
2019
2018
Pharmacy 
76.9 %
76.7 %
76.4 %
Front store and other 
23.1 %
23.3 %
23.6 %
100.0 %
100.0 %
100.0 %
(1)
Pharmacy includes LTC sales and sales in pharmacies within Target Corporation (“Target”) and other retail stores.
(2)
“Other” represents less than 10% of the “Front store and other” revenue category.
Pharmacy
Pharmacy revenues represented approximately three-fourths of Retail/LTC segment revenues in each of 2020, 2019 and 2018. The Company believes that retail
pharmacy operations will continue to represent a critical part of the Company’s business due to industry demographics, e.g., an aging American population
consuming a greater number of prescription drugs, prescription drugs being used more often as the first line of defense for managing illness, the introduction of
new pharmaceutical products, the need for vaccinations and Medicare Part D growth. The Company believes the retail pharmacy business benefits from investment
in both people and technology, as well as innovative collaborations with health plans, PBMs and providers. Given the nature of prescriptions, consumers want their
prescriptions filled accurately by professional pharmacists using the latest tools and technology, and ready when promised. Consumers also need medication
management programs and better information to help them get the most out of their health care dollars. To assist consumers with these needs, the Company has
introduced integrated pharmacy health care services that provide an earlier, easier and more effective approach to engaging consumers in behaviors that can help
lower costs, improve health and save lives.
Front Store
Front store revenues reflect the Company’s strategy of innovating with new and unique products and services, using innovative personalized marketing and
adjusting the mix of merchandise to match customers’ needs and preferences. A key component of the front store strategy is the ExtraCare  card program, which is
one of the largest and most successful retail loyalty programs in the United States. The ExtraCare program allows the Company to balance marketing efforts so it
can reward its best customers by providing them with automatic sale prices, customized coupons, ExtraBucks  rewards and other benefits. The Company also
offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass , under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course of the subscription
period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. The Company continues to launch and enhance new and exclusive
brands to create unmatched offerings in beauty products and deliver other unique product offerings, including a full range of high-quality CVS Health  and other
proprietary brand products that are only available through CVS stores. The Company currently carries approximately 6,000 CVS Health and proprietary brand
products, which accounted for approximately 24% of front store revenues during 2020.
MinuteClinic
As of December 31, 2020, the Company operated approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic locations in the United States. The clinics are staffed by nurse practitioners
and physician assistants who utilize nationally established guidelines to deliver a variety of health care services. Payors value these clinics because they provide
convenient, high-quality, cost-effective care, in many cases offering an attractive alternative to more expensive sites of care. MinuteClinic is collaborating with the
Pharmacy Services and Health Care Benefits segments to help meet the needs of CVS Caremark’s client plan members and the Company’s health plan members by
offering programs that can improve member health and lower costs. MinuteClinic also maintains relationships with leading hospitals, clinics and physicians in the
communities we serve to support and enhance quality, access and continuity of care.
On-site Pharmacies
The Company also operates a limited number of pharmacies located at client sites, which provide certain health plan members and customers with a convenient
alternative for filling their prescriptions.
Medical Diagnostic Testing
The Company provides medical diagnostic testing primarily through its COVID-19 testing sites located at CVS Pharmacy locations as well as in long-term care
facilities, at community-based testing sites in underserved areas, large-scale rapid test sites in select states, and through its Return Ready
solution.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
®
®
®
®
SM 
6

Long-term Care Pharmacy Operations
The Retail/LTC segment provides LTC pharmacy services through the Omnicare  business. Omnicare’s customers consist of skilled nursing facilities, assisted
living facilities, independent living communities, hospitals, correctional facilities, and other health care service providers. The Company provides pharmacy
consulting, including monthly patient drug therapy evaluations, to assist in compliance with state and federal regulations and provide proprietary clinical and health
management programs. It also provides pharmaceutical case management services for retirees, employees and dependents who have drug benefits under corporate-
sponsored health care programs.
Community Location Development
The addition of new community locations has played, and will continue to play, a key role in the Company’s continued growth and success. The Company’s
community location development program focuses on three areas: entering new service areas, adding locations within existing service areas and relocating to more
convenient sites. During 2020, the Company opened approximately 55 new community locations, relocated approximately 20 locations, converted approximately
600 locations into HealthHUB locations and closed approximately 90 locations.
The Company operated over 650 HealthHUB locations as of December 31, 2020. HealthHUBs have a redesigned format that provide enhanced services, offer a
care concierge and focus on health and wellness products. HealthHUBs are designed to meet consumer needs and improve the customer experience by providing
care that complements physician practices and hospital systems, enabling improved health outcomes and reducing overall health care costs. The Company expects
to continue HealthHUB conversions through 2021 and into 2022.
During the last five years, the Company opened approximately 640 new and relocated retail pharmacies, and acquired approximately 225 locations. The Company
believes that continuing to assess the appropriateness of its national footprint and identifying more accessible locations are essential components of competing
effectively in the current health care environment. As a result, the Company believes that its community location development program is an integral part of its
ability to meet the needs of customers and maintain its leadership position in the pharmacy marketplace given the changing health care landscape.
Retail/LTC Information Systems
The Company has continued to invest in information systems to enable it to deliver exceptional customer service, enhance safety and quality, and expand patient
care services while lowering operating costs. The proprietary WeCARE Workflow tool supports pharmacy teams by prioritizing work to meet customer
expectations, facilitating prescriber outreach, and seamlessly integrating clinical programs. This solution delivers improved efficiency and enhances customer
experience, as well as provides a framework to accommodate the evolution of pharmacy practice and the expansion of clinical programs. Our Health Engagement
Engine technology and data science clinical algorithms enable the Company to help identify opportunities for pharmacists to deliver face-to-face counseling
regarding patient health and safety matters, including medication adherence issues, gaps in care and management of certain chronic health conditions. The
Company’s digital strategy is to empower the consumer to navigate their pharmacy experience and manage their condition through integrated online and mobile
solutions that offer utility and convenience. The Company’s LTC digital technology suite, Omniview , improves the efficiency of customers’ operations with tools
that include executive dashboards, pre-admission pricing, electronic ordering of prescription refills, proof-of-delivery tracking, access to patient profiles, receipt
and management of facility bills, and real-time validation of Medicare Part D coverage, among other capabilities.
Retail/LTC Customers
The success of the Retail/LTC segment’s businesses is dependent upon the Company’s ability to establish and maintain contractual relationships with pharmacy
benefit managers and other payors on acceptable terms. Substantially all of the Retail/LTC segment’s pharmacy revenues are derived from pharmacy benefit
managers, managed care organizations (“MCOs”), government funded health care programs, commercial employers and other third-party payors. No single
Retail/LTC payor accounted for 10% or more of the Company’s consolidated total revenues in 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Retail/LTC Seasonality
The majority of Retail/LTC segment revenues, particularly pharmacy revenues, generally are not seasonal in nature. However, front store revenues tend to be
higher during the December holiday season. In addition, both pharmacy and front store revenues are affected by the timing and severity of the cough, cold and flu
season. Uncharacteristic or extreme weather conditions also can adversely affect consumer shopping patterns and Retail/LTC revenues, expenses and operating
results.
®
® 
 
®
7

During the year ended December 31, 2020, the quarterly earnings progression was also impacted by COVID-19. During March 2020, the Company experienced
greater use of 90-day prescriptions, early refills of maintenance medications and increased front store volume as consumers prepared for the COVID-19 pandemic.
Subsequent to March 2020, the Company experienced reduced customer traffic in its retail pharmacies and MinuteClinic locations due to shelter-in-place orders as
well as reduced new therapy prescriptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in the third quarter, the Company saw an increase in diagnostic testing
related to the COVID-19 pandemic and in December 2020, the Company began administering COVID-19 vaccinations in long-term care facilities.
Retail/LTC Competition
The retail pharmacy business is highly competitive. The Company believes that it competes principally on the basis of: (i) store location and convenience,
(ii) customer service and satisfaction, (iii) product selection and variety, and (iv) price. In the areas it serves, the Company competes with other drugstore chains
(e.g., Walgreens and Rite Aid), supermarkets, discount retailers (e.g., Walmart), independent pharmacies, restrictive pharmacy networks, membership
clubs, internet companies (e.g., Amazon), and retail health clinics (including urgent care centers), as well as mail order dispensing pharmacies.
LTC pharmacy services are highly regional or local in nature, and within a given geographic area of operation, highly competitive. The Company’s largest LTC
pharmacy competitor nationally is PharMerica. The Company also competes with numerous local and regional institutional pharmacies, pharmacies owned by
long-term care facilities and local retail pharmacies. Some states have enacted “freedom of choice” or “any willing provider” requirements as part of their state
Medicaid programs or in separate legislation, which may increase the competition that the Company faces in providing services to long-term care facility residents
in these states.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment is one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers, serving an estimated 34 million people as of
December 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals,
make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare
Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care management services and health information technology (“HIT”) products and services.
The Health Care Benefits segment also provided workers’ compensation administrative services through its Coventry Health Care Workers’ Compensation
business (“Workers’ Compensation business”) prior to the sale of this business on July 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer
groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly workers, health plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored
plans, labor groups and expatriates. For periods prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised only of the Company’s
SilverScript  PDP business.
Health Care Benefits Products and Services
The Company refers to insurance products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services
contract products (where the plan sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk of medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” Health Care Benefits products and
services consist of the following:
•
Commercial Medical: The Health Care Benefits segment offers point-of-service (“POS”), preferred provider organization (“PPO”), health maintenance
organization (“HMO”) and indemnity benefit (“Indemnity”) plans. Commercial medical products also include health savings accounts (“HSAs”) and
consumer-directed health plans that combine traditional POS or PPO and/or dental coverage, subject to a deductible, with an accumulating benefit account
(which may be funded by the plan sponsor and/or the member in the case of HSAs). Principal products and services are targeted specifically to large multi-site
national, mid-sized and small employers, individual insureds and expatriates. The Company offers medical stop loss insurance coverage for certain employers
who elect to self-insure their health benefits. Under medical stop loss insurance products, the Company assumes risk for costs associated with large individual
claims and/or aggregate loss experience within an employer’s plan above a pre-set annual threshold.
•
Government Medical: In select geographies, the Health Care Benefits segment offers Medicare Advantage plans, Medicare Supplement plans and prescription
drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries; participates in Medicaid and subsidized Children’s Health Insurance Programs (“CHIP”); and participates in
demonstration projects for members who are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid (“Duals”). These Government Medical products are further described
below:
®
8

•
Medicare Advantage: Through annual contracts with CMS, the Company offers HMO and PPO products for eligible individuals in certain geographic
areas through the Medicare Advantage program. Members typically receive enhanced benefits over traditional fee-for-service Medicare coverage
(“Original Medicare”), including reduced cost-sharing for preventive care, vision and other services. The Company offered network-based HMO
and/or PPO plans in 45 states and Washington, D.C. in 2020. The Company has expanded to 46 states and Washington, D.C. for 2021. For certain
qualifying employer groups, the Company offers Medicare PPO products nationally. When combined with the Company’s PDP product, these
national PPO plans form an integrated national Insured Medicare product for employers that provides medical and pharmacy benefits.
•
Medicare PDP: The Company is a national provider of drug benefits under the Medicare Part D prescription drug program. All Medicare eligible
individuals are eligible to participate in this voluntary prescription drug plan. Members typically receive coverage for certain prescription drugs,
usually subject to a deductible, co-insurance and/or co-payment. On November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone
PDPs to WellCare Health Plans, Inc. effective December 31, 2018. The Company provided administrative services to, and retained the financial
results of, the divested plans through 2019. Subsequent to 2019, the Company no longer retains the financial results of the divested plans.
•
Medicare Supplement: For certain Medicare eligible members, the Company offers supplemental coverage for certain health care costs not covered
by Original Medicare. The products included in the Medicare Supplement portfolio help to cover some of the gaps in Original Medicare, and include
coverage for Medicare deductibles and coinsurance amounts. The Company offered a wide selection of Medicare Supplement products in 49 states
and Washington, D.C. in 2020.
•
Medicaid and CHIP: The Company offers health care management services to individuals eligible for Medicaid and CHIP under multi-year contracts
with government agencies in various states that are subject to annual appropriations. CHIP are state-subsidized insurance programs that provide
benefits for families with uninsured children. The Company offered these services on an Insured or ASC basis in 16 states in 2020.
•
Duals: The Company provides health coverage to beneficiaries who are dually eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid coverage. These members
must meet certain income and resource requirements in order to qualify for this coverage. The Company coordinates 100% of the care for these
members and may provide them with additional services in order to manage their health care costs.
•
Specialty and Strategic Solutions: The Health Care Benefits segment has a portfolio of additional health products and services that complement its medical
products such as dental plans, behavioral health and employee assistance products, provider network access and vision products. The Company also has a
portfolio of transformative products and services aimed at creating a holistic and integrated approach to individual health and wellness. These products and
services complement the Commercial Medical and Government Medical products and aim to provide innovative solutions, create integrated experience
offerings and enable enhanced care delivery to customers.
Health Care Benefits Provider Networks
The Company contracts with physicians, hospitals and other providers for services they provide to the Company’s members. The Company uses a variety of
techniques designed to help encourage appropriate utilization of medical services (“utilization”) and maintain affordability of quality coverage. In addition to
contracts with providers for negotiated rates of reimbursement, these techniques include creating risk sharing arrangements that align economic incentives with
providers, the development and implementation of guidelines for the appropriate utilization and the provision of data to providers to enable them to improve health
care quality. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s underlying nationwide provider network had approximately 1.4 million participating providers. Other
providers in the Company’s provider networks also include laboratory, imaging, urgent care and other freestanding health facilities.
Health Care Benefits Quality Assessment
CMS uses a 5-star rating system to monitor Medicare health care and drug plans and ensure that they meet CMS’s quality standards. CMS uses this rating system
to provide Medicare beneficiaries with a tool that they can use to compare the overall quality of care and level of customer service of companies that provide
Medicare health care and drug plans. The rating system considers a variety of measures adopted by CMS, including quality of preventative services, chronic illness
management and overall customer satisfaction. See “Health Care Benefits Pricing” below in this Item 1 for further discussion of star ratings. The Company seeks
Health Plan accreditation for Aetna HMO plans from the NCQA. Health care plans seeking accreditation must pass a rigorous, comprehensive review and must
annually report on their performance.
9

Aetna Life Insurance Company (“ALIC”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, has received nationwide NCQA PPO Health Plan accreditation. As of
December 31, 2020, all of the Company’s Commercial HMO and all of ALIC’s PPO members who were eligible participated in HMOs or PPOs that are accredited
by the NCQA.
The Company’s provider selection and credentialing/re-credentialing policies and procedures are consistent with NCQA and URAC, as well as state and federal,
requirements. In addition, the Company is certified under the NCQA Credentials Verification Organization (“CVO”) certification program for all certification
options and has URAC CVO accreditation.
Quality assessment programs for contracted providers who participate in the Company’s networks begin with the initial review of health care practitioners.
Practitioners’ licenses and education are verified, and their work history is collected by the Company or in some cases by the practitioner’s affiliated group or
organization. The Company generally requires participating hospitals to be certified by CMS or accredited by The Joint Commission, the American Osteopathic
Association, or Det Norske Veritas Healthcare.
The Company also offers quality and outcome measurement programs, quality improvement programs, and health care data analysis systems to providers and
purchasers of health care services.
Health Care Benefits Information Systems
The Health Care Benefits segment currently operates and supports an end-to-end suite of information technology platforms to support member engagement,
enrollment, health benefit administration, care management, service operations, financial reporting and analytics. The multiple platforms are supported by an
integration layer to facilitate the transfer of real-time data. There is continued focus and investment in enterprise data platforms, cloud capabilities, digital products
to offer innovative solutions and a seamless experience to the Company’s members through mobile and web channels. The Company is making concerted
investments in emerging technology capabilities such as voice, artificial intelligence and robotics to further automate, reduce cost and improve the experience for
all of its constituents. The Health Care Benefits segment is utilizing the full breadth of the Company’s assets to build enterprise technology that will help guide our
members through their health care journey, provide them a high level of service, enable healthier outcomes and encourage them to take next best actions to lead
healthier lives.
Health Care Benefits Customers
Medical membership is dispersed throughout the United States, and the Company also serves medical members in certain countries outside the United States. The
Company offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, many of which are available
nationwide. Depending on the product, the Company markets to a range of customers including employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and
hourly workers, health plans, providers, governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. For additional information on medical
membership, see “Health Care Benefits Segment” in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (the “MD&A”)
included in Item 7 of this 10-K.
The Company markets both Commercial Insured and ASC products and services primarily to employers that sponsor the Company’s products for the benefit of
their employees and their employees’ dependents. Frequently, larger employers offer employees a choice among coverage options, from which the employee
makes his or her selection during a designated annual open enrollment period. Typically, employers pay all of the monthly premiums to the Company and,
through payroll deductions, obtain reimbursement from employees for a percentage of the premiums that is determined by each employer. Some Health Care
Benefits products are sold directly to employees of employer groups on a fully employee-funded basis. In some cases, the Company bills the covered individual
directly.
The Company offers Insured Medicare coverage on an individual basis as well as through employer groups to their retirees. Medicaid and CHIP members are
enrolled on an individual basis. The Company also offers Insured health care coverage to members who are dually-eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.
Health Care Benefits products are sold through: the Company’s sales personnel; independent brokers, agents and consultants who assist in the production and
servicing of business; and Private Exchanges. For large plan sponsors, independent consultants and brokers are frequently involved in employer health plan
selection decisions and sales. In some instances, the Company may pay commissions, fees and other amounts to brokers, agents, consultants and sales
representatives who place business with the Company. In certain cases, the customer pays the broker for services rendered, and the Company may facilitate that
arrangement by collecting the funds from the customer and transmitting them to the broker. The Company
10

supports marketing and sales efforts with an advertising program that may include television, radio, billboards, print media and social media, supplemented by
market research and direct marketing efforts.
The U.S. federal government is a significant customer of the Health Care Benefits segment through contracts with CMS for coverage of Medicare-eligible
individuals and federal employee-related benefit programs. Other than the contracts with CMS, the Health Care Benefits segment is not dependent upon a single
customer or a few customers the loss of which would have a significant effect on the earnings of the segment. The loss of business from any one, or a few,
independent brokers or agents would not have a material adverse effect on the earnings of the Health Care Benefits segment. In both 2020 and 2019, Health Care
Benefits segment revenues from the federal government accounted for 13% of the Company’s consolidated total revenues. Contracts with CMS for coverage of
Medicare-eligible individuals in the Health Care Benefits segment accounted for approximately 92% of the Company’s consolidated revenues from the federal
government in both 2020 and 2019. No single Health Care Benefits customer accounted for 10% or more of the Company’s consolidated total revenues in 2018.
Health Care Benefits Pricing
For Commercial Insured plans, contracts containing the pricing and other terms of the relationship are generally established in advance of the policy period and
typically have a duration of one year. Fees under ASC plans are generally fixed for a period of one year.
Generally, a fixed premium rate is determined at the beginning of the policy period for Commercial Insured plans. The Company typically cannot recover
unanticipated increases in health care and other benefit costs in the current policy period; however, it may consider prior experience for a product in the aggregate
or for a specific customer, among other factors, in determining premium rates for future policy periods. Where required by state laws, premium rates are filed and
approved by state regulators prior to contract inception. Future operating results could be adversely affected if the premium rates requested are not approved or
are adjusted downward or their approval is delayed by state or federal regulators.
The Company has Medicare Advantage and PDP contracts with CMS to provide HMO, PPO and prescription drug coverage to Medicare beneficiaries in certain
geographic areas. Under these annual contracts, CMS pays the Company a fixed per member (or “capitation”) payment and/or a portion of the premium, both of
which are based on membership and adjusted for demographic and health risk factors. CMS also considers inflation, changes in utilization patterns and average per
capita fee-for-service Medicare costs in the calculation of the fixed capitation payment or premium. PDP contracts also provide a risk-sharing arrangement with
CMS to limit the Company’s exposure to unfavorable expenses or benefit from favorable expenses. Amounts payable to the Company under the Medicare
arrangements are subject to annual revision by CMS, and the Company elects to participate in each Medicare service area or region on an annual basis. Premiums
paid to the Company for Medicare products are subject to federal government reviews and audits, which can result, and have resulted, in retroactive and
prospective premium adjustments and refunds to the government and/or members. In addition to payments received from CMS, some Medicare Advantage
products and all PDP products require a supplemental premium to be paid by the member or sponsoring employer. In some cases these supplemental premiums are
adjusted based on the member’s income and asset levels. Compared to Commercial Medical products, Medicare contracts generate higher per member per month
revenues and higher health care and other benefit costs.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) ties a portion of each
Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement to the plan’s “star ratings.” Plans must have a star rating of four or higher (out of five) to qualify for bonus payments.
CMS released the Company’s 2021 star ratings in October 2020. The Company’s 2021 star ratings will be used to determine which of the Company’s Medicare
Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2022. Based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2020, 83% of
the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2021 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars, consistent with 83% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage
members being in plans with 2020 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2019.
Rates for Medicare Supplement products are regulated at the state level and vary by state and plan.
Under Insured Medicaid contracts, state government agencies pay the Company fixed monthly rates per member that vary by state, line of business and
demographics; and the Company arranges, pays for and manages the health care services provided to Medicaid beneficiaries. These rates are subject to change by
each state, and, in some instances, provide for adjustment for health risk factors. CMS requires these rates to be actuarially sound. The Company also receives
fees from customers where it provides services under ASC Medicaid contracts. ASC Medicaid contracts generally are for periods of more than one year, and
certain of them contain performance incentives and limited financial risk sharing with respect to certain medical, financial
11

and operational metrics. Under these arrangements, performance is evaluated annually, with associated financial incentive opportunities, and financial risk share
obligations are typically limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company. Payments to the Company under Medicaid contracts are subject to
the annual appropriation process in the applicable state.
Under Duals contracts, the rate setting process is generally established by CMS in partnership with the state government agency participating in the
demonstration project. Both CMS and the state government agency may seek premium and other refunds under certain circumstances, including if the Company
fails to comply with CMS regulations or other contractual requirements.
The Company offers HMO and consumer-directed medical and dental plans to federal employees under the Federal Employees Health Benefits (“FEHB”) Program
and the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program. Premium rates and fees for those plans are subject to federal government review and audit,
which can result, and have resulted, in retroactive and prospective premium and fee adjustments and refunds to the government and/or members.
Beginning in 2014, the ACA imposed significant new industry-wide fees, assessments and taxes, including an annual levy known as the health insurer fee (the
“HIF”). The HIF applies for both 2020 and 2018 and was temporarily suspended for 2019. In December 2019, the HIF was repealed for calendar years after 2020.
For additional information on the ACA fees, assessments and taxes, see Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K. The Company’s
goal is to collect premiums and fees where possible, or solve for, all of the ACA-related fees, assessments and taxes.
Health Care Benefits Seasonality
For periods prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised only of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business. The quarterly
earnings and operating cash flows of the PDP business are impacted by the Medicare Part D benefit design and changes in the composition of PDP membership.
The Medicare Part D standard benefit design results in coverage that varies with a member’s cumulative annual out-of-pocket costs. The benefit design generally
results in employers or other entities that sponsor the Company’s products (“plan sponsors”) sharing a greater portion of the responsibility for total prescription
drug costs in the early part of the year. As a result, the PDP pay percentage or benefit ratio generally decreases and operating income generally increases as the year
progresses. For periods subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition, the Health Care Benefits segment’s quarterly operating income progression is also impacted by (i) the
seasonality of benefit costs which generally increase during the year as Insured members progress through their annual deductibles and out-of-pocket expense
limits and (ii) the seasonality of operating expenses, which are generally the highest during the fourth quarter due primarily to spending to support readiness for the
start of the upcoming plan year and marketing associated with Medicare annual enrollment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the quarterly earnings progression was also impacted by COVID-19. Beginning in mid-March, the health care system
experienced a significant reduction in utilization that is discretionary and the cancellation of elective medical procedures. Utilization remained below historical
levels through April, began to recover in May and June and reached more normal levels in the third and fourth quarters, with select geographies impacted by
COVID-19 waves. The impact of the deferral of non-essential care was partially offset by COVID-19 testing and treatment costs, as well as planned COVID-19
related investments.
Health Care Benefits Competition
The health care benefits industry is highly competitive, primarily due to a large number of for-profit and not-for-profit competitors, competitors’ marketing and
pricing and a proliferation of competing products, including new products that are continually being introduced into the marketplace. New entrants into the
marketplace, as well as consolidation within the industry, have contributed to and are expected to intensify the competitive environment. In addition, the rapid pace
of change as the industry evolves towards a consumer-focused retail marketplace, including Insurance Exchanges, and the increased use of technology to interact
with members, providers and customers, increase the risks the Company currently faces from new entrants and disruptive actions by existing competitors compared
to prior periods.
The Company believes that the significant factors that distinguish competing health plans include the perceived overall quality (including accreditation status),
quality of service, comprehensiveness of coverage, cost (including premium rates, provider discounts and member out-of-pocket costs), product design, financial
stability and ratings, breadth and quality of provider networks, ability to offer different provider network options, providers available in such networks, and
quality of member support and care management programs. The Company believes that it is competitive on each of these factors. The
12

Company’s ability to increase the number of persons covered by its health plans or to increase Health Care Benefits segment revenues is affected by its ability to
differentiate itself from its competitors on these factors. Competition may also affect the availability of services from providers, including primary care
physicians, specialists and hospitals.
Insured products compete with local and regional health care benefits plans, health care benefits and other plans sponsored by other large commercial health care
benefit insurance companies, health system owned health plans, new entrants into the marketplace and numerous for-profit and not-for-profit organizations
operating under licenses from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. The largest competitor in Medicare products is Original Medicare. Additional Health
Care Benefits segment competitors include other types of medical and dental provider organizations, various specialty service providers (including PBM services
providers), health care consultants, financial services companies, integrated health care delivery organizations (networks of providers who also coordinate
administrative services for and assume insurance risk of their members), third party administrators (“TPAs”), HIT companies and, for certain plans, programs
sponsored by the federal or state governments. Emerging competitors include start up health care benefits plans, technology companies, provider-owned health
plans, new joint ventures (including not-for-profit joint ventures among firms from multiple industries), technology firms, financial services firms that are
distributing competing products on their proprietary Private Exchanges, and consulting firms that are distributing competing products on their proprietary Private
Exchanges, as well as non-traditional distributors such as retail companies. The Company’s ability to increase the number of persons enrolled in Insured
Commercial Medical products also is affected by the desire and ability of employers to self-fund their health coverage.
The Health Care Benefits segment’s ASC plans compete primarily with other large commercial health care benefit companies, numerous for-profit and not-for-
profit organizations operating under licenses from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association and TPAs.
The Health Care Benefits segment’s international products compete with local, global and U.S.-based health plans and commercial health care benefit insurance
companies, many of whom are licensed in more geographies and have a longer operating history, better brand recognition and greater marketplace presence in
one or more geographies.
The provider solutions and HIT marketplaces and products are evolving rapidly. The Company competes for provider solutions and HIT business with other large
health plans and commercial health care benefit insurance companies as well as information technology companies and companies that specialize in provider
solutions and HIT. Many information technology product competitors have longer operating histories, better brand recognition, greater marketplace presence and
more experience in developing innovative products.
In addition to competitive pressures affecting the Company’s ability to obtain new customers or retain existing customers, the Health Care Benefits segment’s
medical membership has been and may continue to be adversely affected by adverse and/or uncertain economic conditions and reductions in workforce by existing
customers due to adverse and/or uncertain general economic conditions, especially in the United States and industries where such membership is concentrated.
Health Care Benefits Reinsurance
The Company currently has several reinsurance agreements with non-affiliated insurers that relate to Health Care Benefits insurance policies. The Company
entered into these contracts to reduce the risk of catastrophic losses which in turn reduces capital and surplus requirements. The Company frequently evaluates
reinsurance opportunities and refines its reinsurance and risk management strategies on a regular basis.
Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which primarily consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
13

Business Strategy
CVS Health is a different kind of health care company. As a diversified health services company, CVS Health is focused on its purpose of helping people on their
path to better health. In an increasingly connected and digital world, the Company is meeting people wherever they are and changing health care to meet their
needs. Built on a foundation of unmatched community presence, our diversified model engages one in three Americans each year. This broad reach differentiates
CVS Health and fosters an increased level of engagement with customers across the country. Through our innovative new products and services that help manage
chronic conditions, our HealthHUB care destinations, and our digital solutions, we are making health care more accessible, more affordable and simply better. The
Company believes its strategy oriented around the consumer and being present for all the meaningful moments in health will drive long-term sustainable value and
place the Company at the forefront of the evolution of health care.
Generic Sourcing Venture
The Company and Cardinal Health, Inc. (“Cardinal”) each have a 50% ownership in Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (“Red Oak”), a generic pharmaceutical sourcing
entity. Under this arrangement, the Company and Cardinal contributed their sourcing and supply chain expertise to Red Oak and agreed to source and negotiate
generic pharmaceutical supply contracts for both companies through Red Oak. Red Oak does not own or hold inventory on behalf of either company.
Working Capital Practices
The Company funds the growth of its businesses through a combination of cash flow from operations, commercial paper and other short-term borrowings, proceeds
from sale-leaseback transactions and long-term borrowings. For additional information on the Company’s working capital practices, see “Liquidity and Capital
Resources” in the MD&A included in Item 7 of this 10-K. The majority of the Retail/LTC segment non-pharmacy revenues are paid in cash, or with debit or credit
cards. Managed care organizations, pharmacy benefit managers, government funded health care programs, commercial employers and other third party insurance
programs, which represent the vast majority of the Company’s consolidated pharmacy revenues, typically settle in less than 30 days. The remainder of the
Company’s consolidated pharmacy revenues are paid in cash, or with debit or credit cards. Employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly
workers, health plans, providers, governmental units, government-sponsored plans (with the exception of Medicare Part D services, which are described below),
labor groups and expatriates, which represent the vast majority of Health Care Benefits segment revenues, typically settle in less than 30 days. As a provider of
Medicare Part D services, the Company contracts annually with CMS. Utilization of services each plan year results in the accumulation of either a receivable from
or a payable to CMS. The timing of settlement of the receivable or payable with CMS takes several quarters, which impacts working capital from year to year.
Human Capital
Overview
At CVS Health, we share a single, clear purpose: helping people on their path to better health. We devote significant time and attention to the attraction,
development and retention of colleagues to deliver high levels of service to our customers. Our commitment to them includes a competitive rewards package and
programs that support our diverse range of colleagues in rewarding and fulfilling careers. As of December 31, 2020, we employed nearly 300,000 colleagues
primarily in the United States including in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, approximately 71% of whom were full-time.
We believe engaged colleagues produce stronger business results and are more likely to build a career with the Company. Each year we conduct an internal
engagement survey that provides colleagues with an opportunity to share their opinions and experiences with respect to their role, their team and the enterprise to
help our Board of Directors (the “Board”) and our management identify areas where we can improve colleague experience. The survey covers a broad range of
topics including development and opportunities, diversity management, recognition, performance, well-being, compliance and continuous improvement. In 2020,
greater than 80% of our colleagues participated in the engagement survey, of which greater than 80% responded that they were actively engaged.
The Board and our chief executive officer (“CEO”) provide oversight of our human capital strategy, which consists of the following categories: total rewards;
diversity, equity and inclusion; colleague development; and health and safety.
14

Total Rewards
We recognize how vital our colleagues are to our success and strive to offer comprehensive and competitive wages and benefits to meet the varying needs of our
colleagues and their families. The benefits and programs include annual bonuses, 401(k) plans, stock awards, an employee stock purchase plan, health care and
insurance benefits, paid time off, flexible work schedules, family leave, dependent care resources, colleague assistance programs and tuition assistance, among
many others, depending on eligibility.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we provided enhanced pay and benefits, including bonuses to frontline colleagues, dependent care financial assistance,
paid sick leave for part-time colleagues and paid time off to colleagues who test positive or are quarantined due to exposure.
Diversity, Equity & Inclusion
We believe that a diverse workforce creates a healthier, stronger and more sustainable company. We aim to attract, retain and support a diverse workforce that
reflects the many customers, patients, members and communities we serve. Our Diversity Management Leadership Council, a cross-functional group of senior
leaders appointed by our CEO, works with our Strategic Diversity Management leadership team to intentionally embed diversity across all facets of our business.
For our efforts, we have been recognized as a DiversityInc Top 50 Company, named to Bloomberg’s 2019 Gender-Equality Index and earned a 100 percent score
on the Disability Equality Index, meaning the company is recognized as a “Best Place to Work for Disability Inclusion.” The Company discloses information on
our diversity, equity and inclusion strategy, programs and progress in our annual Corporate Social Responsibility (“CSR”) Report.
As a foundation of equity, we continuously focus on increasing underrepresented populations across our business. In 2020, 70% of our total colleague population
and 52% of our colleagues at the manager level and above self-reported as female. In addition, in 2020 our colleagues reported their race/ethnicity as: White (53%),
Black/African American (16%), Hispanic/Latino (15%), Asian (11%) and Other (5%). The appendix to our CSR Report includes additional data on the diversity of
our workforce.
Our diversity management strategy emphasizes workplace representation, inclusion and belonging, talent acquisition and management and a diverse marketplace.
We support 15 Colleague Resource Groups (“CRGs”) that include more than 22,000 colleagues across the enterprise. These groups represent a wide range of
professional, cultural, ethical and personal affinities and interests, as well as formal mentoring programs. Our CRGs provide our colleagues with an opportunity to
connect and network with one another through a particular affinity, culture or interest. Each of our CRGs is sponsored by a senior leader.
Colleague Development
The Company offers a number of resources and programs that attract, engage, develop, advance and retain colleagues. Training and development provides
colleagues the support they need to perform well in their current role while planning and preparing for future roles. We offer an online orientation program that
pairs new hires with seasoned colleagues and the training continues throughout a colleague’s career through in-person, virtual and self-paced learning at all levels.
We also provide mentoring, tools and workshops for colleagues to manage their career development. We offer a variety of management and leadership programs
that develop incumbent diverse and other high potential colleagues. Our broad training practices include updated, tech-enabled tools and keep our colleagues
informed of new developments in our industry that are relevant to their roles. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our colleagues completed nearly
12 million training courses.
Our colleague development program also promotes the importance of compliance across our business. Our colleagues demonstrate this commitment through our
annual Code of Conduct training, which 100% of active colleagues completed in 2020. In 2020, we launched more than 75 different training courses as part of our
annual Enterprise Compliance Training Program.
Health & Safety
We have a strong commitment to providing a safe working environment.
We utilize Safety Service Plans to analyze data and concentrate on key areas of risk to reduce the chance of workplace incidents. We focus on identifying causes
and improving performance when workplace incidents occur. We also engage leaders in promoting a culture of safety. With safety task forces in place at each
distribution center, we empower leaders and safety business partners to identify policies, procedures and processes that could improve their own operations.
15

In addition, from the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took a comprehensive approach to managing occupational health and safety challenges presented by
the pandemic. We implemented social distancing practices and enhanced cleaning protocols at all of our locations. We launched a COVID-19 command center to
coordinate responsive actions to reports of COVID-positivity among colleagues, including contact tracing, sanitizing and collaborating with public health officials.
We distributed personal protective equipment based on our safety professionals’ assessment of various activities our colleagues perform. We added engineering
controls and enhanced safety features in our retail locations, including protective panels at pharmacy counters and front store checkout stations. We developed
travel, work from home, self-quarantine, wellness check, and other HR-related guidance to help colleagues maintain their health and safety while continuing to
support the essential operations of the Company.
Intellectual Property
The Company has registered and/or applied to register a variety of trademarks and service marks used throughout its businesses, as well as domain names, and
relies on a combination of copyright, patent, trademark and trade secret laws, in addition to contractual restrictions, to establish and protect the Company’s
proprietary rights. The Company regards its intellectual property as having significant value in the Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits
segments. The Company is not aware of any facts that could materially impact the continuing use of any of its intellectual property.
Government Regulation
Overview
The Company’s operations are subject to comprehensive federal, state and local laws and regulations and comparable multiple levels of international regulation in
the jurisdictions in which it does business. There also continues to be a heightened level of review and/or audit by federal, state and international regulators of the
health and related benefits industry’s business and reporting practices. In addition, many of the Company’s PBM clients and the Company’s payors in the
Retail/LTC segment, including insurers, Medicare plans, Managed Medicaid plans and MCOs, are themselves subject to extensive regulations that affect the design
and implementation of prescription drug benefit plans that they sponsor. Similarly, the Company’s LTC clients, such as skilled nursing facilities, are subject to
government regulations, including many of the same government regulations to which the Company is subject.
The laws and rules governing the Company’s businesses and interpretations of those laws and rules continue to expand and become more restrictive each year and
are subject to frequent change. The application of these complex legal and regulatory requirements to the detailed operation of the Company’s businesses creates
areas of uncertainty. Further, there are numerous proposed health care, financial services and other laws and regulations at the federal, state and international levels,
some of which could adversely affect the Company’s businesses if they are enacted. The Company cannot predict whether pending or future federal or state
legislation or court proceedings, including fundamental changes to the dynamics of one or more of the industries in which it competes, such as the federal or one or
more state governments fundamentally restructuring the Commercial, Medicare or Medicaid marketplace or reducing payments to the Company under or financing
for Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible or special needs programs, increasing its involvement in drug reimbursement, pricing, purchasing, and/or importation or
changing the laws governing PBMs, will change various aspects of the industries in which it competes or the health care industry generally or the impact those
changes will have on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or stock price, but the effects could be materially adverse. The Company has
internal control policies and procedures and conducts training and compliance programs for its employees to deter prohibited practices. However, if the Company’s
employees or agents fail to comply with applicable laws governing its international or other operations, it may face investigations, prosecutions and other legal
proceedings and actions which could result in civil penalties, administrative remedies and criminal sanctions. Any failure or alleged failure to comply with
applicable laws and regulations summarized below, or any adverse applications or interpretations of, or changes in, the laws and regulations affecting the Company
and/or its businesses, could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results, financial condition, cash flows and/or stock price. See Item 3 of this
10-K, “Legal Proceedings,” for further information.
The Company can give no assurance that its businesses, financial condition, operating results and/or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected, or that the
Company will not be required to materially change its business practices, based on: (i) future enactment of new health care or other laws or regulations; (ii) the
interpretation or application of existing laws or regulations, including the laws and regulations described in this Government Regulation section, as they may relate
to one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iii) pending
or future federal or state governmental investigations of one or more of the Company’s
16

businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iv) pending or future government audits,
investigations or enforcement actions against the Company; (v) adverse developments in any pending qui tam lawsuit against the Company, whether sealed or
unsealed, or in any future qui tam lawsuit that may be filed against the Company; or (vi) adverse developments in pending or future legal proceedings against the
Company or affecting one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally.
Laws and Regulations Related to COVID-19
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act (the “Families First Act”) and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) were
enacted in March 2020. Each of the Families First Act and the CARES Act requires the Company to provide coverage for COVID-19 related medical services, in
many cases without member cost-sharing, in its Insured Health Care Benefits products.
The CARES Act also provides relief funding to providers to reimburse them for health care related expenses incurred in preventing, preparing for and/or
responding to COVID-19 (provided no other source is obligated to reimburse those expenses) or lost health care related revenues that are attributable to COVID-
19. Under the CARES Act, the Company receives reimbursement for uninsured patients in connection with COVID-19 testing and vaccination as well as
monoclonal antibody treatment. Aside from such reimbursement, the Company did not request any funding under the CARES Act. However, in the second quarter
of 2020, the Company received $43 million from the CARES Act provider relief fund, all of which was returned to the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (“HHS”) during the second quarter of 2020.
The CARES Act also allows for the deferral of the payment of the employer share of Social Security taxes effective March 27, 2020. The Company has elected to
defer its Social Security tax payments in accordance with this provision, and will remit the associated payments in two equal installments on or about December
31, 2021 and December 31, 2022, as required under the CARES Act. The Company deferred approximately $670 million of its Social Security tax payments during
the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition to the Families First Act and the CARES Act, the Company is experiencing an unprecedented level of new laws, regulations, directives and orders from
federal, state, county and municipal authorities related to the COVID-19 pandemic, most of which have been issued on an emergency basis with immediate, or in
some instances retroactive, effect. These governmental actions include, but are not limited to, requirements to waive member cost-sharing associated with COVID-
19 testing and treatment, provide coverage for additional COVID-19-related services, expand the use of telemedicine, suspend precertification or other UM
mechanisms (including review of claims for medical necessity), allow earlier or longer renewal of prescriptions, extend grace periods for payments of premiums or
limit coverage termination based on non-payment of premiums or fees, modify health benefits coverage eligibility rules to help maintain employee eligibility, and
facilitate, accelerate or advance payments to providers. For example, in December 2020, as part of a COVID-19 relief package, Congress enacted a 3.75% payment
increase to providers through the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule, which Medicare Advantage plans often use as a benchmark for provider contracts. As a result,
in many instances the Company will be contractually required to pass on this payment to its providers, which was not anticipated at the time of bidding.
Related governmental actions have required the Company to close or significantly limit operations at traditional office worksites and affected the hours of
operation of MinuteClinic locations and the Company’s pharmacies. In some instances, the Company has taken permitted proactive actions consistent with more
general regulatory directives, such as expanding home delivery of prescription medications, extending hours of operation for member assistance lines and
liberalizing certain other terms of coverage. Similar directives have affected the Company’s international operations. The Company anticipates additional mandates
and directives from domestic and foreign federal, state, county and local authorities throughout the continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic and for some time
thereafter, some of which may result in permanent changes in the Company’s operations or the health care and other benefits cost and other risks assumed by the
Company. Further, although the Company has seen regulators relax certain requirements in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as temporary suspension of
certain audits and extensions of certain filing deadlines, failure to provide regulatory relief or accommodations in other areas may result in increased costs or
reduced revenue for the Company.
The impact of this governmental activity on the U.S. economy, consumer, customer and health care provider behavior and health care utilization patterns is beyond
our knowledge and control. As a result, the financial and/or operational impact these COVID-19 related governmental actions and inactions will have on our
businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the collective impact could be material and adverse.
17

Laws and Regulations Related to Multiple Segments of the Company’s Business
Laws Related to Reimbursement by Government Programs - The Company is subject to various federal and state laws concerning its submission of claims and
other information to Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state government-sponsored health care programs. Potential sanctions for violating these laws
include recoupment or reduction of government reimbursement amounts, civil penalties, treble damages, and exclusion from participation in government health
care programs. Such laws include the federal False Claims Act (the “False Claims Act”), the federal anti-kickback statute (the “AKS”), state false claims acts and
anti-kickback statutes in most states, the federal “Stark Law” and related state laws. In particular, the False Claims Act prohibits intentionally submitting,
conspiring to submit, or causing to be submitted, false claims, records, or statements to the federal government, or intentionally failing to return overpayments, in
connection with reimbursement by federal government programs. In addition, any claim for government reimbursement also violates the False Claims Act where it
results from a violation of the AKS.
Both federal and state false claims laws permit private individuals to file qui tam or “whistleblower” lawsuits on behalf of the federal or state government.
Participants in the health and related benefits industry, including the Company, frequently are subject to actions under the False Claims Act or similar state laws.
The federal Stark Law generally prohibits physicians from referring Medicare or Medicaid beneficiaries for certain services, including outpatient prescription
drugs, to any entity with which the physician, or an immediate family member of the physician, has a financial relationship. The Stark Law further prohibits the
entity receiving a prohibited referral from presenting a claim for reimbursement by Medicare or Medicaid for services furnished pursuant to the prohibited referral.
Various states have enacted similar laws.
The ACA - The United States Supreme Court is expected to rule on the constitutionality of the ACA by June 2021. If the ACA is deemed unconstitutional, there
will likely be significant changes to the laws and rules that govern the Company’s businesses. If the ACA is deemed constitutional, there may nevertheless be
continued efforts to invalidate, modify, repeal or replace it or portions of it, and the Company expects aspects of the ACA to continue to significantly impact its
business operations and operating results, including pricing, medical benefit ratios (“MBRs”) and the geographies in which the Company’s products are available.
The ACA made broad-based changes to the U.S. health care system. While most of the significant aspects of the ACA became effective during or prior to 2014,
parts of the ACA continue to evolve through the promulgation of executive orders, legislation, regulations and guidance as well as ongoing litigation. Additional
changes to the ACA and those regulations and guidance at the federal and/or state level are likely, and those changes are likely to be significant. Growing federal
and state budgetary pressures make it more likely that any changes, including changes at the state level in response to changes to, or invalidation, repeal or
replacement of, the ACA and/or changes in the funding levels and/or payment mechanisms of federally supported benefit programs, will be adverse to us. For
example, if any elements of the ACA are invalidated or repealed at the federal level, the Company expects that some states would seek to enact similar
requirements, such as prohibiting pre-existing condition exclusions, prohibiting rescission of insurance coverage, requiring coverage for dependents up to age 26,
requiring guaranteed renewability of insurance coverage and prohibiting lifetime limits on insurance coverage.
The Company filed a lawsuit in August 2019 to recover the $313 million it was owed under the ACA’s risk corridor program, which had been stayed pending the
Supreme Court decision. In April 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that health insurance companies may sue the federal government for amounts owed as
calculated under the ACA’s temporary risk corridor program. In October 2020, the Company received the $313 million in funds it was owed under the ACA’s risk
corridor program.
The expansion of health care coverage contemplated by the ACA is being funded in part by reductions to the reimbursements the Company and other health plans
are paid by the federal government for Medicare members, among other sources. While not all-inclusive, the following are some of the recent key funding changes
related to the ACA (assuming it continues to be implemented in its current form). The Company continues to evaluate these provisions and the related regulations
and regulatory guidance to determine the impact that they will have on its business operations and operating results:
•
The repeal of the annual non-tax deductible industry-wide HIF for calendar years after 2020. The HIF was $15.5 billion and $14.3 billion for 2020 and 2018,
respectively, and suspended for 2019.
•
The repeal of the non-tax deductible 40% excise tax on employer-sponsored health care benefits above a certain threshold that was scheduled to begin in 2022.
•
Reduced federal matching funds for Medicaid expansion. Starting in 2017, the federal matching rate declined slightly each year until it reached 90 percent in
2020, and will remain there.
18

The ACA also specifies minimum medical loss ratios (“MLRs”) for Commercial and Medicare Insured products, specifies features required to be included in
commercial benefit designs, limits commercial individual and small group rating and pricing practices, encourages additional competition (including potential
incentives for new participants to enter the marketplace) and significantly increases federal and state oversight of health plans, including regulations and processes
that could delay or limit the Company’s ability to appropriately increase its health plan premium rates. This in turn could adversely affect the Company’s ability to
continue to participate in certain product lines and/or geographies that it serves today.
Potential repeal of the ACA, ongoing legislative, regulatory and administrative policy changes to the ACA, the results of federal and state level elections, pending
litigation challenging the constitutionality of the ACA or funding for the law and federal budget negotiations continue to create uncertainty about the ultimate
impact of the ACA. Given the inherent difficulty of foreseeing the nature and scope of future changes to the ACA and how states, businesses and individuals will
respond to those changes, the Company cannot predict the impact on it of future changes to the ACA. It is reasonably possible that invalidation, repeal or
replacement of or other changes to the ACA and/or states’ responses to such changes, in the aggregate, could have a significant adverse effect on the Company’s
businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Medicare Regulation - The Company’s Medicare Advantage products compete directly with Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage products offered by
other Medicare Advantage organizations and Medicare Supplement products offered by other insurers. The Company’s Medicare PDP and Medicare Supplement
products are products that Medicare beneficiaries who are enrolled in Original Medicare purchase to enhance their Original Medicare coverage.
The Company continues to expand the number of counties in which it offers Medicare products. The Company has expanded its Medicare service area and
products in 2021 and is seeking to substantially grow its Medicare membership, revenue and operating results over the next several years, including through growth
in Medicare Supplement products. The anticipated organic expansion of the Medicare service area and Medicare products offered and the Medicare-related
provisions of the ACA significantly increase the Company’s exposure to funding and regulation of, and changes in government policy with respect to and/or
funding or regulation of, the various Medicare programs in which the Company participates, including changes in the amounts payable to us under those programs
and/or new reforms or surcharges on existing programs. For example, the ACA requires minimum MLRs for Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D plans of
85%. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays minimum MLR rebates for three consecutive years, it will become ineligible to enroll new
members. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays such rebates for five consecutive years, it will be terminated by CMS. Due to potential lower
utilization of medical services by Medicare beneficiaries during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible certain Medicare Advantage contracts may not meet the
85% MLR for consecutive years.
The Company’s Medicare Advantage and PDP products are heavily regulated by CMS. The regulations and contractual requirements applicable to the Company
and other private participants in Medicare programs are complex, expensive to comply with and subject to change. For example, in the second quarter of 2014,
CMS issued a final rule implementing the ACA requirements that Medicare Advantage and PDP plans report and refund to CMS overpayments that those plans
receive from CMS. The precise interpretation, impact and legality of this rule are not clear and are subject to pending litigation. Payments the Company receives
from CMS for its Medicare Advantage and Part D businesses also are subject to risk adjustment based on the health status of the individuals enrolled. Elements of
that risk adjustment mechanism continue to be challenged by the U.S. Department of Justice (the “DOJ”), the Office of the Inspector General of the HHS (the
“OIG”) and CMS itself. Substantial changes in the risk adjustment mechanism, including changes that result from enforcement or audit actions, could materially
affect the amount of the Company’s Medicare reimbursement, require the Company to raise prices or reduce the benefits offered to Medicare beneficiaries, and
potentially limit the Company’s (and the industry’s) participation in the Medicare program.
The Company has invested significant resources to comply with Medicare standards, and its Medicare compliance efforts will continue to require significant
resources. CMS may seek premium and other refunds, prohibit the Company from continuing to market and/or enroll members in or refuse to passively enroll
members in one or more of the Company’s Medicare or Medicare-Medicaid demonstration (historically known as “dual eligible”) plans, exclude us from
participating in one or more Medicare, dual eligible or dual eligible special needs plan programs and/or institute other sanctions and/or civil monetary penalties
against the Company if it fails to comply with CMS regulations or its Medicare contractual requirements. The Company’s Medicare Supplement products are
regulated at the state level and subject to similar significant compliance requirements and risks.
CMS regularly audits the Company’s performance to determine its compliance with CMS’s regulations and its contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of
services it provides to Medicare Advantage and PDP beneficiaries. For example, CMS conducts risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”) audits of a subset of
Medicare Advantage contracts for each contract year.
19

Since 2013, CMS has selected certain of the Company’s Medicare Advantage contracts for various years for RADV audit, and the number of RADV audits
continues to increase. The OIG also is auditing the Company’s risk adjustment data and that of other companies, and the Company expects CMS and the OIG to
continue auditing risk adjustment data. The Company also has received Civil Investigative Demands (“CIDs”) from, and provided documents and information to,
the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of its patient chart review processes in connection with risk adjustment data submissions
under Parts C and D of the Medicare program.
On October 26, 2018, CMS issued proposed rules related to, among other things, changes to the RADV audit methodology established by CMS in 2012. CMS
projects that the changes to the RADV audit methodology would increase its recoveries from Medicare Advantage plans as a result of RADV audits. CMS has
requested comments on the proposed rules, including whether the proposed RADV rule change should apply retroactively to audits of Medicare Advantage plans
for contract year 2011 and forward. The Company is evaluating the potential adverse effect, which could be material, on the Company’s operating results, financial
condition, and cash flows if the proposed RADV rule change were adopted as proposed. CMS also has announced that its goal is to subject all Medicare Advantage
contracts to either a comprehensive or a targeted RADV audit for each contract year.
A portion of each Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement is tied to the plan’s “star ratings.” The star rating system considers a variety of measures adopted by
CMS, including quality of preventative services, chronic illness management, compliance and overall customer satisfaction. Only Medicare Advantage plans with
an overall star rating of four or more stars (out of five stars) are eligible for a quality bonus in their basic premium rates. As a result, the Company’s Medicare
Advantage plans’ operating results in 2021 and going forward will be significantly affected by their star ratings. The Company’s star ratings and past performance
scores are adversely affected by the compliance issues that arise each year in its Medicare operations. CMS released the Company’s 2021 star ratings in October
2020. The Company’s 2021 star ratings will be used to determine which of its Medicare Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus
payments in 2022. Based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2020, 83% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2021
star ratings of at least 4.0 stars. CMS also gives PDPs star ratings which affect each PDP’s enrollment. Medicare Advantage and PDP plans that are rated less than
three stars for three consecutive years are subject to contract termination by CMS. CMS continues to revise its star ratings system to make it harder to achieve four
stars or more. Despite the Company’s success in achieving high 2021 star ratings and other quality measures and the continuation of its improvement efforts, there
can be no assurances that it will be successful in maintaining or improving its star ratings in future years. Accordingly, the Company’s Medicare Advantage plans
may not be eligible for full level quality bonuses, which could adversely affect the benefits such plans can offer, reduce membership and/or reduce profit margins.
Overall, the Company projects the benchmark payment rates in CMS’s April 2020 final notice detailing final Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates for
2021 will increase funding for the Company’s Medicare Advantage business, excluding the impact of the HIF in 2020, by approximately 1.8% in 2021 compared to
2020. This 2021 rate increase only partially offsets the challenge the Company faces from the impact of the increasing cost of medical care (including prescription
medications) and CMS local and national coverage decisions that require the Company to pay for services and supplies that are not factored into the Company’s
bids. The federal government may seek to impose restrictions on the configuration of pharmacy or other provider networks for Medicare Advantage and/or PDP
plans, or otherwise restrict the ability of these plans to alter benefits, negotiate prices or establish other terms to improve affordability or maintain viability of
products. The Company currently believes that the payments it has received and will receive in the near term are adequate to justify the Company’s continued
participation in the Medicare Advantage and PDP programs, although there are economic and political pressures to continue to reduce spending on the program,
and this outlook could change. In January 2021, CMS issued its final notice detailing final 2022 Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates. Final 2022
Medicare Advantage rates resulted in an increase in industry benchmark rates of approximately 4.1%.
Going forward, the Company expects CMS, the OIG, the DOJ, other federal agencies and the U.S. Congress to continue to scrutinize closely each component of
the Medicare program (including Medicare Advantage, PDPs, demonstration projects such as Medicare-Medicaid plans and provider network access and
adequacy), modify the terms and requirements of the program and possibly seek to recast or limit private insurers’ roles. It is not possible to predict the outcome of
this Congressional or regulatory activity, any of which could materially and adversely affect the Company.
In addition, in November 2020, the HHS released the final Rebate Rule (the “Rebate Rule”), which eliminates the regulatory safe harbor from prosecution under
the AKS for rebates from pharmaceutical companies to PBMs in Medicare Part D, replacing it with two far narrower safe harbors designed to directly benefit
patients with high out-of-pocket costs and to change the way PBMs are compensated. The new safe harbors are (i) for rebates which are passed on to the patient at
the point of sale and (ii) for flat service fee payments made to PBMs which cannot be tied to the list prices of drugs. The Pharmaceutical Care
20

Management Association (the “PCMA”), which represents PBMs, has filed a suit in an effort to block the Rebate Rule, claiming that the Rebate Rule would lead to
higher premiums in Medicare Part D and was adopted in an unlawful manner. It is unclear whether the Rebate Rule will be enforceable, whether pharmaceutical
companies will respond by reducing list prices, whether list prices in the private market may also be reduced, and what the resulting impact will be to PBMs or the
Company.
340B Drug Pricing Program – The 340B Drug Pricing Program allows eligible covered entities to purchase prescription drugs from manufacturers at a steep
discount, and is overseen by the HHS and the Health Resources and Services Administration (“HRSA”). In 2020, a number of pharmaceutical manufacturers began
programs that limited covered entities’ participation in the program through contract pharmacies arrangements, which the Company has with some covered entities.
Enforcement from HHS and HRSA to curb these manufacturer practices will significantly impact the Company’s participation in the program in the future.
Anti-Remuneration Laws - Federal law prohibits, among other things, an entity from knowingly and willfully offering, paying, soliciting or receiving, subject to
certain exceptions and “safe harbors,” any remuneration to induce the referral of individuals or the purchase, lease or order of items or services for which payment
may be made under Medicare, Medicaid or certain other federal and state health care programs. A number of states have similar laws, some of which are not
limited to services paid for with government funds. Sanctions for violating these federal and state anti-remuneration laws may include imprisonment, criminal and
civil fines, and exclusion from participation in Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state government-sponsored health care programs. Companies involved in
public health care programs such as Medicare and/or Medicaid are required to maintain compliance programs to detect and deter fraud, waste and abuse, and are
often the subject of fraud, waste and abuse investigations and audits. The Company has invested significant resources to comply with Medicare and Medicaid
program standards. Ongoing vigorous law enforcement and the highly technical regulatory scheme mean that the Company’s compliance efforts in this area will
continue to require significant resources.
Antitrust and Unfair Competition - The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”) investigates and prosecutes practices that are “unfair trade practices” or “unfair
methods of competition.” Numerous lawsuits have been filed throughout the United States against pharmaceutical manufacturers, retail pharmacies and/or PBMs
under various federal and state antitrust and unfair competition laws challenging, among other things: (i) brand name drug pricing and rebate practices of
pharmaceutical manufacturers, (ii) the maintenance of retail or specialty pharmacy networks by PBMs, and (iii) various other business practices of PBMs and retail
pharmacies. To the extent that the Company appears to have actual or potential market power in a relevant market or CVS Pharmacy, CVS Specialty or
MinuteClinic plays a unique or expanded role in a Pharmacy Services or Health Care Benefits segment product offering, the Company’s business arrangements and
uses of confidential information may be subject to heightened scrutiny from an anti-competitive perspective and possible challenge by state and/or federal
regulators and/or private parties.
Privacy and Confidentiality Requirements - Many of the Company’s activities involve the receipt, use and disclosure by the Company of personally identifiable
information (“PII”) as permitted in accordance with applicable federal and state privacy and data security laws, which require organizations to provide appropriate
privacy and security safeguards for such information. In addition to PII, the Company uses and discloses de-identified data for analytical and other purposes when
permitted. Additionally, there are industry standards for handling credit card data known as the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, which are a set of
requirements designed to help ensure that entities that process, store or transmit credit card information maintain a secure environment. Certain states have
incorporated these requirements into state laws or enacted other requirements relating to the use and/or disclosure of PII.
The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and the regulations issued thereunder (collectively, “HIPAA”), as further modified by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (“ARRA”) impose extensive requirements on the way in which health plans, providers, health care
clearinghouses (known as “covered entities”) and their business associates use, disclose and safeguard protected health information (“PHI”). Further, ARRA
requires the Company and other covered entities to report any breaches of PHI to impacted individuals and to the HHS and to notify the media in any states where
500 or more people are impacted by the unauthorized release or use of or access to PHI. Criminal penalties and civil sanctions may be imposed for failing to
comply with HIPAA standards. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (the “HITECH Act”), enacted as part of ARRA,
amended HIPAA to impose additional restrictions on third-party funded communications using PHI and the receipt of remuneration in exchange for PHI. The
HITECH Act also extended HIPAA privacy and security requirements and penalties directly to business associates. HHS has begun to audit health plans, providers
and other parties to enforce HIPAA compliance, including with respect to data security.
In addition to HIPAA, state health privacy laws apply to the extent they are more protective of individual privacy than is HIPAA, including laws that place stricter
controls on the release of information relating to specific diseases or conditions and
21

requirements to notify members of unauthorized release or use of or access to PHI. States also have adopted regulations to implement provisions of the Financial
Modernization Act of 1999 (also known as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (“GLBA”)) which generally require insurers, including health insurers, to provide
customers with notice regarding how their non-public personal health and financial information is used and the opportunity to “opt out” of certain disclosures
before the insurer shares such information with a non-affiliated third party. Like HIPAA, GLBA sets a “floor” standard, allowing states to adopt more stringent
requirements governing privacy protection. Complying with additional state requirements requires us to make additional investments beyond those the Company
has made to comply with HIPAA and GLBA.
The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 encourages organizations to share cyber threat indicators with the federal government and, among other things,
directs HHS to develop a set of voluntary cybersecurity best practices for organizations in the health care industry. In addition, states have begun to enact more
comprehensive privacy laws and regulations addressing consumer rights to data access, deletion, protection or transparency, such as the California Consumer
Privacy Act (“CCPA”). States also are starting to issue regulations and proposed regulations specifically related to cybersecurity, such as the regulations issued by
the New York Department of Financial Services. Complying with conflicting cybersecurity regulations, which may differ from state to state, requires significant
resources. In addition, differing approaches to state privacy and/or cyber-security regulation and varying enforcement philosophies may materially and adversely
affect the Company’s ability to standardize its products and services across state lines. Widely-reported large scale commercial data breaches in the United States
and abroad increase the likelihood that additional data security legislation will be considered by additional states. These legislative and regulatory developments
will impact the design and operation of the Company’s businesses, its privacy and security strategy and its web-based and mobile assets.
Finally, each Public Exchange is required to adhere to privacy and security standards with respect to PII, and to impose privacy and security standards that are at
least as protective of PII as those the Public Exchange has implemented for itself or non-Public Exchange entities, which include insurers offering plans through
the Public Exchange and their designated downstream entities, including PBMs and other business associates. These standards may differ from, and be more
stringent than, HIPAA.
Consumer Protection Laws - The federal government has many consumer protection laws, such as the Federal Trade Commission Act, the Federal Postal Service
Act and the Consumer Product Safety Act. Most states also have similar consumer protection laws and a growing number of states regulate subscription programs.
In addition, the federal government and most states have adopted laws and/or regulations requiring places of public accommodation, health care services and other
goods and services to be accessible to people with disabilities. These consumer protection and accessibility laws and regulations have been the basis for
investigations, lawsuits and multistate settlements relating to, among other matters, the marketing of loyalty programs, and health care products and services,
pricing accuracy, expired front store products, financial incentives provided by drug manufacturers to pharmacies in connection with therapeutic interchange
programs, disclosures related to how personal data is used and protected and the accessibility of goods and services to people with disabilities. As a result of the
Company’s direct-to-consumer activities, including mobile and web-based solutions offered to members and to other consumers, the Company also is subject to
federal and state regulations applicable to electronic communications and to other general consumer protection laws and regulations. For example, the CCPA
became effective in 2020, and additional federal and state regulation of consumer privacy protection may be proposed or enacted in 2020. The Company expects
these new laws and regulations to impact the design of its products and services and the management and operation of its businesses and to increase its compliance
costs.
Transparency in Coverage Rule - In October 2020, the HHS released a final rule requiring health insurers to disclose negotiated prices of drugs, medical services,
supplies and other covered items to the public. The rule requires group health plans and health insurance issuers in the individual and group markets to disclose
cost-sharing information upon request, to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, which, unless otherwise indicated, for the purpose of the final rules includes an
authorized representative, and require plans and issuers to disclose in-network provider rates, historical out-of-network allowed amounts and the associated billed
charges, and negotiated rates for prescription drugs. Disclosure of data in a machine readable file is required beginning in January 2022, and insurers are required
to have a consumer tool in place by January 2023. The public disclosure of insurer- or PBM-negotiated price concessions may result in drug manufacturers
lowering discounts or rebates, resulting in higher drug costs for patients and impacting the ability of the Company to negotiate drug prices and provide competitive
products and services to consumers.
Telemarketing and Other Outbound Contacts - Certain federal and state laws, such as the Telephone Consumer Protection Act and the Telemarketing Sales
Rule, give the FTC, the Federal Communications Commission and state attorneys general the ability to regulate, and bring enforcement actions relating to,
telemarketing practices and certain automated outbound contacts such as phone calls, texts or emails. Under certain circumstances, these laws provide consumers
with a private right of action. Violations of these laws could result in substantial statutory penalties and other sanctions.
22

Pharmacy and Professional Licensure and Regulation - The Company is subject to a variety of intersecting federal and state statutes and regulations that govern
the wholesale distribution of drugs; operation of retail, specialty, infusion, LTC and mail order pharmacies; licensure of facilities and professionals, including
pharmacists, technicians, nurses and other health care professionals; registration of facilities with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (the “DEA”) and
analogous state agencies that regulate controlled substances; packaging, storing, shipping and tracking of pharmaceuticals; repackaging of drug products; labeling,
medication guides and other consumer disclosures; interactions with prescribers and health care professionals; compounding of prescription medications;
dispensing of controlled and non-controlled substances; counseling of patients; transfers of prescriptions; advertisement of prescription products and pharmacy
services; security; inventory control; recordkeeping; reporting to Boards of Pharmacy, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”), the U.S. Consumer
Product Safety Commission, the DEA and related state agencies; and other elements of pharmacy practice. Pharmacies are highly regulated and have contact with a
wide variety of federal, state and local agencies with various powers to investigate, inspect, audit or solicit information, including Boards of Pharmacy and
Nursing, the DEA, the FDA, the DOJ, HHS and others. Many of these agencies have broad enforcement powers, conduct audits on a regular basis, can impose
substantial fines and penalties, and may revoke the license, registration or program enrollment of a facility or professional.
State Insurance, HMO and Insurance Holding Company Regulation - A number of states regulate affiliated groups of insurers and HMOs such as the
Company under holding company statutes. These laws may, among other things, require prior regulatory approval of dividends and material intercompany transfers
of assets and transactions between the regulated companies and their affiliates, including their parent holding companies. The Company expects the states in which
its insurance and HMO subsidiaries are licensed to continue to expand their regulation of the corporate governance and internal control activities of its insurance
companies and HMOs. Changes to state insurance, HMO and/or insurance holding company laws or regulations or changes to the interpretation of those laws or
regulations, including due to regulators’ increasing concerns regarding insurance company and/or HMO solvency due, among other things, to past and expected
payor insolvencies, could negatively affect the Company’s businesses in various ways, including through increases in solvency fund assessments, requirements that
the Company hold greater levels of capital and/or delays in approving dividends from regulated subsidiaries.
PBM offerings of prescription drug coverage under certain risk arrangements may be subject to laws and regulations in various states. Such laws may require that
the party at risk become licensed as an insurer, establish reserves or otherwise demonstrate financial viability. Laws that may apply in such cases include insurance
laws and laws governing MCOs and limited prepaid health service plans.
The states of domicile of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries have statutory risk-based capital (“RBC”) requirements for health and other insurance companies
and HMOs based on the National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ Risk-Based Capital for Insurers Model Act (the “RBC Model Act”). These RBC
requirements are intended to assess the capital adequacy of life and health insurers and HMOs, taking into account the risk characteristics of a company’s
investments and products. The RBC Model Act sets forth the formula for calculating RBC requirements, which are designed to take into account asset risks,
insurance risks, interest rate risks and other relevant risks with respect to an individual company’s business. In general, under these laws, an insurance company or
HMO must submit a report of its RBC level to the insurance department or insurance commissioner of its state of domicile for each calendar year. At December 31,
2020, the RBC level of each of the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries was above the level that would require regulatory action.
For information regarding restrictions on certain payments of dividends or other distributions by the Company’s HMO and insurance company subsidiaries, see
Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The holding company laws for the states of domicile of certain of the Company’s subsidiaries also restrict the ability of any person to obtain control of an insurance
company or HMO without prior regulatory approval. Under those statutes, without such approval (or an exemption), no person may acquire any voting security of
an insurance holding company (such as the Company’s ultimate parent company, CVS Health) that controls an insurance company or HMO, or merge with such a
holding company, if as a result of such transaction such person would control the insurance holding company. Control is generally defined as the direct or indirect
power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person and is presumed to exist if a person directly or indirectly owns or controls 10% or
more of the voting securities of another person.
Certain states have laws that prohibit submitting a false claim or making a false record or statement in order to secure reimbursement from an insurance company.
These state laws vary, and violation of them may lead to the imposition of civil or criminal penalties.
23

Government Agreements and Mandates - The Company and/or its various affiliates are subject to certain consent decrees, settlement and other agreements,
corrective action plans and corporate integrity agreements with various federal, state and local authorities relating to such matters as privacy practices, controlled
substances, PDPs, expired products, environmental and safety matters, marketing and advertising practices, PBM, LTC and other pharmacy operations and various
other business practices. Certain of these agreements contain ongoing reporting, monitoring and/or other compliance requirements for the Company. Failure to
meet the Company’s obligations under these agreements could result in civil or criminal remedies, financial penalties, administrative remedies, and/or exclusion
from participation in federal health care programs.
Environmental and Safety Regulation - The Company’s businesses are subject to various federal, state and local laws, regulations and other requirements
pertaining to protection of the environment, public health and employee safety, including, for example, regulations governing the management of hazardous
substances, the cleaning up of contaminated sites, and the maintenance of safe working conditions in the Company’s retail locations, distribution centers and other
facilities. Governmental agencies at the federal, state and local levels continue to focus on the retail and health care sectors’ compliance with such laws and
regulations, and have at times pursued enforcement activities. Any failure to comply with these regulations could result in fines or other sanctions by government
authorities.
ERISA Regulation - The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), provides for comprehensive federal regulation of certain employee
pension and benefit plans, including private employer and union sponsored health plans and certain other plans that contract with us to provide PBM services. In
general, the Company assists plan sponsors in the administration of their health benefit plans, including the prescription drug benefit portion of those plans, in
accordance with the plan designs adopted by the plan sponsors. In addition, the Company may have fiduciary duties where it has specifically contracted with a plan
sponsor to accept limited fiduciary responsibility, such as for the adjudication of initial prescription drug benefit claims and/or the appeals of denied claims under a
plan. In addition to its fiduciary provisions, ERISA imposes civil and criminal liability on service providers to health plans and certain other persons if certain
forms of illegal remuneration are made or received. These provisions of ERISA are broadly written and their application to specific business practices is often
uncertain.
Some of the Company’s health and related benefits and large case pensions products and services and related fees also are subject to potential issues raised by
judicial interpretations relating to ERISA. Under those interpretations, together with U.S. Department of Labor (“DOL”) regulations, the Company may have
ERISA fiduciary duties with respect to PBM members and/or certain general account assets held under contracts that are not guaranteed benefit policies. As a
result, certain transactions related to those general account assets are subject to conflict of interest and other restrictions, and the Company must provide certain
disclosures to policyholders annually. The Company must comply with these restrictions or face substantial penalties.
In addition, ERISA generally preempts all state and local laws that relate to employee benefit plans, but the extent of the pre-emption continues to be reviewed by
courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court. For example, in December 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld an Arkansas law that, among other things, mandates a
particular pricing methodology, establishes an appeals process for a pharmacy when the reimbursement is below the pharmacy’s acquisition cost, permits a
pharmacy to reverse and rebill if they cannot procure the drug from its wholesaler at a price equal to or less than the reimbursement rate, prohibits a PBM from
reimbursing a pharmacy less than the amount it reimburses an affiliate on a per unit basis, and permits a pharmacy to decline to dispense if the reimbursement is
lower than the pharmacy’s acquisition cost.
Other Legislative Initiatives and Regulatory Initiatives - The U.S. federal and state governments, as well as governments in other countries where the Company
does business, continue to enact and seriously consider many broad-based legislative and regulatory proposals that have had a material impact on or could
materially impact various aspects of the health care and related benefits system and the Company’s businesses, operating results and/or cash flows. For example:
•
Under the Budget Control Act of 2011 and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 significant, automatic across-the-board budget cuts (known as
sequestration) began in March 2013, including Medicare spending cuts of not more than 2% of total program costs per year through 2024. Since then,
Congress has extended and modified sequestration a number of times. Currently, the CARES Act suspended Medicare sequestration from May 2020 to the end
of December 2020 and extended mandatory sequestration to 2030. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 extended the temporary suspension of
Medicare sequestration through the end of March 2021. Significant uncertainty remains as to whether and how the U.S. Congress will proceed with actions
that create additional federal revenue and/or with entitlement reform. The Company cannot predict future federal Medicare or federal or state Medicaid
funding levels or the impact that future federal or state budget actions or entitlement program reform, if it occurs, will have on the Company’s businesses,
operations or operating results, but the effects could be materially adverse, particularly on the Company’s Medicare and/or Medicaid revenues, MBRs and
operating results.
24

•
The European Union’s (“EU’s”) General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) began to apply across the EU during 2018.
•
Other significant legislative and/or regulatory measures which are or recently have been under consideration include the following:
•
Eliminating payment of manufacturer’s rebates on prescription drugs to PBMs, PDPs and Managed Medicaid organizations in connection with
federally funded health care programs.
•
Imposing requirements and restrictions on the design and/or administration of pharmacy benefit plans offered by the Company’s and its clients’
health plans and/or its PBM clients and/or the services the Company provides to those clients, including prohibiting “differential” or “spread” pricing
in PBM contracts; restricting or eliminating the use of formularies for prescription drugs; restricting the Company’s ability to require members to
obtain drugs through a home delivery or specialty pharmacy; restricting the Company’s ability to place certain specialty or other drugs in the higher
cost tiers of its pharmacy formularies; restricting the Company’s ability to make changes to drug formularies and/or clinical programs; limiting or
eliminating rebates on pharmaceuticals; requiring the use of up front purchase price discounts on pharmaceuticals in lieu of rebates; restricting the
Company’s ability to configure its health plan and retail pharmacy provider networks, including use of CVS Pharmacy locations; and restricting or
eliminating the use of certain drug pricing methodologies.
•
Increasing federal or state government regulation of, or involvement in, the pricing and/or purchasing of drugs.
•
Restricting the Company’s ability to limit providers’ participation in its networks and/or remove providers from its networks by imposing network
adequacy requirements or otherwise (including in its Medicare and Commercial Health Care Benefits products).
•
Imposing assessments on (or to be collected by) health plans or health carriers that may or may not be passed through to their customers. These
assessments may include assessments for insolvency, the uninsured, uncompensated care, Medicaid funding or defraying health care provider
medical malpractice insurance costs.
•
Mandating coverage by the Company’s and its clients’ health plans for additional conditions and/or specified procedures, drugs or devices (e.g., high
cost pharmaceuticals, experimental pharmaceuticals and oral chemotherapy regimens).
•
Regulating electronic connectivity.
•
Mandating or regulating the disclosure of provider fee schedules, manufacturer’s rebates and other data about the Company’s payments to providers
and/or payments the Company receives from pharmaceutical manufacturers.
•
Mandating or regulating disclosure of provider outcome and/or efficiency information.
•
Prescribing or limiting members’ financial responsibility for health care or other covered services they utilize, including restricting “surprise” bills by
providers and by specifying procedures for resolving “surprise” bills.
•
Prescribing payment levels for health care and other covered services rendered to the Company’s members by providers who do not have contracts
with the Company.
•
Assessing the medical device status of HIT products and/or solutions, mobile consumer wellness tools and clinical decision support tools, which may
require compliance with FDA requirements in relation to some of these products, solutions and/or tools.
•
Restricting the ability of employers and/or health plans to establish or impose member financial responsibility.
•
Amending or supplementing ERISA to impose greater requirements on PBMs or the administration of employer-funded benefit plans or limit the
scope of current ERISA pre-emption, which would among other things expose the Company and other health plans to expanded liability for punitive
and other extra-contractual damages and additional state regulation.
It is uncertain whether the Company can counter the potential adverse effects of such potential legislation or regulation on its operating results or cash flows,
including whether it can recoup, through higher premium rates, expanded membership or other measures, the increased costs of mandated coverage or benefits,
assessments, fees, taxes or other increased costs, including the cost of modifying its systems to implement any enacted legislation or regulations.
The Company’s businesses also may be affected by other legislation and regulations. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act creates
incentives for whistleblowers to speak directly to the government rather than utilizing internal compliance programs and reduces the burden of proof under the
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (the “FCPA”). There also are laws and regulations that set standards for the escheatment of funds to states.
Health savings accounts, health reimbursement arrangements and flexible spending accounts and certain of the tax, fee and subsidy provisions of the ACA also are
regulated by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service.
25

The Company also may be adversely affected by court and regulatory decisions that expand or revise the interpretations of existing statutes and regulations or
impose medical malpractice or bad faith liability. Federal and state courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court, continue to consider cases, and federal and state
regulators continue to issue regulations and interpretations, addressing bad faith liability for denial of medical claims, the scope of ERISA’s fiduciary duty
requirements, the scope of the False Claims Act and the pre-emptive effect of ERISA on state laws.
Contract Audits - The Company is subject to audits of many of its contracts, including its PBM client contracts, its PBM rebate contracts, its PBM network
contracts, its contracts relating to Medicare Advantage and/or Medicare Part D, the agreements the Company’s pharmacies enter into with other payors, its
Medicaid contracts and its customer contracts. Because some of the Company’s contracts are with state or federal governments or with entities contracted with
state or federal agencies, audits of these contracts are often regulated by the federal or state agencies responsible for administering federal or state benefits
programs, including those which operate Medicaid fee for service plans, Managed Medicaid plans, Medicare Part D plans or Medicare Advantage organizations.
Federal Employee Health Benefits Program - The Company’s subsidiaries contract with the Office of Personnel Management (the “OPM”) to provide managed
health care services under the FEHB program in their service areas. These contracts with the OPM and applicable government regulations establish premium rating
arrangements for this program. OPM regulations require that community-rated FEHB plans meet a FEHB program-specific minimum MLR by plan code and
market. Managing to these rules is complicated by the simultaneous application of the minimum MLR standards and associated premium rebate requirements of
the ACA. The Company also has a contractual arrangement with carriers for the FEHB program, such as the BlueCross BlueShield Association, to provide
pharmacy services to federal employees, postal workers, annuitants, and their dependents under the Government-wide Service Benefit Plan, as authorized by the
FEHB Act and as part of the FEHB program. Additionally, the Company manages certain FEHB plans on a “cost-plus” basis. These arrangements subject the
Company to certain aspects of the FEHB Act, and other federal regulations, such as the FEHB Acquisition Regulation, that otherwise would not be applicable to
the Company. The OPM also is auditing the Company and its other contractors to, among other things, verify that plans meet their applicable FEHB program-
specific MLR and the premiums established under the OPM’s Insured contracts and costs allocated pursuant to the OPM’s cost-based contracts are in compliance
with the requirements of the applicable FEHB program. The OPM may seek premium refunds or institute other sanctions against the Company if it fails to comply
with the FEHB program requirements.
Clinical Services Regulation - The Company provides clinical services to health plans, PBMs and providers for a variety of complex and common medical
conditions, including arranging for certain members to participate in disease management programs. State laws regulate the practice of medicine, the practice of
pharmacy, the practice of nursing and certain other clinical activities. Clinicians engaged in a professional practice in connection with the provision of clinical
services must satisfy applicable state licensing requirements and must act within their scope of practice.
Third Party Administration and Other State Licensure Laws - Many states have licensure or registration laws governing certain types of administrative
organizations, such as PPOs, TPAs and companies that provide utilization review services. Several states also have licensure or registration laws governing the
organizations that provide or administer consumer card programs (also known as cash card or discount card programs).
International Regulation - The Company has insurance licenses in several foreign jurisdictions and does business directly or through local affiliations in
numerous countries around the world. The Company has taken steps to be able to continue to serve customers in the European Economic Area following the United
Kingdom’s exit from the EU (“Brexit”). However, the impact of Brexit on the Company’s international business and operating results is uncertain.
The Company’s international operations are subject to different, and sometimes more stringent, legal and regulatory requirements, which vary widely by
jurisdiction, including anti-corruption laws; economic sanctions laws; various privacy, insurance, tax, tariff and trade laws and regulations; corporate governance,
privacy, data protection (including the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation which began to apply across the EU during 2018), data mining, data transfer, labor
and employment, intellectual property, consumer protection and investment laws and regulations; discriminatory licensing procedures; compulsory cessions of
reinsurance; required localization of records and funds; higher premium and income taxes; limitations on dividends and repatriation of capital; and requirements for
local participation in an insurer’s ownership. In addition, the expansion of the Company’s operations into foreign countries increases the Company’s exposure to
the anti-bribery, anti-corruption and anti-money laundering provisions of U.S. law, including the FCPA, and corresponding foreign laws, including the U.K.
Bribery Act 2010 (the “UK Bribery Act”).
26

Anti-Corruption Laws - The FCPA prohibits offering, promising or authorizing others to give anything of value to a foreign government official to obtain or
retain business or otherwise secure a business advantage. The Company also is subject to applicable anti-corruption laws of the jurisdictions in which it operates. In
many countries outside the United States, health care professionals are employed by the government. Therefore, the Company’s dealings with them are subject to
regulation under the FCPA. Violations of the FCPA and other anti-corruption laws may result in severe criminal and civil sanctions as well as other penalties, and
there continues to be a heightened level of FCPA enforcement activity by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and the DOJ. The UK
Bribery Act is an anti-corruption law that is broader in scope than the FCPA and applies to all companies with a nexus to the United Kingdom. Disclosures of
FCPA violations may be shared with the UK authorities, thus potentially exposing companies to liability and potential penalties in multiple jurisdictions.
Anti-Money Laundering Regulations - Certain lines of the Company’s businesses are subject to Treasury anti-money laundering regulations. Those lines of
business have implemented anti-money laundering policies designed to ensure their compliance with the regulations. The Company also is subject to anti-money
laundering laws in non-U.S. jurisdictions where it operates.
Office of Foreign Assets Control - The Company also is subject to regulation by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of Treasury
(“OFAC”). OFAC administers and enforces economic and trade sanctions based on U.S. foreign policy and national security goals against targeted foreign
countries and regimes, terrorists, international narcotics traffickers, those engaged in activities related to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and other
threats to the national security, foreign policy or economy of the United States. In addition, the Company is subject to similar regulations in the non-U.S.
jurisdictions in which it operates.
FDA Regulation - The FDA regulates the Company’s compounding pharmacy and clinical research operations. The FDA also generally has authority to, among
other things, regulate the manufacture, distribution, sale and labeling of medical devices (including hemodialysis devices such as the device the Company is
developing and mobile medical devices) and many products sold through retail pharmacies, including prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, cosmetics,
dietary supplements and certain food items. In addition, the FDA regulates the Company’s activities as a distributor of store brand products.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Pharmacy Services Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state and
local statutes and regulations governing the operation of its Pharmacy Services segment specifically. Among these are the following:
PBM Laws and Regulation - Legislation and/or regulations seeking to regulate PBM activities in a comprehensive manner have been proposed or enacted in a
number of states. This legislation could adversely affect the Company’s ability to conduct business on commercially reasonable terms in states where the
legislation is in effect and the Company’s ability to standardize its PBM products and services across state lines. In addition, certain quasi-regulatory organizations,
including the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (“NAIC”) and the National Council of
Insurance Legislators, have issued model regulations or may propose future regulations concerning PBMs and/or PBM activities. Similarly, credentialing
organizations such as NCQA and URAC may establish voluntary standards regarding PBM, mail order pharmacy and/or specialty pharmacy activities. While the
actions of these quasi-regulatory or standard-setting organizations do not have the force of law, they may influence states to adopt their requirements or
recommendations and influence client requirements for PBM, mail order pharmacy and/or specialty pharmacy services. Moreover, any standards established by
these organizations could also impact the Company’s health plan clients and/or the services provided to those clients and/or the Company’s health plans.
The Company’s PBM activities also are regulated directly and indirectly at the federal and state levels, including being subject to the False Claims Act and state
false claims acts and the AKS and state anti-kickback laws. These laws and regulations govern, and proposed legislation and regulations may govern and/or further
restrict, critical PBM practices, including disclosure, receipt and retention of rebates and other payments received from pharmaceutical manufacturers; use of,
administration of and/or changes to drug formularies, maximum allowable cost (“MAC”) list pricing, average wholesale prices (“AWP”) and/or clinical programs;
the offering to plan sponsors of pricing that includes retail network “differential” or “spread” (i.e., a difference between the drug price charged to the plan sponsor
by a PBM and the price paid by the PBM to the dispensing provider); disclosure of data to third parties; drug UM practices; the level of duty a PBM owes its
customers; configuration of pharmacy networks; the operations of the Company’s pharmacies (including audits of its pharmacies); disclosure of negotiated
provider reimbursement rates; disclosure of fees associated with administrative service agreements and patient care programs that are attributable to members’ drug
utilization; and registration or licensing of PBMs. Failure by the
27

Company or one of its PBM services suppliers to comply with these laws or regulations could result in material fines and/or sanctions and could have a material
adverse effect on the Company’s operating results and/or cash flows.
The Company’s PBM service contracts, including those in which the Company assumes certain risks under performance guarantees or similar arrangements, are
generally not subject to insurance regulation by the states. However, state departments of insurance are increasing their oversight of PBM activities due to
legislation passing in a number of states requiring PBMs to register or obtain a license with the department. Rulemaking is either underway or has already taken
place in a number of states with the areas of focus on licensure requirements, pharmacy reimbursement for generics (MAC reimbursement) and pharmacy audits -
most of which fall under the state insurance code.
Most-Favored-Nations Rule - In November 2020, HHS released the Most-Favored-Nations Rule (the “MFN Rule”), which requires CMS to take a most-favored-
nation approach in calculating payment for Medicare Part B drugs. The MFN Rule will test paying Part B drugs at comparable amounts to the lowest adjusted price
paid by any country in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development that has a Gross Domestic Product (“GDP”) per capita that is at least 60% of
the U.S. GDP per capita. The MFN Rule will also test a redesign of the percentage add-on payment structure under Medicare Part B to remove incentives for use of
higher-cost drugs through a flat per-dose add-on payment, and will include a financial hardship exemption for participants. The mandatory MFN Rule will operate
for seven years, from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2027. Over the course of the model, CMS will monitor and evaluate the impact of the MFN Rule on
beneficiary access to drugs, program costs, and the quality of care for beneficiaries. Further, CMS commits to assess initial impacts of the MFN Rule on quality of
care, including access to drugs, prior to beginning performance year 5. Multiple pharmaceutical manufacturers have sued HHS over the rule, and it is currently
delayed due to a temporary restraining order prohibiting CMS from implementing it. If implemented, the MFN Rule may impact the ability of the Company to
negotiate drug prices and provide competitive products and services to consumers.
Pharmacy Network Access Legislation - Medicare Part D and a majority of states now have some form of legislation affecting the Company’s (and its health
plans’ and its health plan clients’) ability to limit access to a pharmacy provider network or remove pharmacy network providers. For example, certain “any willing
provider” legislation may require the Company or its clients to admit a nonparticipating pharmacy if such pharmacy is willing and able to meet the plan’s price and
other applicable terms and conditions for network participation. These laws could negatively affect the services and economic benefits achievable through a limited
pharmacy provider network. Also, a majority of states now have some form of legislation affecting the Company’s ability (and the Company’s and its client health
plans’ ability) to conduct audits of network pharmacies regarding claims submitted to the Company for payment. These laws could negatively affect the
Company’s ability to recover overpayments of claims submitted by network pharmacies that the Company identifies through pharmacy audits.
Pharmacy Pricing Legislation - A number of states have passed legislation regulating the Company’s ability to manage and establish MACs for generic
prescription drugs. MAC methodology is a common cost management practice used by private and public payors (including CMS) to pay pharmacies for
dispensing generic prescription drugs. MAC prices specify the allowable reimbursement by a PBM for a particular strength and dosage of a generic drug that is
available from multiple manufacturers but sold at different prices. State legislation can regulate the disclosure of MAC prices and MAC price methodologies, the
kinds of drugs that a PBM can pay for at a MAC price, and the rights of pharmacies to appeal a MAC price established by a PBM. These laws could negatively
affect the Company’s ability to establish MAC prices for generic drugs.
Formulary and Plan Design Regulation - A number of government entities regulate the administration of prescription drug benefits. HHS regulates how
Medicare Part D formularies are developed and administered, including requiring the inclusion of all drugs in certain classes and categories, subject to limited
exceptions. Under the ACA, CMS imposes drug coverage requirements for health plans required to cover essential health benefits, including plans offered through
federal or state Public Exchanges. Additionally, the NAIC and health care accreditation agencies like NCQA and URAC have developed model acts and standards
for formulary development that are often incorporated into government requirements. Many states regulate the scope of prescription drug coverage, as well as the
delivery channels to receive prescriptions, for insurers, MCOs and Medicaid managed care plans. The increasing government regulation of formularies could
significantly affect the Company’s ability to develop and administer formularies, pharmacy networks and other plan design features on behalf of its insurer, MCO
and other clients. Similarly, some states prohibit health plan sponsors from implementing certain restrictive pharmacy benefit plan design features. This regulation
could limit or preclude (i) limited networks, (ii) a requirement to use particular providers, (iii) copayment differentials among providers and (iv) formulary tiering
practices.
28

Laws and Regulations Related to the Retail/LTC Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state and
local statutes and regulations governing the operation of its Retail/LTC segment specifically. Among these are the following:
Retail Medical Clinics - States regulate retail medical clinics operated by nurse practitioners or physician assistants through physician oversight, clinic and lab
licensure requirements and the prohibition of the corporate practice of medicine. A number of states have implemented or proposed laws or regulations that impact
certain components of retail medical clinic operations such as physician oversight, signage, third party contracting requirements, bathroom facilities, and scope of
services. These laws and regulations may affect the operation and expansion of the Company’s owned and managed retail medical clinics.
Other Laws - Other federal, state and local laws and regulations also impact the Company’s retail operations, including laws and regulations governing the
practice of optometry, the practice of audiology, the provision of dietician services and the sale of durable medical equipment, contact lenses, eyeglasses, hearing
aids and alcohol.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Health Care Benefits Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state, local
and international statutes and regulations governing its Health Care Benefits segment specifically.
Overview - Differing approaches to state insurance regulation and varying enforcement philosophies may materially and adversely affect the Company’s ability to
standardize its Health Care Benefits products and services across state lines. These laws and regulations, including the ACA, restrict how the Company conducts its
business and result in additional burdens and costs to the Company. Significant areas of governmental regulation include premium rates and rating methodologies,
underwriting rules and procedures, required benefits, sales and marketing activities, provider rates of payment, restrictions on health plans’ ability to limit
providers’ participation in their networks and/or remove providers from their networks and financial condition (including reserves and minimum capital or risk
based capital requirements). These laws and regulations are different in each jurisdiction and vary from product to product.
Each health insurer and HMO must file periodic financial and operating reports with the states in which it does business. In addition, health insurers and HMOs are
subject to state examination and periodic license renewal. Applicable laws also restrict the ability of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries to pay dividends, and
certain dividends require prior regulatory approval. In addition, some of the Company’s businesses and related activities may be subject to PPO, MCO, utilization
review or TPA-related licensure requirements and regulations. These licensure requirements and regulations differ from state to state, but may contain provider
network, contracting, product and rate, financial and reporting requirements. There also are laws and regulations that set specific standards for the Company’s
delivery of services, payment of claims, fraud prevention, protection of consumer health information, and payment for covered benefits and services.
Required Regulatory Approvals - The Company must obtain and maintain regulatory approvals to price, market and administer many of its Health Care Benefits
products. Supervisory agencies, including CMS, the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight and the DOL, as well as state health, insurance,
managed care and Medicaid agencies, have broad authority to take one or more of the following actions:
•
Grant, suspend and revoke the Company’s licenses to transact business;
•
Suspend or exclude the Company from participation in government programs;
•
Suspend or limit the Company’s authority to market products;
•
Regulate many aspects of the products and services the Company offers, including the pricing and underwriting of many of its products and services;
•
Assess damages, fines and/or penalties;
•
Terminate the Company’s contract with the government agency and/or withhold payments from the government agency to the Company;
•
Impose retroactive adjustments to premiums and require the Company to pay refunds to the government, customers and/or members;
•
Restrict the Company’s ability to conduct acquisitions or dispositions;
29

•
Require the Company to maintain minimum capital levels in its subsidiaries and monitor its solvency and reserve adequacy;
•
Regulate the Company’s investment activities on the basis of quality, diversification and other quantitative criteria; and/or
•
Exclude the Company’s plans from participating in Public Exchanges if they are deemed to have a history of “unreasonable” premium rate increases or fail to
meet other criteria set by HHS or the applicable state.
The Company’s operations, current and past business practices, current and past contracts, and accounts and other books and records are subject to routine, regular
and special investigations, audits, examinations and reviews by, and from time to time the Company receives subpoenas and other requests for information from,
federal, state and international supervisory and enforcement agencies, attorneys general and other state, federal and international governmental authorities and
legislators.
Commercial Product Pricing and Underwriting Restrictions - Pricing and underwriting regulation by states limits the Company’s underwriting and rating
practices and those of other health insurers, particularly for small employer groups, and varies by state. In general, these limitations apply to certain customer
segments and limit the Company’s ability to set prices for new or renewing groups, or both, based on specific characteristics of the group or the group’s prior claim
experience. In some states, these laws and regulations restrict the Company’s ability to price for the risk it assumes and/or reflect reasonable costs in the
Company’s pricing.
The ACA expanded the premium rate review process by, among other things, requiring the Company’s Commercial Insured rates to be reviewed for
“reasonableness” at either the state or the federal level. HHS established a federal premium rate review process that generally applies to proposed premium rate
increases equal to or exceeding a federally (or lower state) specified threshold. HHS’s rate review process imposes additional public disclosure requirements as
well as additional review on filings requesting premium rate increases equal to or exceeding this “reasonableness” threshold. These combined state and federal
review requirements may prevent, further delay or otherwise affect the Company’s ability to price for the risk it assumes, which could adversely affect its MBRs
and operating results, particularly during periods of increased utilization of medical services and/or medical cost trend or when such utilization and/or trend
exceeds the Company’s projections.
The ACA also specifies minimum MLRs of 85% for large group Commercial products and 80% for individual and small group Commercial products. Because the
ACA minimum MLRs are structured as “floors” for many of their requirements, states have the latitude to enact more stringent rules governing these restrictions.
For Commercial products, states have and may adopt higher minimum MLR requirements, use more stringent definitions of “medical loss ratio,” incorporate
minimum MLR requirements into prospective premium rate filings, require prior approval of premium rates or impose other requirements related to minimum
MLR. Minimum MLR requirements and similar actions further limit the level of margin the Company can earn in its Insured Commercial products while leaving
the Company exposed to medical costs that are higher than those reflected in its pricing. The Company also may be subject to significant fines, penalties, premium
refunds and litigation if it fails to comply with minimum MLR laws and regulations.
In addition, the Company requested increases in its premium rates in its Commercial Health Care Benefits business for 2020 (including as a result of the
reinstatement of the HIF for 2020 following the temporary suspension of the HIF for 2019) and expects to continue to request increases in those rates for 2021 and
beyond in order to adequately price for projected medical cost trends, required expansions of coverage and rating limits, and significant assessments, fees and taxes
imposed by the federal and state governments, including as a result of the ACA. The Company’s rates also must be adequate to reflect adverse selection in its
products, particularly in small group Commercial products. These rate increases may be significant and thus heighten the risks of adverse publicity, adverse
regulatory action and adverse selection and the likelihood that the Company’s requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed, which could
lead to operating margin compression.
Many of the laws and regulations governing the Company’s pricing and underwriting practices also limit the differentials in premium rates insurers and other
carriers may charge between new and renewal business, and/or between groups based on differing characteristics. They may also require that carriers disclose to
customers the basis on which the carrier establishes new business and renewal premium rates and limit the ability of a carrier to terminate customers’ coverage.
Medicaid Regulation - The Company is seeking to substantially grow its Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan businesses over the next
several years. As a result, the Company also is increasing its exposure to changes in government policy with respect to and/or regulation of the various Medicaid,
dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs in which the Company participates, including changes in the amounts payable to the Company under
those programs.
30

Since 2017, Managed Medicaid products, including those the Company offers, are subject to a minimum federal MLR of 85%. A Medicaid managed care quality
rating system and provider network adequacy requirements also apply to Medicaid products. Because the federal minimum MLR is structured as a “floor,” states
have the latitude to enact more stringent rules governing these restrictions. For Managed Medicaid products, states may adopt higher minimum MLR requirements,
use more stringent definitions of “medical loss ratio” or impose other requirements related to minimum MLR. Minimum MLR requirements and similar actions
further limit the level of margin the Company can earn in its Insured Medicaid products while leaving the Company exposed to medical costs that are higher than
those reflected in its pricing. The Company also may be subject to significant fines, penalties, premium refunds and litigation if it fails to comply with minimum
MLR laws and regulations.
The future of the ACA, and the impact of Medicaid expansion under the ACA, are uncertain. States may opt out of the elements of the ACA requiring expansion of
Medicaid coverage without losing their current federal Medicaid funding. To date, a number of states and the District of Columbia have expanded Medicaid
coverage to the higher eligibility levels contemplated by the ACA. In addition, the election of new governors and/or state legislatures may impact states’ previous
decisions regarding Medicaid expansion. Proposals for substantial changes to federal funding of state Medicaid programs are likely to be considered in 2020 and
beyond, including the possibility of converting federal Medicaid support to block grants (such as the block grant option outlined by CMS on January 30, 2020) and
per capita caps on federal funding. Uncertainty regarding federal funding is causing and will continue to cause states to re-evaluate their Medicaid expansions and
consider new assessments, fees and/or taxes on health plans. That re-evaluation and any changes to federal funding of state Medicaid programs may adversely
affect Medicaid payment rates, the Company’s revenues and its Medicaid membership.
The economic aspects of the Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan business vary from state to state and are subject to frequent change.
Medicaid premiums are paid by each state and differ from state to state. The federal government and certain states also are considering proposals and legislation for
Medicaid and dual eligible program reforms or redesigns, including restrictions on the collection of manufacturer’s rebates on pharmaceuticals by Medicaid MCOs
and their contracted PBMs, further program, population and/or geographic expansions of risk-based managed care, increasing beneficiary cost-sharing or payment
levels, and changes to benefits, reimbursement, eligibility criteria, provider network adequacy requirements (including requiring the inclusion of specified high cost
providers in the Company’s networks) and program structure. In some states, current Medicaid and dual eligible funding and premium revenue may not be
adequate for the Company to continue program participation. The Company’s Medicaid and dual eligible contracts with states (or sponsors of Medicaid managed
care plans) are subject to cancellation by the state (or the sponsors of the managed care plans) after a short notice period without cause (e.g., when a state
discontinues a managed care program) or in the event of insufficient state funding.
The Company’s Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan products also are heavily regulated by CMS and state Medicaid agencies, which have
the right to audit the Company’s performance to determine compliance with CMS contracts and regulations. The Company’s Medicaid products, dual eligible
products and CHIP contracts also are subject to complex federal and state regulations and oversight by state Medicaid agencies regarding the services provided to
Medicaid enrollees, payment for those services, network requirements (including mandatory inclusion of specified high-cost providers), and other aspects of these
programs, and by external review organizations which audit Medicaid plans on behalf of state Medicaid agencies. The laws, regulations and contractual
requirements applicable to the Company and other participants in Medicaid and dual eligible programs, including requirements that the Company submit encounter
data to the applicable state agency, are extensive, complex and subject to change. The Company has invested significant resources to comply with these standards,
and its Medicaid and dual eligible program compliance efforts will continue to require significant resources. CMS and/or state Medicaid agencies may fine the
Company, withhold payments to the Company, seek premium and other refunds, terminate the Company’s existing contracts, elect not to award the Company new
contracts or not to renew the Company’s existing contracts, prohibit the Company from continuing to market and/or enroll members in or refuse to automatically
assign members to one or more of the Company’s Medicaid or dual eligible products, exclude the Company from participating in one or more Medicaid or dual
eligible programs and/or institute other sanctions and/or civil monetary penalties against the Company if it fails to comply with CMS or state regulations or
contractual requirements.
The Company cannot predict whether pending or future federal or state legislation or court proceedings will change various aspects of the Medicaid program, nor
can it predict the impact those changes will have on its business operations or operating results, but the effects could be materially adverse.
Federal and State Reporting - The Company is subject to extensive financial and business reporting requirements, including penalties for inaccuracies and/or
omissions, at both the federal and state level. The Company’s ability to comply with certain of these requirements depends on receipt of information from third
parties that may not be readily available or reliably provided in all instances. The Company is and will continue to be required to modify its information systems,
dedicate significant resources
31

Table of Contents
and incur significant expenses to comply with these requirements. However, the Company cannot eliminate the risks of unavailability of or errors in its reports.
Product Design and Administration and Sales Practices - State and/or federal regulatory scrutiny of health care benefit product design and administration and
marketing and advertising practices, including the filing of insurance policy forms, the adequacy of provider networks, the accuracy of provider directories, and the
adequacy of disclosure regarding products and their administration, is increasing as are the penalties being imposed for inappropriate practices. Medicare, Medicaid
and dual eligible products and products offering more limited benefits in particular continue to attract increased regulatory scrutiny.
Guaranty Fund Assessments/Solvency Protection - Under guaranty fund laws existing in all states, insurers doing business in those states can be assessed (in
most states up to prescribed limits) for certain obligations of insolvent insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. The life and health insurance guaranty
associations in which the Company participates that operate under these laws respond to insolvencies of long-term care insurers as well as health insurers. The
Company’s assessments generally are based on a formula relating to the Company’s health care premiums in the state compared to the premiums of other insurers.
Certain states allow assessments to be recovered over time as offsets to premium taxes. Some states have similar laws relating to HMOs and/or other payors such
as not-for-profit consumer governed health plans established under the ACA. While historically the Company has ultimately recovered more than half of guaranty
fund assessments through statutorily permitted premium tax offsets, significant increases in assessments could lead to legislative and/or regulatory actions that limit
future offsets.
Available Information
CVS Health Corporation was incorporated in Delaware in 1996. The corporate office is located at One CVS Drive, Woonsocket, Rhode Island 02895, telephone
(401) 765-1500. CVS Health’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the trading symbol “CVS.” General information about the
Company is available through the Company’s website at http://www.cvshealth.com. The Company’s financial press releases and filings with the SEC are available
free of charge within the Investors section of the Company’s website at http://investors.cvshealth.com. In addition, the SEC maintains an internet site that contains
reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers, such as the Company, that file electronically with the SEC. The address of that
website is http://www.sec.gov. The information on or linked to the Company’s website is neither a part of nor incorporated by reference in this 10-K or any of the
Company’s other SEC filings.
In accordance with guidance provided by the SEC regarding use by a company of its websites and social media channels as a means to disclose material
information to investors and to comply with its disclosure obligations under SEC Regulation FD, CVS Health Corporation (the “Registrant”) hereby notifies
investors, the media and other interested parties that it intends to continue to use its media and investor relations website (http://investors.cvshealth.com/) and its
Twitter feed (@CVSHealthIR) to publish important information about the Registrant, including information that may be deemed material to investors. The list of
social media channels that the Registrant uses may be updated on its media and investor relations website from time to time. The Registrant encourages investors,
the media, and other interested parties to review the information the Registrant posts on its website and social media channels as described above, in addition to
information announced by the Registrant through its SEC filings, press releases and public conference calls and webcasts.
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
You should carefully consider each of the following risks and uncertainties and all of the other information set forth in this 10-K. These risks and uncertainties and
other factors may affect forward-looking statements, including those we make in this 10-K or elsewhere, such as in news releases or investor or analyst calls,
meetings or presentations, on our websites or through our social media channels. The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face. There
can be no assurance that we have identified all the risks that affect us. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently believe to
be immaterial also may adversely affect our businesses. Any of these risks or uncertainties could cause our actual results to differ materially from our expectations
and the expected results discussed in our forward-looking statements. You should not consider past results to be an indication of future performance.
If any of the following risks or uncertainties develops into actual events or if the circumstances described in the risks or uncertainties occur or continue to occur,
those events or circumstances could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results, cash flows, financial condition and/or stock price, among
other effects on us. You should read the following section in conjunction with the MD&A, included in Item 7 of this 10-K, our consolidated financial statements
and the related notes, included in Item 8 of this 10-K, and our “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” in this 10-K.
32

Summary
The following is a summary of the principal risks we face:
Risks Related to COVID-19
•
The impact of COVID-19 on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be material and
adverse.
•
The impact of COVID-19 and the related testing and vaccination may result in us not being able to accurately forecast health care and other benefit costs,
and we are uncertain that future health care and other benefits costs will not exceed our projections.
Risks Relating to Our Businesses
•
Each of our segments operates in a highly competitive and evolving business environment.
•
A change in our Health Care Benefits product mix may adversely affect our profit margins.
•
Negative public perception of the industries in which we operate can adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and prospects.
•
Failure to maintain or improve our relationships with our retail and specialty pharmacy customers may adversely affect our operating results.
•
We face risks relating to the availability, pricing and safety profiles of prescription drugs that we purchase and sell.
•
We may not be able to accurately forecast health care and other benefit costs.
•
If actual claims in our Insured Health Care Benefits products exceed our estimates, our operating results could be materially adversely affected, and our
ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future costs may be limited.
•
We are exposed to risks relating to the solvency of other insurers.
Risks From Changes in Public Policy and Other Legal and Regulatory Risks
•
We are subject to potential changes in public policy, laws and regulations, including reform of the U.S. health care system, which can adversely affect our
businesses.
•
If we fail to comply with applicable laws and regulations, we could be subject to significant adverse regulatory actions or suffer brand and reputational
harm.
•
If our compliance or other systems and processes fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and become subject to
regulatory actions and/or litigation.
•
The litigation and other adverse legal proceedings that we face are costly to defend, may result in changes in our business practices, harm our brand and
reputation and adversely affect our businesses and operating results.
•
The governmental audits, investigations and reviews to which we are subject could result in changes to our business practices and also could result in
material refunds, fines, penalties, civil and/or criminal liabilities and other sanctions.
•
Our litigation and regulatory risk profile are changing as we offer new products and services.
•
We face unique regulatory and other challenges in our Medicare and Medicaid businesses.
•
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to
increase.
•
We may not be able to obtain adequate premium rate increases in our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which would have an adverse effect on our
revenues, MBRs and operating results.
•
Minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in our Insured Health Care Benefits products while leaving us exposed to higher
than expected medical costs.
•
Our operating results may be adversely affected by changes in laws and policies governing employers and by union organizing activity.
Risks Associated with Mergers, Acquisitions, and Divestitures
•
We may be unable to successfully integrate companies we acquire.
33

•
The acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities we pursue may be unsuccessful.
•
In order to complete a proposed acquisition, we may be required to divest certain portions of our business, for which we may not be able to obtain
favorable pricing.
Risks Related to Our Operations
•
Failure to meet customer expectations may harm our brand and reputation, our ability to retain and grow our customer base and membership and our
operating results and cash flows.
•
We can provide no assurance that we or our vendors will be able to detect, prevent or contain the effects of cyber attacks or other information security
(including cybersecurity) risks or threats in the future.
•
Our use and disclosure of members’, customers’ and other constituents’ sensitive information is subject to complex regulations at multiple levels, and we
would be adversely affected if we or our business associates or other vendors fail to adequately protect members’, customers’ or other constituents’
sensitive information.
•
Product liability, product recall or personal injury issues could damage our reputation and have a significant adverse effect on our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
•
We face significant competition in attracting and retaining talented employees, and managing succession for, and retention of, key executives is critical to
our success.
•
Sales of our products and services are dependent on our ability to attract and motivate internal sales personnel and independent third-party brokers,
consultants and agents.
•
Failure of our businesses to effectively collaborate could prevent us from maximizing our operating results.
•
The failure or disruption of our information technology systems or infrastructure to support our businesses could adversely affect our reputation,
businesses, operating results and cash flows.
•
Pursuing multiple initiatives simultaneously presents challenges to maintaining, continuing to develop and improve an effective information technology
system.
•
We are subject to payment-related risks that could increase our operating costs, expose us to fraud or theft, subject us to potential liability and disrupt our
business operations.
•
Both our and our vendors’ operations are subject to a variety of business continuity hazards and risks.
Financial Risks
•
We would be adversely affected if we do not effectively deploy our capital. Downgrades or potential downgrades in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our brand and reputation, businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
•
Goodwill and other intangible assets could, in the future, become impaired.
•
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and global capital markets can significantly and adversely affect the value of our investments.
•
Our significant indebtedness has increased our consolidated interest expense and could adversely affect our business flexibility and increase our
borrowing costs.
Risks Related to Our Relationships with Manufacturers, Providers, Suppliers and Vendors
•
We face risks relating to the market availability, pricing, suppliers and safety profiles of prescription drugs and other products that we purchase and sell.
•
Our operating results may be adversely affected if we are unable to contract with providers on competitive terms and develop and maintain attractive
networks with high quality providers.
•
If our service providers fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to comply with applicable laws or regulations, we may be exposed to brand and
reputational harm, litigation and/or regulatory action.
•
We may experience increased medical and other benefit costs, litigation risk and customer and member dissatisfaction when providers that do not have
contracts with us render services to our Health Care Benefits members.
•
Continuing consolidation and integration among providers and other suppliers may increase our medical and other covered benefits costs, make it difficult
for us to compete in certain geographies and create new competitors.
34

Risks Related to COVID-19
The spread of, impact of and response to COVID-19 underscores and amplifies certain risks we face. The impact COVID-19 will have on our businesses,
operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be material and adverse.
COVID-19 has spread to every state in the U.S., has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and has severely impacted, and is expected to
continue to severely impact, the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world.
The legislative and regulatory environment governing our businesses is dynamic and changing frequently, including the Families First Act, the CARES Act and
mandated increases to the medical services we must pay for without a corresponding increase in the premiums we receive in our Health Care Benefits Insured
products. As a result of COVID-19, including legislative and/or regulatory responses to COVID-19, the premiums we charge in our Insured Health Care Benefits
products may prove to be insufficient to cover the cost of medical services delivered to our Insured medical members, which may increase significantly as a result
of higher utilization rates of medical facilities and services and other increases in associated hospital and pharmaceutical costs.
Federal, state and local governmental policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, including shelter-in-place orders and social distancing
directives, may not effectively combat the severity and/or duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and have resulted in, among other things, a reduction in utilization
that is discretionary, the cancellation of elective medical procedures, reduced customer traffic and front store sales in our retail pharmacies, our customers being
ordered to close or severely curtail their operations, the adoption of work-from-home policies and a reduction in diagnostic reporting due to reductions in health
care provider visits and restrictions on our access to providers’ medical records, all of which impact our businesses. Among other impacts of these policies and
initiatives on our businesses, we expect changes in medical claims submission patterns and an adverse impact on (i) drug utilization due to the reduction in
discretionary visits with providers; (ii) front store sales as a result of reduced customer traffic in our retail pharmacies due to shelter-in-place orders and COVID-19
related unemployment; (iii) medical membership in our Health Care Benefits segment and covered lives in our PBM clients due to reductions in workforce at our
existing customers (including due to business failures) as well as reduced willingness to change benefits providers by prospective customers; (iv) benefit costs due
to COVID-19 related support programs we have put in place for our medical members and mandated increases to the medical services we must pay for without a
corresponding increase in the premiums we receive in our Insured Health Care Benefits products; and (v) the amount, timing and collectability of payments to the
Company from customers, clients, government payers and members as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on them. Over time, these policies and initiatives also
may cause us to experience increased benefit costs and/or decreased revenues in our Health Care Benefits segment if, as a result of our medical members not seeing
their providers as a result of COVID-19, we are unable to implement clinical initiatives to manage benefit costs and chronic conditions of our medical members
and appropriately document their risk profiles.
In addition, in response to COVID-19, during the first half of 2020, we began to offer our medical members expanded benefit coverage and became obligated by
governmental action to provide other additional coverage. This expanded benefit coverage is being provided without a corresponding increase in the premiums we
receive in our Insured Health Care Benefits products. We also are taking actions designed to help provide financial and administrative relief for the health care
provider community. Such measures and any further steps we take or are required to take to expand or otherwise modify the services delivered to our Health Care
Benefits members, provide relief for the health care provider community, or in connection with the relaxation of shelter-in-place orders and social distancing
directives and other restrictions on movement and economic activity intended to reduce the spread of COVID-19, including the potential for widespread testing and
vaccination, as a component of lifting those measures, could adversely impact our benefit costs, MBR and operating results.
The various initiatives we have implemented to slow and/or reduce the impact of COVID-19, such as colleagues working remotely and installing protective
equipment in our retail pharmacies, and the COVID-19-related support programs we have put in place for our customers, medical members and colleagues have
increased our operating expenses and reduced the efficiency of our operations. Our operating results will continue to be adversely affected so long as these
initiatives continue or if they are expanded. In addition, the adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad caused by COVID-19 have had, and may continue
to have, an adverse impact on our net investment income and the value of our investment portfolio.
The spread of COVID-19, or actions taken to mitigate its spread, could have material and adverse effects on our ability to operate our businesses effectively,
including as a result of the complete or partial closure of facilities, labor shortages and/or financial difficulties experienced by third-party service providers.
Disruptions in our supply chains, our distribution chains and/
35

or public and private infrastructure, including communications and financial services, could materially and adversely impact our business operations. We have
transitioned a significant subset of our colleagues to a remote work environment in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, as have a significant number of
our third-party service providers, which may amplify certain risks to our businesses, including an increased demand for information technology resources,
increased risk of phishing and other cybersecurity attacks, increased risk of unauthorized dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary or
confidential information about us or our medical members or other third-parties and increased risk of business interruptions.
While the FDA has authorized some COVID-19 vaccines for emergency use, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and the severity and duration of the
pandemic and scope and intensity of the governmental response to it are unknown at this time. We believe COVID-19’s impact on our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or financial condition primarily will be driven by the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; the pandemic’s
impact on the U.S. and global economies and consumer behavior and health care utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and impact of stimulus legislation as
well as other federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are beyond our knowledge and control. As a result, the impact
COVID-19 will have on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material. COVID-
19 also may result in legal and regulatory proceedings, investigations and claims against us.
A number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, including COVID-19 and related testing and vaccination, contribute to rising health care and
other benefit costs. We may not be able to accurately forecast health care and other benefit costs, which could adversely affect our Health Care Benefits
segment’s operating results. There can be no assurance that future health care and other benefits costs will not exceed our projections.
As a result of COVID-19, the current economic environment is adverse and less predictable than recently experienced, which has caused and may continue to cause
unanticipated and significant volatility in our health care and other benefits costs, including COVID-19 related testing and vaccination and post-acute care skilled
nursing facility and behavioral health costs. On January 21, 2021, the President of the United States issued an executive order to support government efforts to
expand access, availability and use of COVID-19 diagnostic, screening and surveillance and addressed the cost of COVID-19 testing by facilitating COVID-19
testing free of charge to those who lack comprehensive health insurance and clarifying group health plans’ and health insurance issuers’ obligations to provide
coverage for COVID-19 testing. In addition, the timing of vaccine administration to the general public and related costs as well as the identification of new, more
infectious strains of the COVID-19 virus and whether the vaccines will be effective against such new strains are uncertain and may impact our MBR. Premiums for
our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which comprised 92% of our Health Care Benefits revenues for 2020, are priced in advance based on our forecasts of
health care and other benefit costs during a fixed premium period, which is generally twelve months. These forecasts are typically developed several months before
the fixed premium period begins, are influenced by historical data (and recent historical data in particular), are dependent on our ability to anticipate and detect
medical cost trends and changes in our members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns and medical claim submission patterns and require a significant
degree of judgment. For example, our revenue on Medicare policies is based on bids submitted in June of the year before the contract year. Cost increases in excess
of our projections cannot be recovered in the fixed premium period through higher premiums. As a result, our profits are particularly sensitive to the accuracy of
our forecasts of the increases in health care and other benefit costs that we expect to occur and our ability to anticipate and detect medical cost trends. For 2021,
those forecasts include adjustments made to pricing based on prospective expectations for liabilities due to testing, vaccines, direct COVID-19 treatment and
deferred care. Risk-adjusted revenue has been adjusted for deferred care, and forecasted enrollment considers assumptions about the economic environment,
though COVID-19 related impacts remain uncertain. During periods such as 2020 and 2021 when health care and other benefit costs, utilization and/or medical
costs trends experience significant volatility and medical claim submission patterns are changing rapidly as a result of COVID-19, accurately detecting,
forecasting, managing, reserving and pricing for our (and our self-insured customers’) medical cost trends and incurred and future health care and other benefits
costs is more challenging. There can be no assurance regarding the accuracy of the health care or other benefit cost projections reflected in our pricing, and our
health care and other benefit costs (including COVID-19 related testing and vaccination and post-acute care skilled nursing facility and behavioral health costs) are
affected by COVID-19 and other external events over which we have no control. Even relatively small differences between predicted and actual health care and
other benefit costs as a percentage of premium revenues can result in significant adverse changes in our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
A number of factors contribute to rising health care and other benefit costs, including COVID-19, previously uninsured members entering the health care system,
changes in members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns, turnover in our membership, additional government mandated benefits or other regulatory
changes (including under the Families First Act and the CARES Act), changes in the health status of our members, the aging of the population and other changing
demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology, increases in the number and cost of prescription drugs (including specialty
36

pharmacy drugs and ultra-high cost drugs and therapies), direct-to-consumer marketing by drug manufacturers, the increasing influence of social media on our
members’ health care utilization and other behaviors, changes in health care practices and general economic conditions (such as inflation and employment levels).
In addition, government-imposed limitations on Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements to health plans and providers have caused the private sector to bear a
greater share of increasing health care and other benefits costs over time, and future amendments or repeal or replacement of the ACA that increase the uninsured
population may amplify this problem. Other factors that affect our health care and other benefit costs include epidemics or other pandemics, changes as a result of
the ACA, changes to or the discontinuation of the ACA and other changes in the regulatory environment, the evolution toward a consumer driven business model,
new technologies, influenza-related health care costs (which may be substantial), clusters of high-cost cases, health care provider and member fraud, and numerous
other factors that are or may be beyond our control.
Furthermore, if we are not able to accurately and promptly anticipate and detect medical cost trends or accurately estimate the cost of incurred but not yet reported
claims or reported claims that have not been paid, our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future health care costs and reflect our current benefit cost
experience in our pricing process may be limited, which would further amplify the extent of any adverse impact on our operating results. These risks are
particularly acute during periods such as 2020 and 2021 when health care and other benefit costs, utilization and/or medical cost trends experience significant
volatility and medical claim submission patterns are changing rapidly as a result of COVID-19. Such risks are further magnified by the ACA and other existing and
future legislation and regulations that limit our ability to price for our projected and/or experienced increases in utilization and/or medical cost trends.
There can be no assurance that future health care and other benefits costs will not exceed our projections.
Adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad can materially and adversely impact our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition,
and we do not expect these conditions to improve in the near future.
The COVID-19 pandemic, the availability and cost of credit and other capital, higher unemployment rates and other factors have contributed to adverse conditions
in the global economy and significantly diminished expectations for the global economy, and particularly the U.S. economy, at least through the end of 2020 and
possibly longer. Our customers, medical providers and the other companies with which we do business are generally headquartered in the U.S.; however, many of
our largest customers are global companies with operations around the world. As a result, adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad, including those
caused by COVID-19, can materially and adversely impact our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition, including:
•
In our Pharmacy Services segment, by causing drug utilization to decline, reducing demand for PBM services and adversely affecting the financial health
of our PBM clients.
•
In our Retail/LTC segment, by causing drug utilization to decline, changing consumer purchasing power, preferences and/or spending patterns leading to
reduced consumer demand for products sold in our stores and adversely affecting the financial health of our LTC pharmacy customers.
•
By causing our existing customers to reduce workforces (including due to business failures), which would reduce our revenues, the number of covered
lives in our PBM clients and/or the number of members our Health Care Benefits segment serves.
•
By causing our clients and customers and potential clients and customers, particularly those with the most employees or members, and state and local
governments, to force us to compete more vigorously on factors such as price and service, including service, discount and other performance guarantees,
to retain or obtain their business.
•
By causing customers and potential customers of our Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits segments to purchase fewer products and/or products that
generate less profit for us than the ones they currently purchase or otherwise would have purchased.
•
By causing customers and potential customers of our Health Care Benefits segment, particularly smaller employers and individuals, to forego obtaining or
renewing their health and other coverage with us.
•
In our Health Care Benefits segment, by causing unanticipated increases and volatility in utilization of medical and other covered services, including
COVID-19 related testing, vaccination and behavioral health services, by our medical members, changes in medical claim submission patterns and/or
increases in medical unit costs and/or provider behavior, each of which would increase our costs and limit our ability to accurately detect, forecast,
manage, reserve and price for our (and our self-insured customers’) medical cost trends and incurred and future health care and other benefits costs.
37

•
By increasing medical unit costs and causing changes in provider behavior in our Health Care Benefits segment as hospitals and other providers attempt to
maintain revenue levels in their efforts to adjust to their own COVID-19-related and other economic challenges.
•
By weakening the ability or perceived ability of the issuers and/or guarantors of the debt or other securities we hold in our investment portfolio to perform
on their obligations to us, which could result in defaults in those securities and has reduced, and may further reduce, the value of those securities and has
created, and may continue to create, net realized capital losses for us that reduce our operating results.
•
By weakening the ability of our customers, including self-insured customers in our Health Care Benefits segment, medical providers and the other
companies with which we do business as well as our medical members to perform their obligations to us or causing them not to perform those obligations,
either of which could reduce our operating results.
•
By weakening the ability of our former subsidiaries and/or their purchasers to satisfy their lease obligations that we have guaranteed and causing the
Company to be required to satisfy those obligations.
•
By weakening the financial condition of other insurers, including long-term care insurers and life insurers, which increases the risk that we will receive
significant assessments for obligations of insolvent insurers to policyholders and claimants.
•
By causing, over time, inflation that could cause interest rates to increase and thereby increase our interest expense and reduce our operating results, as
well as decrease the value of the debt securities we hold in our investment portfolio, which would reduce our operating results and/or adversely affect our
financial condition.
Furthermore, reductions in workforce by our customers can cause unanticipated increases in the health care and other benefits costs of our Health Care Benefits
segment. For example, our business associated with members who have elected to receive benefits under Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (known
as “COBRA”) typically has an MBR that is significantly higher than our overall Commercial MBR.
Risks Relating to Our Businesses
Each of our segments operates in a highly competitive and evolving business environment; and gross margins in the industries in which we compete may
decline.
Each of our segments, Pharmacy Services, which includes our pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) business, Retail/LTC, and Health Care Benefits, operates in
a highly competitive and evolving business environment. Specifically:
•
As competition increases in the geographies in which we operate, including competition from new entrants, a significant increase in price compression and/or
reimbursement pressures could occur, and this could require us to reevaluate our pricing structures to remain competitive.
•
The competitive success of our Pharmacy Services segment is dependent on our ability to establish and maintain contractual relationships with network
pharmacies as PBM clients evaluate adopting narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks.
•
The competitive success of our Retail/LTC segment and our specialty pharmacy operations is dependent on our ability to establish and maintain contractual
relationships with PBMs and other payors on acceptable terms as the payors’ clients evaluate adopting narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks.
•
In our PBM business, we maintain contractual relationships with brand name drug manufacturers that provide for purchase discounts and/or rebates on drugs
dispensed by pharmacies in our retail network and by our specialty and mail order pharmacies (all or a portion of which may be passed on to clients).
Manufacturer’s rebates often depend on a PBM’s ability to meet contractual requirements, including the placement of a manufacturer’s products on the PBM’s
formularies. If we lose our relationship with one or more drug manufacturers, or if the discounts or rebates provided by drug manufacturers decline, our
operating results, cash flows and/or prospects could be adversely affected.
•
The PBM industry has been experiencing price compression as a result of competitive pressures and increased client demands for lower prices, increased
revenue sharing, including sharing in a larger portion of rebates received from drug manufacturers, enhanced service offerings and/or higher service levels.
Marketplace dynamics and regulatory changes also have adversely affected our ability to offer plan sponsors pricing that includes the use of retail
“differential” or “spread,” which could adversely affect our future profitability, and we expect these trends to continue.
•
Our retail pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and LTC pharmacy operations have been affected by reimbursement pressure caused by competition, including client
demands for lower prices, generic drug pricing, earlier than expected generic drug introductions and network reimbursement pressure. If we are unable to
increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate
38

the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely affected. If we are unable to limit our price increases, we may lose customers to competitors
with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and operating results.
•
A shift in the mix of our pharmacy prescription volume towards programs offering lower reimbursement rates as a result of competition or otherwise could
adversely affect our margins, including the ongoing shift in pharmacy mix towards 90-day prescriptions at retail and the ongoing shift in pharmacy mix
towards Medicare Part D prescriptions.
•
PBM client contracts often are for a period of approximately three years. However, PBM clients may require early or periodic re-negotiation of pricing prior to
contract expiration. PBM clients are generally well informed, can move between us and our competitors and often seek competing bids prior to expiration of
their contracts. We are therefore under pressure to contain price increases despite being faced with increasing drug costs and increasing operating costs. If we
are unable to increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely affected. If we are unable to
limit our price increases, we may lose customers to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and operating results.
•
The operating results and margins of our LTC business are further affected by the increased efforts of health care payors to negotiate reduced or capitated
pricing arrangements and by the financial health of, and purchases and sales of, our LTC customers.
•
In our Health Care Benefits segment we are seeking to substantially grow our Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan membership over the
next several years. In many instances, to acquire and retain our government customers’ business, we must bid against our competitors in a highly competitive
environment. Winning bids often are challenged successfully by unsuccessful bidders, and may also be withdrawn or cancelled by the issuing agency.
•
Customer contracts in our Health Care Benefits segment are generally for a period of one year, and our customers have considerable flexibility in moving
between us and our competitors. One of the key factors on which we compete for customers, especially in uncertain economic environments, is overall cost.
We are therefore under pressure to contain premium price increases despite being faced with increasing health care and other benefit costs and increasing
operating costs. If we are unable to increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely
affected. If we are unable to limit our price increases, we may lose members to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and
operating results. In response to rising prices, our customers may elect to self-insure or to reduce benefits in order to limit increases in their benefit costs.
Alternatively, our customers may purchase different types of products from us that are less profitable. Such elections may result in reduced membership in our
more profitable Insured products and/or lower premiums for our Insured products, which may adversely affect our revenues and operating results, although
such elections also may reduce our health care and other benefit costs. In addition, our Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP products are subject to termination
without cause, periodic re-bid, rate adjustment and program redesign, as customers seek to contain their benefit costs, particularly in an uncertain economy,
and our exposure to this risk is increasing as we grow our Government products membership. These actions may adversely affect our membership, revenues
and operating results.
•
We requested increases in our premium rates in our Commercial Health Care Benefits business for 2021 and expect to continue to request increases in those
rates for 2022 and beyond in order to adequately price for projected medical cost trends, required expansions of coverage and rating limits, and significant
assessments, fees and taxes imposed by federal and state governments, including as a result of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health
Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”). Our rates also must be adequate to reflect the risk that our products will be selected
by people with a higher risk profile or utilization rate than the pool of participants we anticipated when we established pricing for the applicable products (also
known as “adverse selection”), particularly in small group Commercial products. These rate increases may be significant and thus heighten the risks of adverse
publicity, adverse regulatory action and adverse selection and the likelihood that our requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed,
which could lead to operating margin compression.
In addition, competitors in each of our businesses may offer services and pricing terms that we may not be willing or able to offer. Competition also may come
from new entrants and other sources in the future. Unless we can demonstrate enhanced value to our clients through innovative product and service offerings in the
rapidly changing health care industry, we may be unable to remain competitive.
Disruptive innovation by existing or new competitors could alter the competitive landscape in the future and require us to accurately identify and assess such
alterations and make timely and effective changes to our strategies and business model to compete effectively. For example, decisions to buy our Pharmacy
Services and Health Care Benefits products and services increasingly are made or influenced by consumers, either through direct purchasing (e.g., Medicare
Advantage plans and PDPs) or through public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) and private health insurance exchanges (together with Public
Exchanges, collectively, “Insurance Exchanges”) that allow individual choice. Consumers also are increasingly seeking to access consumer goods and health care
products and services locally and through other direct channels such as mobile
39

devices and websites. To compete effectively in the consumer-driven marketplace, we will be required to develop or acquire new capabilities, attract new talent and
develop new service and distribution relationships that respond to consumer needs and preferences.
Changes in marketplace dynamics or the actions of competitors or manufacturers, including industry consolidation, the emergence of new competitors and strategic
alliances, and decisions to exclude us from new narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks could materially and adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or prospects.
A change in our Health Care Benefits product mix may adversely affect our profit margins.
Our Insured Health Care Benefits products that involve greater potential risk generally tend to be more profitable than our ASC products. Historically, smaller
employer groups have been more likely to purchase Insured Health Care Benefits products because such purchasers are generally unable or unwilling to bear
greater liability for health care expenditures, although over the last several years even relatively small employers have moved to ASC products. We also serve, and
expect to grow our business with, government-sponsored programs, including Medicare and Medicaid, that are subject to competitive bids and have lower profit
margins than our Commercial Insured Health Care Benefits products. A shift of enrollees from more profitable products to less profitable products could have a
material adverse effect on the Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
Negative public perception of the industries in which we operate, or of our industries’ or our practices, can adversely affect our businesses, operating results,
cash flows and prospects.
Our brand and reputation are two of our most important assets, and the industries in which we operate have been and are negatively perceived by the public from
time to time. Negative publicity may come as a result of adverse media coverage, litigation against us and other industry participants, the ongoing public debates
over drug pricing, PBMs, government involvement in drug pricing and purchasing, the future of the ACA, “surprise” medical bills, governmental hearings and/or
investigations, actual or perceived shortfalls regarding our industries’ or our own products and/or business practices (including PBM operations, drug pricing and
insurance coverage determinations) and social media and other media relations activities. Negative publicity also may come from a failure to meet customer
expectations for consistent, high quality and accessible care. This risk may increase as we continue to offer products and services that make greater use of data and
as our business model becomes more focused on delivering health care to consumers.
In addition, by working with the U.S. government in the distribution and administration of the COVID-19 vaccine, the Company may be subject to negative
publicity related to the government’s actions in response to COVID-19 that are outside of the ability of the Company to control.
Negative public perception and/or publicity of our industries in general, or of us or our key vendors, brokers or product distribution networks in particular, can
further increase our costs of doing business and adversely affect our operating results and our stock price by:
•
adversely affecting our brand and reputation;
•
adversely affecting our ability to market and sell our products and/or services and/or retain our existing customers and members;
•
requiring us to change our products and/or services;
•
reducing or restricting the revenue we can receive for our products and/or services; and/or
•
increasing or significantly changing the regulatory and legislative requirements with which we must comply.
We must maintain and improve our relationships with our retail and specialty pharmacy customers and increase the demand for our products and services,
including proprietary brands.
The success of our businesses depends in part on customer loyalty, superior customer service and our ability to persuade customers to frequent our retail stores and
online sites and to purchase products in additional categories and our proprietary brands. Failure to timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer
preferences and spending patterns, and evolving demographic mixes in the communities we serve, an inability to expand the products being purchased by our
clients and customers, or the failure or inability to obtain or offer particular categories of products could adversely affect our relationship with our customers and
clients and the demand for our products and services and could result in excess inventories of products.
40

We offer our retail customers proprietary brand products that are available exclusively at our retail stores and through our online retail sites. The sale of proprietary
products subjects us to unique risks including potential product liability risks, mandatory or voluntary product recalls, potential supply chain and distribution chain
disruptions for raw materials and finished products, our ability to successfully protect our intellectual property rights and the rights of applicable third parties, and
other risks generally encountered by entities that source, market and sell private-label products. We also face similar risks for the other products we sell in our retail
operations, including supply chain and distribution chain disruption risk. Any failure to adequately address some or all of these risks could have an adverse effect
on our retail business, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition. Additionally, an increase in the sales of our proprietary brands may adversely affect
our sales of products owned by our suppliers and adversely impact certain of our supplier relationships. Our ability to locate qualified, economically stable
suppliers who satisfy our requirements, and to acquire sufficient products in a timely and effective manner, is critical to ensuring, among other things, that
customer confidence is not diminished. Any failure to develop sourcing relationships with a broad and deep supplier base could adversely affect our operating
results and erode customer loyalty.
We also could be adversely affected if we fail to identify or effectively respond to changes in marketplace dynamics. For example, specialty pharmacy represents a
significant and growing proportion of prescription drug spending in the U.S., a significant portion of which is dispensed outside of traditional retail pharmacies.
Because our specialty pharmacy business focuses on complex and high-cost medications, many of which are made available by manufacturers to a limited number
of pharmacies (so-called limited distribution drugs) that serve a relatively limited universe of patients, the future growth of our specialty pharmacy business
depends largely upon expanding our access to key drugs and penetration in certain treatment categories. Any contraction of our base of patients or reduction in
demand for the prescriptions we currently dispense could have an adverse effect on our specialty pharmacy business, operating results and cash flows.
We face risks relating to the availability, pricing and safety profiles of prescription drugs that we purchase and sell.
The profitability of our Retail/LTC and Pharmacy Services segments is dependent upon the utilization of prescription drug products. We dispense significant
volumes of brand name and generic drugs from our retail, LTC, specialty and mail order pharmacies, and the retail pharmacies in our PBM’s network also dispense
significant volumes of brand name and generic drugs. Our revenues, operating results and cash flows may decline if physicians cease writing prescriptions for
drugs or the utilization of drugs is reduced, including due to:
•
increased safety risk profiles or regulatory restrictions;
•
manufacturing or other supply issues;
•
certain products being withdrawn by their manufacturers or transitioned to over-the-counter products;
•
future FDA rulings restricting the supply or increasing the cost of products;
•
the introduction of new and successful prescription drugs or lower-priced generic alternatives to existing brand name products; or
•
inflation in the price of brand name drugs.
In addition, increased utilization of generic drugs (which normally yield a higher gross profit rate than equivalent brand name drugs) has resulted in pressure to
decrease reimbursement payments to retail, mail order, specialty and LTC pharmacies for generic drugs, causing a reduction in our margins on sales of generic
drugs. Consolidation within the generic drug manufacturing industry and other external factors may enhance the ability of manufacturers to sustain or increase
pricing of generic drugs and diminish our ability to negotiate reduced generic drug acquisition costs. Any inability to offset increased brand name or generic
prescription drug acquisition costs or to modify our activities to lessen the financial impact of such increased costs could have a significant adverse effect on our
operating results.
A number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, contribute to rising health care and other benefit costs. We may not be able to accurately forecast
health care and other benefit costs, which could adversely affect our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
Premiums for our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which comprised 92% of our Health Care Benefits revenues for 2020, are priced in advance based on our
forecasts of health care and other benefit costs during a fixed premium period, which is generally one year. These forecasts are typically developed several months
before the fixed premium period begins, are influenced by historical data (and recent historical data in particular), are dependent on our ability to anticipate and
detect medical cost trends and changes in our members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns and require a significant degree of judgment. For example, our
revenue on Medicare policies is based on bids submitted in June of the year before the contract year. Cost increases in excess of our projections cannot be
recovered in the fixed premium period through higher premiums. As
41

a result, our profits are particularly sensitive to the accuracy of our forecasts and our ability to anticipate and detect medical cost trends. Even relatively small
differences between predicted and actual health care and other benefit costs as a percentage of premium revenues can result in significant adverse changes in our
operating results.
A number of factors contribute to rising health care and other benefit costs, including previously uninsured members entering the health care system, changes in
members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns, turnover in our membership, additional government mandated benefits or other regulatory changes, changes
in the health status of our members, the aging of the population and other changing demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology, increases in the
number and cost of prescription drugs (including specialty pharmacy drugs and ultra-high cost drugs and therapies), direct-to-consumer marketing by drug
manufacturers, the increasing influence of social media on our members’ health care utilization and other behaviors, changes in health care practices and general
economic conditions (such as inflation and employment levels). In addition, government-imposed limitations on Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements to health
plans and providers have caused the private sector to bear a greater share of increasing health care and other benefits costs over time, and future amendments or
repeal or replacement of the ACA that increase the uninsured population may exacerbate this problem. Other factors that affect our health care and other benefit
costs include changes as a result of the ACA, changes to the ACA and other changes in the regulatory environment, the evolution toward a consumer driven
business model, new technologies, influenza related health care costs (which may be substantial and higher than we project), clusters of high-cost cases, epidemics
or pandemics, health care provider and member fraud, and numerous other factors that are or may be beyond our control. For example, the 2020-2021 influenza
season was impacted by efforts taken to reduce the spread of COVID-19; and the 2019-2020 influenza season had an earlier than average start and had a higher
incidence of influenza than the 2018-2019 influenza season.
Our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results and competitiveness depend in large part on our ability to appropriately manage future health care and other
benefit costs through underwriting criteria, product design, provider network configuration, negotiation of favorable provider contracts and medical management
programs. Our medical cost management programs may not be successful and may have a smaller impact on health care and benefit costs than we expect. The
factors described above may adversely affect our ability to predict and manage health care and other benefit costs, which can adversely affect our competitiveness
and operating results.
The reserves we hold for expected claims in our Insured Health Care Benefits products are based on estimates that involve an extensive degree of judgment
and are inherently variable. Any reserve, including a premium deficiency reserve, may be insufficient. If actual claims exceed our estimates, our operating
results could be materially adversely affected, and our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future costs may be limited.
A large portion of health care claims are not submitted to us until after the end of the quarter in which services are rendered by providers to our members. Our
reported health care costs payable for any particular period reflect our estimates of the ultimate cost of such claims as well as claims that have been reported to us
but not yet paid. We also must estimate the amount of rebates payable under the MLR rules of the ACA, CMS and the OPM and the amounts payable by us to, and
receivable by us from, the United States federal government under the ACA’s remaining premium stabilization program.
Our estimates of health care costs payable are based on a number of factors, including those derived from historical claim experience, but this estimation process
also makes use of extensive judgment. Considerable variability is inherent in such estimates, and the accuracy of the estimates is highly sensitive to changes in
medical claims submission and processing patterns and/or procedures, turnover and other changes in membership, changes in product mix, changes in the
utilization of medical and/or other covered services, including prescription drugs, changes in medical cost trends, changes in our medical management practices
and the introduction of new benefits and products. We estimate health care costs payable periodically, and any resulting adjustments, including premium deficiency
reserves, are reflected in current-period operating results within benefit costs. For example, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we established a premium
deficiency reserve of $11 million and $4 million, respectively, related to Medicaid products in the Health Care Benefits segment. A worsening (or improvement) of
health care cost trend rates or changes in claim payment patterns from those that we assumed in estimating health care costs payable as of December 31, 2020
would cause these estimates to change in the near term, and such a change could be material.
Furthermore, if we are not able to accurately and promptly anticipate and detect medical cost trends or accurately estimate the cost of incurred but not yet reported
claims or reported claims that have not been paid, our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future health care costs and reflect our current benefit cost
experience in our pricing process may be limited, which would further exacerbate the extent of any adverse impact on our operating results. These risks are
particularly acute during and following periods when utilization of medical and/or other covered services and/or medical cost trends are below recent historical
levels and in products where there is significant turnover in our membership each year, and such risks are
42

further magnified by the ACA and other legislation and regulations that limit our ability to price for our projected and/or experienced increases in utilization and/or
medical cost trends.
Our operating results are affected by the health of the economy in general and in the geographies we serve.
Our businesses are affected by the U.S. economy and consumer confidence in general and in the geographies we serve, including various economic factors,
including inflation and changes in consumer purchasing power, preferences and/or spending patterns. An unfavorable, uncertain or volatile economic environment
could cause a decline in drug utilization, an increase in health care utilization and dampen demand for PBM services as well as consumer demand for products sold
in our retail stores.
If our customers’ operating and financial performance deteriorates, or they are unable to make scheduled payments or obtain adequate financing, our customers
may not be able to pay timely, or may delay payment of, amounts owed to us. Any inability of our customers to pay us for our products and services may adversely
affect our businesses, operating results and cash flows. In addition, both state and federal government sponsored payers, as a result of budget deficits or spending
reductions, may suspend payments or seek to reduce their health care expenditures resulting in our customers delaying payments to us or renegotiating their
contracts with us.
Further, economic conditions including interest rate fluctuations, changes in capital market conditions and regulatory changes may affect our ability to obtain
necessary financing on acceptable terms, our ability to secure suitable store locations under acceptable terms, our ability to execute sale-leaseback transactions
under acceptable terms and the value of our investment portfolio. Adverse changes in the U.S. economy, consumer confidence and economic conditions could have
an adverse effect on our businesses and financial results. This adverse effect could be further exacerbated by the increasing prevalence of high deductible health
plans and health plan designs favoring co-insurance over co-payments as members and other consumers may decide to postpone, or not to seek, medical treatment
which may lead them to incur more expensive medical treatment in the future and/or decrease our prescription volumes.
In addition, our Health Care Benefits membership remains concentrated in certain U.S. geographies and in certain industries. Unfavorable changes in health care or
other benefit costs or reimbursement rates or increased competition in those geographic areas where our membership is concentrated could therefore have a
disproportionately adverse effect on our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results. Our Health Care Benefits membership has been and may continue to be
affected by workforce reductions by our customers due to adverse and/or uncertain general economic conditions, especially in the U.S. geographies and industries
where our membership is concentrated. As a result, we may not be able to profitably grow and diversify our Health Care Benefits membership geographically, by
product type or by customer industry, and our revenues and operating results may be disproportionately affected by adverse changes affecting our customers.
We are exposed to risks relating to the solvency of other insurers.
We are subject to assessments under guaranty fund laws existing in all states for obligations of insolvent insurance companies (including long-term care insurers),
HMOs, ACA co-ops and other payors to policyholders and claimants. For example, in the first quarter of 2017, Aetna recorded a discounted estimated liability
expense of $231 million pretax for our estimated share of future assessments for long-term care insurer Penn Treaty Network America Insurance Company and one
of its subsidiaries. Guaranty funds are maintained by state insurance commissioners to protect policyholders and claimants in the event that an insurer, HMO, ACA
co-op and/or other payor becomes insolvent or is unable to meet its financial obligations. These funds are usually financed by assessments against insurers
regulated by a state. Future assessments may have an adverse effect on our operating results and cash flows.
Extreme events, or the threat of extreme events, could materially increase our health care (including behavioral health) costs.
Nuclear, biological or other attacks, whether as a result of war or terrorism, other man-made disasters, natural disasters, epidemics, pandemics and other extreme
events can affect the U.S. economy in general, our industries and us specifically. In particular, such extreme events or the threat of such extreme events could result
in significant health care (including behavioral health) costs, which also would be affected by the government’s actions and the responsiveness of public health
agencies and other insurers. Such extreme events or the threat of such extreme events also could disrupt our supply chains and/or our distribution chains for the
products we sell. In addition, our employees and those of our vendors are concentrated in certain large, metropolitan areas which may be particularly exposed to
these events. Such events could adversely affect our businesses,
43

operating results and cash flows, and, in the event of extreme circumstances, our financial condition or viability, particularly if our responses to such events are less
adequate than those of our competitors.
Risks From Changes in Public Policy and Other Legal and Regulatory Risks
We are subject to potential changes in public policy, laws and regulations, including reform of the U.S. health care system, which can adversely affect our
businesses. Entitlement program reform, if it occurs, could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operations and/or operating results.
The political environment in which we operate remains uncertain. It is reasonably possible that our business operations and operating results could be materially
adversely affected by legislative, regulatory and public policy changes at the federal or state level, increased government involvement in drug reimbursement,
pricing, purchasing and/or importation and/or increased regulation of PBMs, including: changes to the Medicare or Medicaid programs (including the block grant
option outlined by CMS on January 30, 2020, the “block grant option”) or the regulatory environment for health care and related benefits, including the ACA;
changes to laws or regulations governing drug reimbursement and/or pricing; changes to the laws and regulations governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed
Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care programs; changes to laws and/or regulations governing drug manufacturers’ rebates;
changes to laws and/or regulations governing reimbursements paid to pharmacists by and/or reporting required by PBMs; changes to immigration policies and/or
other public policy initiatives. It is not possible to predict whether or when any such changes will occur or what form any such changes may take (including
through the use of U.S. Presidential Executive Orders). Other significant changes to health care and related benefits system legislation or regulation as well as
changes with respect to tax and trade policies, tariffs and other government regulations affecting trade between the United States and other countries also are
possible and could adversely affect our businesses. If we fail to respond adequately to such changes, including by implementing strategic and operational
initiatives, or do not respond as effectively as our competitors, our businesses, operations and operating results may be materially adversely affected.
In addition to efforts to amend, repeal or replace the ACA and related regulations, we expect the federal and state governments to continue to enact and seriously
consider many broad-based legislative and regulatory proposals that will or could materially impact various aspects of the health care and related benefits system
and our businesses. Potential modification to the ACA, including changes in enforcement and/or funding that further destabilize the Public Exchanges, as well as
significant changes to Medicaid funding (including the block grant option) could impact the number of Americans with health insurance and, consequently,
prescription drug coverage. Further changes to federal health care and related benefits laws, including the ACA, drug reimbursement and pricing laws, laws
governing PBMs and/or laws governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care programs, are
probable. We cannot predict the effect, if any, that new health care and related benefits legislation, future changes to the ACA or the implementation of or failure to
implement the outstanding provisions of ACA, may have on our Pharmacy Services, retail pharmacy, LTC pharmacy and/or Health Care Benefits operations and/or
operating results. The federal and many state governments also are considering changes in the interpretation, enforcement and/or application of existing programs,
laws and regulations, including changes to payments under and funding of Medicare and Medicaid programs and increased regulation of PBMs.
Further, changes in existing federal or state laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or regulations relating to additional regulation of PBMs (including
formulary management or other PBM services), drug pricing or purchasing, patent term extensions and/or purchase discount and/or rebate arrangements with drug
manufacturers also could reduce the discounts or rebates we receive. Changes in existing federal or state laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or
regulations relating to claims processing and billing, including our ability to use MAC lists and collect transmission fees, also could adversely affect our
profitability. For example, on October 29, 2020, the HHS released a final rule requiring health insurers to disclose drug pricing and cost-sharing information. The
final rule requires group health plans and health insurance issuers in the individual and group markets to disclose cost-sharing information upon request, to a
participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, which, unless otherwise indicated, for the purpose of the final rules includes an authorized representative, and requires plans
and issuers to disclose in-network provider rates, historical out-of-network allowed amounts and the associated billed charges, and
negotiated rates for prescription drugs. The public disclosure of insurer- or PBM-negotiated price concessions may result in drug manufacturers lowering discounts
or rebates, resulting in higher drug costs for patients and impacting the ability of the Company to negotiate drug prices and provide competitive products and
services to consumers.
In addition, in November 2020, the HHS released the Rebate Rule, which eliminates the regulatory safe harbor from prosecution under the AKS for rebates from
pharmaceutical companies to PBMs in Medicare Part D and in Medicaid MCOs, replacing it with two far narrower safe harbors designed to directly benefit patients
with high out-of-pocket costs and to change the way PBMs are compensated. The new safe harbors are (i) for rebates which are passed on to the patient at the point
of sale
44

and (ii) for flat service fee payments made to PBMs which cannot be tied to the list prices of drugs. The PCMA, which represents PBMs, has filed a suit in an effort
to block the Rebate Rule, claiming that the Rebate Rule would lead to higher premiums in Medicare Part D and was adopted in an unlawful manner. It is unclear
whether the Rebate Rule will be enforceable, whether pharmaceutical companies will respond by reducing list prices, whether list prices in the private market may
also be reduced, and what the resulting impact will be to PBMs or the Company.
We cannot predict the enactment or content of new legislation or regulations or changes to existing laws or regulations or their enforcement, interpretation or
application, or the effect they will have on our business operations or operating results, which could be materially adverse. Even if we could predict such matters, it
is not possible to eliminate the adverse impact of public policy changes that would fundamentally change the dynamics of one or more of the industries in which
we compete. Examples of such changes include: the federal or one or more state governments fundamentally restructuring or reducing the funding available for
Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible or dual eligible special needs plan programs, increasing its involvement in drug reimbursement, pricing, purchasing and/or
importation, changing the laws and regulations governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care
programs, changing the tax treatment of health or related benefits, or repealing or otherwise significantly altering the ACA. The likelihood of adverse changes
remains high due to state and federal budgetary pressures, and our businesses and operating results could be materially and adversely affected by such changes,
even if we correctly predict their occurrence.
For more information on these matters, see “Government Regulation” included in Item 1 of this 10-K.
If we fail to comply with applicable laws and regulations, many of which are highly complex, we could be subject to significant adverse regulatory actions or
suffer brand and reputational harm.
Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and oversight by state, federal and international governmental authorities. The laws and regulations governing
our operations and interpretations of those laws and regulations are increasing in number and complexity, change frequently and can be inconsistent or conflict
with one another. In general, these laws and regulations are designed to benefit and protect customers, members and providers rather than us or our investors. In
addition, the governmental authorities that regulate our businesses have broad latitude to make, interpret and enforce the laws and regulations that govern us and
continue to interpret and enforce those laws and regulations more strictly and more aggressively each year. We also must follow various restrictions on certain of
our businesses and the payment of dividends by certain of our subsidiaries put in place by certain state regulators.
Certain of our Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC operations, products and services are subject to:
•
the clinical quality, patient safety and other risks inherent in the dispensing, packaging and distribution of drugs and other health care products and services,
including claims related to purported dispensing and other operational errors (any failure by our Pharmacy Services and/or Retail/LTC operations to adhere to
the laws and regulations applicable to the dispensing of drugs could subject us to civil and criminal penalties);
•
federal and state anti-kickback and other laws that govern our relationship with drug manufacturers, customers and consumers;
•
compliance requirements under ERISA, including fiduciary obligations in connection with the development and implementation of items such as drug
formularies and preferred drug listings; and
•
federal and state legislative proposals and/or regulatory activity that could adversely affect pharmacy benefit industry practices.
Our Health Care Benefits products are highly regulated, particularly those that serve Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible, dual eligible special needs and small group
Commercial customers and members. The laws and regulations governing participation in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual
eligible special needs plan programs are complex, are subject to interpretation and can expose us to penalties for non-compliance.
The scope of the practices and activities that are prohibited by federal and state false claims acts is the subject of pending litigation. Claims under federal and state
false claims acts can be brought by the government or by private individuals on behalf of the government through a qui tam or “whistleblower” suit, and we are a
defendant in a number of such proceedings. If we are convicted of fraud or other criminal conduct in the performance of a government program or if there is an
adverse decision against us under the False Claims Act, we may be temporarily or permanently suspended from participating in government health care programs,
including Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs, and we also may be required to pay
significant fines and/or other monetary penalties. Whistleblower suits have
45

resulted in significant settlements between governmental agencies and health care companies. The significant incentives and protections provided to
whistleblowers under applicable law increase the risk of whistleblower suits.
If we fail to comply with laws and regulations that apply to government programs, we could be subject to criminal fines, civil penalties, premium refunds,
prohibitions on marketing or active or passive enrollment of members, corrective actions, termination of our contracts or other sanctions which could have a
material adverse effect on our ability to participate in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible, dual eligible special needs plan and other
programs and on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Our businesses, profitability and growth also may be adversely affected by (i) judicial and regulatory decisions that change and/or expand the interpretations of
existing statutes and regulations, impose medical or bad faith liability, increase our responsibilities under ERISA or the remedies available under ERISA, or reduce
the scope of ERISA pre-emption of state law claims or (ii) other legislation and regulations. For example, in December 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld an
Arkansas law that, among other things, mandates a particular pricing methodology, establishes an appeals process for a pharmacy when the reimbursement is below
the pharmacy’s acquisition cost, permits a pharmacy to reverse and rebill if they cannot procure the drug from its wholesaler at a price equal to or less than the
reimbursement rate, prohibits a PBM from reimbursing a pharmacy less than the amount it reimburses an affiliate on a per unit basis, and permits a pharmacy to
decline to dispense if the reimbursement is lower than the pharmacy’s acquisition cost.
If our compliance or other systems and processes fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and become subject to regulatory
actions and/or litigation.
In addition to being subject to extensive and complex regulations, many of our contracts with customers include detailed requirements. In order to be eligible to
offer certain products or bid on certain contracts, we must demonstrate that we have robust systems and processes in place that are designed to maintain compliance
with all applicable legal, regulatory and contractual requirements. These systems and processes frequently are reviewed and audited by our customers and
regulators. If our systems and processes designed to maintain compliance with applicable legal and contractual requirements, and to prevent and detect instances
of, or the potential for, non-compliance fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and be subject to regulatory actions, litigation
and other proceedings which may result in damages, fines, suspension or loss of licensure, suspension or exclusion from participation in government programs
and/or other penalties, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
We routinely are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings, including class actions and qui tam actions. Many of these proceedings seek
substantial damages which may not be covered by insurance. These proceedings are costly to defend, may result in changes in our business practices, harm our
brand and reputation and adversely affect our businesses and operating results.
PBM, retail pharmacy, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy, LTC pharmacy and health care and related benefits are highly regulated industries whose
participants frequently are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings. We are currently subject to various litigation and arbitration matters,
investigations, regulatory audits, inspections, government inquiries, and regulatory and other legal proceedings, both inside and outside the U.S. Outside the U.S.,
contractual rights, tax positions and applicable regulations may be subject to interpretation or uncertainty to a greater degree than in the U.S. Litigation related to
our provision of professional services in our medical clinics, pharmacies and LTC operations is increasing as we expand our services along the continuum of health
care.
Litigation, and particularly securities, derivative, collective or class action and qui tam litigation, is often expensive and disruptive. Many of the legal proceedings
against us seek substantial damages (including non-economic or punitive damages and treble damages), and certain of these proceedings also seek changes in our
business practices. While we currently have insurance coverage for some potential liabilities, other potential liabilities may not be covered by insurance, insurers
may dispute coverage and/or the amount of our insurance may not be enough to cover the damages awarded or costs incurred. In addition, some types of damages,
like punitive damages, may not be covered by insurance, and in some jurisdictions the coverage of punitive damages is prohibited. Insurance coverage for all or
some forms of liability also may become unavailable or prohibitively expensive in the future.
The outcome of litigation and other adverse legal proceedings is always uncertain, and outcomes that are not justifiable by the evidence or existing law or
regulation can and do occur, and the costs incurred frequently are substantial regardless of the outcome. Litigation and other adverse legal proceedings could
materially adversely affect our businesses, operating results and/or cash flows because of brand and reputational harm to us caused by such proceedings, the cost of
defending such proceedings,
46

the cost of settlement or judgments against us, or the changes in our operations that could result from such proceedings. See Item 3 of this 10-K for additional
information.
We frequently are subject to regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews that could result in changes to our business practices and also
could result in material refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities and other sanctions.
As one of the largest national retail, mail order, specialty and LTC pharmacy, PBM and health care and related benefits providers, we frequently are subject to
regular and special governmental market conduct and other audits, investigations and reviews by, and we receive subpoenas and other requests for information
from, various federal and state agencies, regulatory authorities, attorneys general, committees, subcommittees and members of the U.S. Congress and other state,
federal and international governmental authorities. For example, we have received CIDs from, and provided documents and information to, the Civil Division of
the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of our patient chart review processes in connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D
of the Medicare program. CMS and the OIG also are auditing the risk adjustment-related data of certain of our Medicare Advantage plans, and the number of such
audits continues to increase. Several such audits, investigations and reviews by governmental authorities currently are pending, some of which may be resolved in
2021, the results of which may be adverse to us.
Federal and state governments have made investigating and prosecuting health care and other insurance fraud, waste and abuse a priority. Fraud, waste and abuse
prohibitions encompass a wide range of activities, including kickbacks for referral of members, billing for unnecessary medical and/or other covered services,
improper marketing and violations of patient privacy rights. The regulations and contractual requirements applicable to us and other industry participants are
complex and subject to change, making it necessary for us to invest significant resources in complying with our regulatory and contractual requirements. Ongoing
vigorous law enforcement and the highly technical regulatory scheme mean that our compliance efforts in this area will continue to require significant resources. In
addition, our medical costs and the medical expenses of our Health Care Benefits ASC customers may be adversely affected if we do not prevent or detect
fraudulent activity by providers and/or members.
Regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews by federal, state and international regulators could result in changes to our business practices,
and also could result in significant or material premium refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities or other sanctions, including suspension or
exclusion from participation in government programs and suspension or loss of licensure. Any of these audits, investigations or reviews could have a material
adverse effect on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition or result in significant liabilities and negative publicity for us.
See “Legal and Regulatory Proceedings” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Our litigation and regulatory risk profile are changing as we offer new products and services and expand in business areas beyond our historical core
businesses of Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits.
Historically, we focused primarily on providing Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits products and services. As a result of our transformation
program and other innovation initiatives, we are expanding our presence in the health care space and plan to offer new products and services (such as the home
hemodialysis device we are developing) which present a different litigation and regulatory risk profile than the products and services that we historically have
offered.
The increased volume of business in areas beyond our historical core businesses and new products and services subject us to litigation and regulatory risks that are
different from the risks of providing Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits products and services and increase significantly our exposure to
other risks.
We face unique regulatory and other challenges in our Medicare and Medicaid businesses.
We are seeking to substantially grow the Medicare and Medicaid membership in our Health Care Benefits segment in 2020 and over the next several years. We
face unique regulatory and other challenges that may inhibit the growth and profitability of those businesses.
•
In April 2020, CMS issued a final notice detailing final Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates for 2021 (the “Final Notice”). Overall, we project the
benchmark rates in the Final Notice will increase funding for our Medicare Advantage
47

business, excluding the impact of the HIF in 2020, by approximately 1.8% in 2021 compared to 2020. This 2021 rate increase only partially offsets the
challenge we face from the impact of the increasing cost of medical care (including prescription medications) and CMS local and national coverage decisions
that require us to pay for services and supplies that are not factored into our bids and creates continued pressure on our Medicare Advantage operating results.
In January 2021, CMS issued its final notice detailing final 2022 Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates. Final 2022 Medicare Advantage rates
resulted in an increase in industry benchmark rates of approximately 4.1%. We cannot predict future Medicare funding levels, the impact of future federal
budget actions or ensure that such changes or actions will not have an adverse effect on our Medicare operating results.
•
The organic expansion of our Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D service area is subject to the ability of CMS to process our requests for service area
expansions and our ability to build cost competitive provider networks in the expanded service areas that meet applicable network adequacy requirements.
CMS’ decisions on our requests for service area expansions also may be affected adversely by compliance issues that arise each year in our Medicare
operations.
•
CMS regularly audits our performance to determine our compliance with CMS’s regulations and our contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of the
services we provide to our Medicare members. As a result of these audits, we may be subject to significant or material retroactive adjustments to and/or
withholding of certain premiums and fees, fines, criminal liability, civil monetary penalties, CMS imposed sanctions (including suspension or exclusion from
participation in government programs) or other restrictions on our Medicare, Medicaid and other businesses, including suspension or loss of licensure.
•
“Star ratings” from CMS for our Medicare Advantage plans will continue to have a significant effect on our plans’ operating results. Since 2015, only
Medicare Advantage plans with a star rating of four or higher (out of five) are eligible for a quality bonus in their basic premium rates. CMS continues to
change its rating system to make achieving and maintaining a four or higher star rating more difficult. Our star ratings and past performance scores are
adversely affected by the compliance issues that arise each year in our Medicare operations. If our star ratings fall below four for a significant portion of our
Medicare Advantage membership or do not match the performance of our competitors or the star rating quality bonuses are reduced or eliminated, our
revenues, operating results and cash flows may be significantly adversely affected.
•
Payments we receive from CMS for our Medicare Advantage and Part D businesses also are subject to risk adjustment based on the health status of the
individuals we enroll. Elements of that risk adjustment mechanism continue to be challenged by the DOJ, the OIG and CMS itself. Substantial changes in the
risk adjustment mechanism, including changes that result from enforcement or audit actions, could materially affect the amount of our Medicare
reimbursement, require us to raise prices or reduce the benefits we offer to Medicare beneficiaries, and potentially limit our (and the industry’s) participation
in the Medicare program.
•
Changes to the ability of PBMs to have pharmacy performance programs in place for clients and report payments via direct and indirect reporting mechanisms
could impact the Pharmacy Services business.
•
Medicare Part D has resulted in increased utilization of prescription medications and puts pressure on our pharmacy gross margin rates due to regulatory and
competitive pressures. Further, as a result of the ACA and changes to the retiree drug subsidy rules, clients of our PBM business could decide to discontinue
providing prescription drug benefits to their Medicare-eligible members. To the extent this phenomenon occurs, the adverse effects of increasing customer
migration into Medicare Part D may outweigh the benefits we realize from growth of our Medicare Part D products.
•
Our Medicare Part D operating results and our ability to expand our Medicare Part D business could be adversely affected if: the cost and complexity of
Medicare Part D exceed management’s expectations or prevent effective program implementation or administration; changes to the regulations regarding how
drug costs are reported for Medicare Part D are implemented in a manner that adversely affects the profitability of our Medicare Part D business; changes to
the applicable regulations impact our ability to retain fees from third parties including network pharmacies; the government alters Medicare Part D program
requirements or reduces funding because of the higher-than-anticipated cost to taxpayers of Medicare Part D or for other reasons; the government mandated
use of point-of-sale manufacturer’s rebates effective in 2022 continues; the government makes changes to how pharmacy pay-for-performance is calculated; or
reinsurance thresholds are reduced below their current levels.
•
We have experienced challenges in obtaining complete and accurate encounter data for our Medicaid products due to difficulties with providers and third-party
vendors submitting claims in a timely fashion in the proper format, and with state agencies in coordinating such submissions. As states increase their reliance
on encounter data, these difficulties could affect the Medicaid premium rates we receive and how Medicaid membership is assigned to us, which could have a
material adverse effect on our Medicaid operating results and cash flows and/or our ability to bid for, and continue to participate in, certain Medicaid
programs.
48

•
Federal funding for expanded Medicaid coverage began to decrease in 2017. This reduction is causing states to re-evaluate funding for their Medicaid
expansions. That re-evaluation may adversely affect Medicaid payment rates, our Medicaid membership in those states, our revenues, our MLRs and our
operating results.
•
If we fail to report and correct errors discovered through our own auditing procedures or during a CMS audit or otherwise fail to comply with the applicable
laws and regulations, we could be subject to fines, civil monetary penalties or other sanctions, including fines and penalties under the False Claims Act, which
could have a material adverse effect on our ability to participate in Medicare Advantage, Part D or other government programs, and on our operating results,
cash flows and financial condition.
•
In the second quarter of 2014, CMS issued a final rule implementing ACA requirements that Medicare Advantage and PDP plans report and refund to CMS
overpayments that those plans receive from CMS. However, CMS’s statements in formalized guidance regarding “overpayments” to Medicare Advantage
plans appear to be inconsistent with CMS’s prior RADV audit guidance. These statements appear to equate each Medicare Advantage risk adjustment data
error with an “overpayment” without reconciliation to the principles underlying the fee for service adjustment comparison contemplated by CMS’s RADV
audit methodology. The precise interpretation, impact and legality of the final rule are not clear and are subject to pending litigation. If Medicare Advantage
plans were not paid based on payment model principles that align with the requirements of the Social Security Act or such payments were not implemented
correctly, it could have a material adverse effect on our operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
•
Certain of our Medicaid contracts require the submission of complete and correct encounter data. The accurate and timely reporting of encounter data is
increasingly important to the success of our Medicaid programs because more states are using encounter data to determine compliance with performance
standards and, in part, to set premium rates. We have expended and may continue to expend additional effort and incur significant additional costs to collect
accurate, or to correct inaccurate or incomplete, encounter data and have been and could be exposed to premium withholding, operating sanctions and financial
fines and penalties for noncompliance. We have experienced challenges in obtaining complete and accurate encounter data due to difficulties with providers
and third-party vendors submitting claims in a timely fashion in the proper format, and with state agencies in coordinating such submissions. As states increase
their reliance on encounter data, these difficulties could affect the Medicaid premium rates we receive and how Medicaid membership is assigned to us, which
could have a material adverse effect on our Medicaid operating results and cash flows and/or our ability to bid for, and continue to participate in, certain
Medicaid programs.
•
Our businesses that dispense drugs also face challenges in the Medicaid space. The ACA made several significant changes to Medicaid rebates and to
reimbursement rates. One of these changes was to revise the definition of the Average Manufacturer Price, a pricing element common to most payment
formulas, and the reimbursement formula for generic drugs. This change has adversely affected the reimbursements we receive when we dispense prescription
drugs to Medicaid recipients.
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to
increase.
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to increase. As
our government funded businesses grow, our exposure to changes in federal and state government policy with respect to and/or regulation of the various
government funded programs in which we participate also increases.
Our revenues from government funded programs, including in Health Care Benefits’ Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan
businesses and from government customers in its Commercial business, are dependent on annual funding by the federal government and/or applicable state or local
governments. Federal, state and local governments have the right to cancel or not to renew their contracts with us on short notice without cause or if funds are not
available. Funding for these programs is dependent on many factors outside our control, including general economic conditions, continuing government efforts to
contain health care costs and budgetary constraints at the federal or applicable state or local level and general political issues and priorities.
The U.S. federal government and our other government customers also may reduce funding for health care or other programs, cancel or decline to renew contracts
with us, or make changes that adversely affect the number of persons eligible for certain programs, the services provided to enrollees in such programs, our
premiums and our administrative and health care and other benefit costs, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and
cash flows. When federal funding is delayed, suspended or curtailed, we continue to receive, and we remain liable for and are required to fund, claims from
providers for providing services to beneficiaries of federally funded health benefits programs in which we participate. An extended federal government shutdown
or a delay by Congress in raising the federal government’s debt ceiling
49

also could lead to a delay, reduction, suspension or cancellation of federal government spending and a significant increase in interest rates that could, in turn, have
a material adverse effect on the value of our investment portfolio, our ability to access the capital markets and our businesses, operating results, cash flows and
liquidity.
Possible changes in industry pricing benchmarks and drug pricing generally can adversely affect our PBM and Retail/LTC businesses.
It is possible that the pharmaceutical industry or regulators may evaluate and/or develop an alternative pricing reference to replace AWP or Wholesale Acquisition
Cost (“WAC”), which are the pricing references used for many of our PBM and LTC client contracts, drug purchase agreements, retail network contracts, specialty
payor agreements and other contracts with third party payors in connection with the reimbursement of drug payments. In addition, many state Medicaid fee-for-
service programs have established pharmacy network payments on the basis of Actual Acquisition Cost (“AAC”). The use of an AAC basis in FFS Medicaid could
have an impact on reimbursement practices in Health Care Benefits’ Commercial and other Government products.
Future changes to the use of AWP, WAC or to other published pricing benchmarks used to establish drug pricing, including changes in the basis for calculating
reimbursement by federal and state health care programs and/or other payors, could impact the reimbursement we receive from Medicare and Medicaid programs,
the reimbursement we receive from our PBM clients and other payors and/or our ability to negotiate rebates and/or discounts with drug manufacturers, wholesalers,
PBMs and retail pharmacies. A failure or inability to fully offset any increased prices or costs or to modify our operations to mitigate the impact of such increases
could have a material adverse effect on our operating results. Additionally, any future changes in drug prices could be significantly different than our projections.
We cannot predict the effect of these possible changes on our businesses.
We may not be able to obtain adequate premium rate increases in our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which would have an adverse effect on our
revenues, MBRs and operating results and could magnify the adverse impact of increases in health care and other benefit costs and of ACA assessments, fees
and taxes.
Premium rates for our Insured Health Care Benefits products generally must be filed with state insurance regulators and are subject to their approval, which creates
risk for us in the current political and regulatory environment. The ACA generally requires a review by HHS in conjunction with state regulators of premium rate
increases that exceed a federally specified threshold (or lower state-specific thresholds set by states determined by HHS to have adequate processes). Rate reviews
can magnify the adverse impact on our operating margins, MBRs and operating results of increases in health care and other benefit costs, increased utilization of
covered services, and ACA assessments, fees and taxes, by restricting our ability to reflect these increases and/or these assessments, fees and taxes in our pricing.
Further, our ability to reflect ACA assessments, fees and taxes in our Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP premium rates is limited.
Since 2013, HHS has issued determinations to health plans that their premium rate increases were “unreasonable,” and we continue to experience challenges to
appropriate premium rate increases in certain states. Regulators or legislatures in several states have implemented or are considering limits on premium rate
increases, either by enforcing existing legal requirements more stringently or proposing different regulatory standards. Regulators or legislatures in several states
also have conducted hearings on proposed premium rate increases, which can result, and in some instances have resulted, in substantial delays in implementing
proposed rate increases even if they ultimately are approved. Our plans can be excluded from participating in small group Public Exchanges if they are deemed to
have a history of “unreasonable” rate increases. Any significant rate increases we may request heighten the risks of adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and
adverse selection and the likelihood that our requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed, which could adversely affect our MBRs and lead
to operating margin compression.
We anticipate continued regulatory and legislative action to increase regulation of premium rates in our Insured Health Care Benefits products. We may not be able
to obtain rates that are actuarially justified or that are sufficient to make our policies profitable in one or more product lines or geographies. If we are unable to
obtain adequate premium rates and/or premium rate increases, it could materially and adversely affect our operating margins and MBRs and our ability to earn
adequate returns on Insured Health Care Benefits products in one or more states or cause us to withdraw from certain geographies and/or products.
50

Minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in our Insured Health Care Benefits products while leaving us exposed to higher
than expected medical costs. Challenges to our minimum MLR rebate methodology and/or reports could adversely affect our operating results.
The ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in Health Care Benefits’ Commercial Insured and Medicare Insured
businesses. CMS minimum MLR rebate regulations limit the level of margin we can earn in our Medicaid Insured business. Certain portions of our Health Care
Benefits Medicaid and Federal Employees Health Benefits (“FEHB”) program business also are subject to minimum MLR rebate requirements in addition to but
separate from those imposed by the ACA. Minimum MLR rebate requirements leave us exposed to medical costs that are higher than those reflected in our pricing.
The process supporting the management and determination of the amount of MLR rebates payable is complex and requires judgment, and the minimum MLR
reporting requirements are detailed. CMS has also proposed, but not yet finalized, a definition of “prescription drug price concessions” for commercial MLR
calculation purposes, which would make additional PBM information available to plans and the HHS, potentially further complicating the MLR calculation
process. Federal and state auditors are challenging our Commercial Health Care Benefits business’ compliance with the ACA’s minimum MLR requirements as
well as our FEHB plans’ compliance with OPM’s FEHB program-specific minimum MLR requirements. Our Medicare and Medicaid contracts also are subject to
minimum MLR audits. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays minimum MLR rebates for three consecutive years, it will become ineligible to
enroll new members. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays such rebates for five consecutive years, it will be terminated by CMS. Additional
challenges to our methodology and/or reports relating to minimum MLR and related rebates by federal and state regulators and private litigants are reasonably
possible. The outcome of these audits and additional challenges could adversely affect our operating results.
Our operating results may be adversely affected by changes in laws and policies governing employers and by union organizing activity.
The federal and certain state legislatures continue to consider and pass legislation that increases our costs of doing business, including increased minimum wages
and requiring employers to provide paid sick leave or paid family leave. In addition, our employee-related operating costs may be increased by union organizing
activity. If we are unable to reflect these increased expenses in our pricing or otherwise modify our operations to mitigate the effects of such increases, our
operating results will be adversely affected.
We face international political, legal and compliance, operational, regulatory, economic and other risks that may be more significant than in our domestic
operations.
We significantly expanded our international operations as a result of the Aetna Acquisition. As a result of our expanded international operations, we face political,
legal, compliance, operational, regulatory, economic and other risks that we do not face or that are more significant than in our domestic operations. These risks
vary widely by country and include varying regional and geopolitical business conditions and demands, government intervention and censorship, discriminatory
regulation, nationalization or expropriation of assets and pricing constraints. Our international products need to meet country-specific customer and member
preferences as well as country-specific legal requirements, including those related to licensing, data privacy, data storage and data protection.
Our international operations increase our exposure to, and require us to devote significant management resources to implement controls and systems to comply
with, the privacy and data protection laws of non-U.S. jurisdictions, such as the EU’s GDPR, and the anti-bribery, anti-corruption and anti-money laundering laws
of the United States (including the FCPA) and the United Kingdom (including the UK Bribery Act) and similar laws in other jurisdictions. Implementing our
compliance policies, internal controls and other systems upon our expansion into new countries and geographies may require the investment of considerable
management time and financial and other resources over several years before any significant revenues or profits are generated. Violations of these laws and
regulations could result in fines, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or employees, restrictions or outright prohibitions on the conduct of our business, and
significant brand and reputational harm. We must regularly reassess the size, capability and location of our global infrastructure and make appropriate changes, and
must have effective change management processes and internal controls in place to address changes in our businesses and operations. Our success depends, in part,
on our ability to anticipate these risks and manage these difficulties, and the failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on our brand, reputation,
businesses, operating results and/or financial condition.
Our international operations require us to overcome logistical and other challenges based on differing languages, cultures, legal and regulatory schemes and time
zones. Our international operations encounter labor laws, standards and customs that can be difficult and make employee relationships less flexible than in our
domestic operations and expensive to modify or terminate. In
51

some countries we are required to, or choose to, operate with local business associates, which requires us to manage our relationships with these third parties and
may reduce our operational flexibility and ability to quickly respond to business challenges.
In some countries we may be exposed to currency exchange controls or other restrictions that prevent us from transferring funds internationally or converting local
currencies into U.S. dollars or other currencies. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates may adversely affect our revenues, operating results and cash flows
from our international operations. Some of our operations are, and are increasingly likely to be, in emerging markets where these risks are heightened. Any
measures we may implement to reduce the effect of volatile currencies and other risks on our international operations may not be effective.
Risks Associated with Mergers, Acquisitions, and Divestitures
We may be unable to successfully integrate companies we acquire.
Upon the closing of any acquisition we complete, we will need to successfully integrate the products, services and related assets, as well as internal controls into
our business operations. If an acquisition is consummated, the integration of the acquired business, its products, services and related assets into our company also
may be complex and time-consuming and, if the integration is not fully successful, we may not achieve the anticipated benefits, operating and cost synergies and/or
growth opportunities of an acquisition. Potential difficulties that may be encountered in the integration process include the following:
•
Integrating personnel, operations and systems (including internal control environments and compliance policies), while maintaining focus on producing and
delivering consistent, high quality products and services;
•
Coordinating geographically dispersed organizations;
•
Disrupting management’s attention from our ongoing business operations;
•
Retaining existing customers and attracting new customers; and
•
Managing inefficiencies associated with integrating our operations.
An inability to realize the full extent of the anticipated benefits, operating and cost synergies, innovations and operations efficiencies or growth opportunities of an
acquisition, as well as any delays or additional expenses encountered in the integration process, could have a material adverse effect on our businesses and
operating results. Furthermore, acquisitions, even if successfully integrated, may fail to further our business strategy as anticipated, expose us to increased
competition or challenges with respect to our products, services or service areas, and expose us to additional liabilities associated with an acquired business
including risks and liabilities associated with litigation involving the acquired business. Any one of these challenges or risks could impair our ability to realize any
benefit from our acquisitions after we have expended resources on them.
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities, which may be unsuccessful, cause us
to assume unanticipated liabilities, disrupt our existing businesses, be dilutive or lead us to assume significant debt, among other things.
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities as part of our growth strategy. In addition
to the integration risks noted above, some other risks we face with respect to acquisitions and other inorganic growth strategies include:
•
we frequently compete with other firms, some of which may have greater financial and other resources and a greater tolerance for risk, to acquire attractive
companies;
•
the acquired, alliance and/or joint venture businesses may not perform as projected;
•
the goodwill or other intangible assets established as a result of our acquisitions may be incorrectly valued or may become impaired; for example, in 2018 we
took $6.1 billion of goodwill impairment charges related to our LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment;
•
we may assume unanticipated liabilities, including those that were not disclosed to us or which we underestimated;
•
the acquired businesses, or the pursuit of other inorganic growth strategies, could disrupt or compete with our existing businesses, distract management, result
in the loss of key employees, divert resources, result in tax costs or inefficiencies and make it difficult to maintain our current business standards, controls,
information technology systems, policies, procedures and performance;
52

•
as we did in the Aetna Acquisition, we may finance future acquisitions and other inorganic growth strategies by issuing common stock for some or all of the
purchase price, which would dilute the ownership interests of our stockholders;
•
as we did in the Aetna Acquisition, we may incur significant debt in connection with acquisitions (whether to finance acquisitions or by assuming debt from
the businesses we acquire);
•
we may not have the expertise to manage and profitably grow the businesses we acquire, and we may need to rely on the retention of key personnel and other
suppliers of businesses we acquire, which may be difficult or impossible to accomplish;
•
we may enter into merger or purchase agreements but, due to reasons within or outside our control, fail to complete the related transactions, which could result
in termination fees or other penalties that could be material, cause material disruptions to our businesses and operations and adversely affect our brand and
reputation;
•
in order to complete a proposed acquisition, we may be required to divest certain portions of our business, for which we may not be able to obtain favorable
pricing;
•
as is the case with the Aetna Acquisition and our acquisition of Omnicare, Inc., we may be involved in litigation related to mergers or acquisitions, including
for matters that occurred prior to the applicable closing, which may be costly to defend and may result in adverse rulings against us that could be material; and
•
the integration into our businesses of the businesses and entities we acquire may affect the way in which existing laws and regulations apply to us, including
subjecting us to laws and regulations that did not previously apply to us.
In addition, joint ventures present risks that are different from acquisitions, including selection of appropriate joint venture parties, initial and ongoing governance
of the joint venture, joint venture compliance activities (including compliance with applicable CMS requirements), growing the joint venture’s business in a
manner acceptable to all the parties, including other providers in the networks that include joint ventures, maintaining positive relationships among the joint
venture parties and the joint venture’s customers, and member and business disruption that may occur upon joint venture termination.
Risks Related to Our Operations
Failure to meet customer expectations may harm our brand and reputation, our ability to retain and grow our customer base and membership and our
operating results and cash flows.
Our ability to attract and retain customers and members is dependent upon providing cost effective, quality customer service operations (such as call center
operations, PBM functions, retail pharmacy and LTC services, retail, mail order and specialty pharmacy prescription delivery, claims processing, customer case
installation and online access and tools) that meet or exceed our customers’ and members’ expectations, either directly or through vendors. As we seek to reduce
general and administrative expenses, we must balance the potential impact of cost-saving measures on our customers and other services and performances. If we
misjudge the effects of such measures, customers and other services may be adversely affected. We depend on third parties for certain of our customer service,
PBM and prescription delivery operations. If we or our vendors fail to provide service that meets our customers’ and members’ expectations, we may have
difficulty retaining or profitably growing our customer base and/or membership, which could adversely affect our operating results. For example, noncompliance
with any privacy or security laws or regulations or any security breach involving us or one of our third-party vendors could have a material adverse effect on our
businesses, operating results, brand and reputation.
We and our vendors have experienced and continue to experience cyber attacks. We can provide no assurance that we or our vendors will be able to detect,
prevent or contain the effects of such attacks or other information security (including cybersecurity) risks or threats in the future.
We and our vendors have experienced diverse cyber attacks and expect to continue to experience cyber attacks going forward. As examples, the Company and its
vendors have experienced attempts to gain access to systems, denial of service attacks, attempted malware infections, account takeovers, scanning activity, and
phishing emails. Attacks can originate from external criminals, terrorists, nation states, or internal actors. The Company is dedicating and will continue to dedicate
significant resources and incur significant expenses to maintain and update on an ongoing basis the systems and processes that are designed to mitigate the
information security risks it faces and protect the security of its computer systems, software, networks and other technology assets against attempts by unauthorized
parties to obtain access to confidential information, disrupt or degrade service, or cause other damage. The impact of cyber attacks has not been material to the
Company’s operations or operating results through December 31, 2020. The Board and its Audit Committee and Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee are regularly informed regarding the Company’s information security policies, practices and status.
53

A compromise of our information security controls or of those businesses with whom we interact, which results in confidential information being accessed,
obtained, damaged, or used by unauthorized or improper persons, could harm our reputation and expose us to regulatory actions and claims from customers and
clients, financial institutions, payment card associations and other persons, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results and financial
condition. Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable or degrade service, or sabotage systems change frequently and may not immediately
produce signs of intrusion, we may be unable to anticipate these techniques or to implement adequate preventative measures. Moreover, a data security breach
could require that we expend significant resources related to our information systems and infrastructure, and could distract management and other key personnel
from performing their primary operational duties. We also could be adversely affected by any significant disruption in the systems of third parties we interact with,
including key payors and vendors.
The costs of attempting to protect against the foregoing risks and the costs of responding to a cyber-incident are significant. Large scale data breaches at other
entities increase the challenge we and our vendors face in maintaining the security of our information technology systems and proprietary information and of our
customers’, members’ and other constituents’ sensitive information. Following a cyber-incident, our and/or our vendors’ remediation efforts may not be successful,
and a cyber-incident could result in interruptions, delays or cessation of service, and loss of existing or potential customers and members. In addition, breaches of
our and/or our vendors’ security measures and the unauthorized dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary information or confidential
information about us, our customers, our members or other third-parties, could expose our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ private information and
our customers, members and other constituents to the risk of financial or medical identity theft, or expose us or other third parties to a risk of loss or misuse of this
information, and result in investigations, regulatory enforcement actions, material fines and penalties, loss of customers, litigation or other actions which could
have a material adverse effect on our brand, reputation, businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Data governance failures can adversely affect our reputation, businesses and prospects. Our use and disclosure of members’, customers’ and other
constituents’ sensitive information is subject to complex regulations at multiple levels. We would be adversely affected if we or our business associates or other
vendors fail to adequately protect members’, customers’ or other constituents’ sensitive information.
Our information systems are critical to the operation of our businesses. We collect, process, maintain, retain, evaluate, utilize and distribute large amounts of
personal health and financial information and other confidential and sensitive data about our customers, members and other constituents in the ordinary course of
our businesses. Some of our information systems rely upon third party systems, including cloud service providers, to accomplish these tasks. The use and
disclosure of such information is regulated at the federal, state and international levels, and these laws, rules and regulations are subject to change and increased
enforcement activity, such as the California Consumer Privacy Act which went into effect January 1, 2020, the EU’s GDPR which began to apply across the EU
during 2018 and the audit program implemented by HHS under HIPAA. In some cases, such laws, rules and regulations also apply to our vendors and/or may hold
us liable for any violations by our vendors. International laws, rules and regulations governing the use and disclosure of such information are generally more
stringent than U.S. laws and regulations, and they vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Noncompliance with any privacy or security laws or regulations, or any
security breach, cyber attack or cybersecurity breach, and any incident involving the theft, misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of, or access to,
sensitive or confidential customer, member or other constituent information, whether by us, by one of our business associates or vendors or by another third party,
could require us to expend significant resources to remediate any damage, could interrupt our operations and could adversely affect our brand and reputation,
membership and operating results and also could expose and/or has exposed us to mandatory disclosure to the media, litigation (including class action litigation),
governmental investigations and enforcement proceedings, material fines, penalties and/or remediation costs, and compensatory, special, punitive and statutory
damages, consent orders, adverse actions against our licenses to do business and/or injunctive relief, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows or financial condition.
Our businesses depend on our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ willingness to entrust us with their health related and other sensitive personal
information. Events that adversely affect that trust, including inadequate disclosure to our members or customers of our uses of their information, failing to keep
our information technology systems and our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ sensitive information secure from significant attack, theft, damage, loss
or unauthorized disclosure or access, whether as a result of our action or inaction (including human error) or that of our business associates, vendors or other third
parties, could adversely affect our brand and reputation, membership and operating results and also could expose and/or has exposed us to mandatory disclosure to
the media, litigation (including class action litigation), governmental investigations and enforcement proceedings, material fines, penalties and/or remediation
costs, and compensatory, special, punitive and statutory damages, consent orders, adverse actions against our licenses to do business and/or injunctive relief, any of
which
54

could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows or financial condition. Large scale data breaches at other entities increase the challenge we and
our vendors face in maintaining the security of our information technology systems and proprietary information and of our customers’, members’ and other
constituents’ sensitive information. There can be no assurance that additional such failures will not occur, or if any do occur, that we will detect them or that they
can be sufficiently remediated.
Product liability, product recall or personal injury issues could damage our reputation and have a significant adverse effect on our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
The products that we sell could become subject to contamination, product tampering, mislabeling, recall or other damage. In addition, errors in the dispensing and
packaging of drugs and consuming drugs in a manner that is not prescribed could lead to serious injury or death. Product liability or personal injury claims may be
asserted against us with respect to any of the drugs or other products we sell or services we provide. For example, we are a defendant in hundreds of litigation
proceedings relating to opioids and the sale of products containing talc. Our businesses involve the provision of professional services, including by pharmacists,
physician assistants, nurses and nurse practitioners, which exposes us to professional liability claims. Should a product or other liability issue arise, the coverage
available under our insurance programs and the indemnification amounts available to us from third parties may not be adequate to protect us against the financial
impact of the related claims. We also may not be able to maintain our existing levels of insurance on acceptable terms in the future. A product liability or personal
injury issue or judgment against us or a product recall could damage our reputation and have a significant adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and/or
financial condition.
We face significant competition in attracting and retaining talented employees. Further, managing succession for, and retention of, key executives is critical to
our success, and our failure to do so could adversely affect our businesses, operating results and/or future performance.
Our ability to attract and retain qualified and experienced employees is essential to meet our current and future goals and objectives. There is no guarantee we will
be able to attract and retain such employees or that competition among potential employers will not result in increased compensation and/or benefits costs. If we
are unable to retain existing employees or attract additional employees, or we experience an unexpected loss of leadership, we could experience a material adverse
effect on our businesses, operating results and/or future performance.
In addition, our failure to adequately plan for succession of senior management and other key management roles or the failure of key employees to successfully
transition into new roles could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and/or future performance. The succession plans we have in place
and our employment arrangements with certain key executives do not guarantee the services of these executives will continue to be available to us.
Sales of our products and services are dependent on our ability to attract and motivate internal sales personnel and independent third-party brokers,
consultants and agents. New distribution channels create new disintermediation risk. We may be subject to penalties or other regulatory actions as a result of
the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling our products.
Our products are sold primarily through our sales personnel, who frequently work with independent brokers, consultants and agents who assist in the production
and servicing of business. The independent brokers, consultants and agents generally are not dedicated to us exclusively and may frequently recommend and/or
market health care benefits products of our competitors. Accordingly, we must compete intensely for their services and allegiance. Our sales could be adversely
affected if we are unable to attract, retain or motivate sales personnel and third-party brokers, consultants and agents, or if we do not adequately provide support,
training and education to this sales network regarding our complex product portfolio, or if our sales strategy is not appropriately aligned across distribution
channels. This risk is heightened as we develop, operate and expand our consumer-oriented products and services and we expand in the health care space and our
business model evolves to include a greater focus on consumers and direct-to-consumer sales, such as competing for sales on Insurance Exchanges.
New distribution channels for our products and services continue to emerge, including Private Exchanges operated by health care consultants and technology
companies. These channels may make it more difficult for us to directly engage consumers and other customers in the selection and management of their health
care benefits, in health care utilization and in the effective navigation of the health care system. We also may be challenged by new technologies and marketplace
entrants that could interfere with our existing relationships with customers and health plan members in these areas.
55

In addition, there have been several investigations regarding the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling health care and other insurance products and the
payments they receive. These investigations have resulted in enforcement actions against companies in our industry and brokers and agents marketing and selling
those companies’ products. For example, CMS and state departments of insurance have increased their scrutiny of the marketing practices of brokers and agents
who market Medicare products. These investigations and enforcement actions could result in penalties and the imposition of corrective action plans and/or changes
to industry practices, which could adversely affect our ability to market our products.
Failure of our businesses to effectively collaborate could prevent us from maximizing our operating results.
To maximize our overall enterprise value, our various businesses need to collaborate effectively. Our businesses need to be aligned in order to prioritize goals and
coordinate the design of new products intended to utilize the offerings of multiple businesses, including our transformation and enterprise modernization programs.
In addition, misaligned incentives, information siloes, ineffective product development and failure of our corporate governance policies or procedures, for example
significant financial decisions being made at an inappropriate level in our organization, also could prevent us from maximizing our operating results and/or
achieving our financial and other projections.
The failure or disruption of our information technology systems or the failure of our information technology infrastructure to support our businesses could
adversely affect our reputation, businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Our information systems are subject to damage or interruption from power outages, facility damage, computer and telecommunications failures, computer viruses,
security breaches (including credit card or personally identifiable information breaches), cyber attacks, vandalism, catastrophic events and human error. If our
information systems are damaged, fail to work properly or otherwise become unavailable, we may incur substantial costs to repair or replace them, and may
experience reputational damage, loss of critical information, customer disruption and interruptions or delays in our ability to perform essential functions and
implement new and innovative services. In addition, compliance with changes in U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including privacy and information security
laws and standards, may cause us to incur significant expense due to increased investment in technology and the development of new operational processes.
Our business success and operating results depend in part on effective information technology systems and on continuing to develop and implement
improvements in technology. Pursuing multiple initiatives simultaneously could make this continued development and implementation significantly more
challenging.
Many aspects of our operations are dependent on our information systems and the information collected, processed, stored, and handled by these systems. We rely
heavily on our computer systems to manage our ordering, pricing, point-of-sale, pharmacy fulfillment, inventory replenishment, claims processing, customer
loyalty and subscription programs, finance and other processes. Throughout our operations, we collect, process, maintain, retain, evaluate, utilize and distribute
large amounts of confidential and sensitive data and information, including personally identifiable information and protected health information, that our
customers, members and other constituents provide to purchase products or services, enroll in programs or services, register on our websites, interact with our
personnel, or otherwise communicate with us. In addition, for these operations, we depend in part on the secure transmission of confidential information over
public networks.
We have many different information and other technology systems supporting our businesses (including as a result of our acquisitions). Our businesses depend in
large part on these systems to adequately price our products and services; accurately establish reserves, process claims and report operating results; and interact
with providers, employer plan sponsors, customers, members, consumers and vendors in an efficient and uninterrupted fashion. In addition, recent trends toward
greater consumer engagement in health care require new and enhanced technologies, including more sophisticated applications for mobile devices. Certain of our
technology systems (including software) are older, legacy systems that are less flexible, less efficient and require a significant ongoing commitment of capital and
human resources to maintain, protect and enhance them and to integrate them with our other systems. We must re-engineer and reduce the number of these systems
to meet changing consumer and vendor preferences and needs, improve our productivity and reduce our operating expenses. We also need to develop or acquire
new technology systems, contract with new vendors or modify certain of our existing systems to support the consumer-oriented and transformation products and
services we are developing, operating and expanding and/or to meet current and developing industry and regulatory standards, including to keep pace with
continuing changes in information processing technology and emerging cybersecurity risks and threats. If we fail to achieve these objectives, our ability to
profitably grow our business and/or our operating results may be adversely affected.
In addition, information technology and other technology and process improvement projects, including our transformation and enterprise modernization programs,
frequently are long-term in nature and may take longer to complete and cost more than we
56

expect and may not deliver the benefits we project once they are complete. If we do not effectively and efficiently secure, manage, integrate and enhance our
technology portfolio (including vendor sourced systems), we could, among other things, have problems determining health care and other benefit cost estimates
and/or establishing appropriate pricing, meeting the needs of customers, consumers, providers, members and vendors, developing and expanding our consumer-
oriented products and services or keeping pace with industry and regulatory standards, and our operating results may be adversely affected.
We are subject to payment-related risks that could increase our operating costs, expose us to fraud or theft, subject us to potential liability and disrupt our
business operations.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash, checks, credit cards, debit cards, gift cards, mobile payments and potentially other technologies in
the future. Acceptance of these payment methods subjects us to rules, regulations, contractual obligations and compliance requirements, including payment
network rules and operating guidelines, data security standards and certification requirements, and rules governing electronic funds transfers. These requirements
may change in the future, which could make compliance more difficult or costly. For certain payment options, including credit and debit cards, we pay interchange
and other fees, which could increase periodically thereby raising our operating costs. We rely on third parties to provide payment processing services, including the
processing of credit cards, debit cards, and various other forms of electronic payment. If these vendors are unable to provide these services to us, or if their systems
are compromised, our operations could be disrupted. The payment methods that we offer also expose us to potential fraud and theft by persons seeking to obtain
unauthorized access to, or exploit any weaknesses in, the payment systems we use. If we fail to abide by applicable rules or requirements, or if data relating to our
payment systems is compromised due to a breach or misuse, we may be responsible for any costs incurred by payment card issuing banks and other third parties or
subject to fines and higher transaction fees. In addition, our reputation and ability to accept certain types of payments could each be harmed resulting in reduced
sales and adverse effects on our operating results.
Both our and our vendors’ operations are subject to a variety of business continuity hazards and risks, any of which could interrupt our operations or
otherwise adversely affect our performance and operating results.
We and our vendors are subject to business continuity hazards and other risks, including natural disasters, utility and other mechanical failures, acts of war or
terrorism, acts of civil unrest, disruption of communications, data security and preservation, disruption of supply or distribution, safety regulation and labor
difficulties. The occurrence of any of these or other events to us or our vendors might disrupt or shut down our operations or otherwise adversely affect our
operations. We also may be subject to certain liability claims in the event of an injury or loss of life, or damage to property, resulting from such events. Although
we have developed procedures for crisis management and disaster recovery and business continuity plans and maintain insurance policies that we believe are
customary and adequate for our size and industry, our insurance policies include limits and exclusions and, as a result, our coverage may be insufficient to protect
against all potential hazards and risks incident to our businesses. In addition, our crisis management and disaster recovery procedures and business continuity plans
may not be effective. Should any such hazards or risks occur, or should our insurance coverage be inadequate or unavailable, our businesses, operating results, cash
flows and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Financial Risks
We would be adversely affected if we do not effectively deploy our capital. Downgrades or potential downgrades in our credit ratings, should they occur, could
adversely affect our brand and reputation, businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Our operations generate significant capital, and we have the ability to raise additional capital. The manner in which we deploy our capital, including investments in
our businesses, our operations (such as information technology and other strategic and capital projects), dividends, acquisitions, share and/or debt repurchases,
repayment of debt, reinsurance or other capital uses, impacts our financial strength, claims paying ability and credit ratings issued by nationally-recognized
statistical rating organizations. Credit ratings issued by nationally-recognized statistical rating organizations are broadly distributed and generally used throughout
our industries. Our ratings reflect each rating organization’s opinion of our financial strength, operating performance and ability to meet our debt obligations or
obligations to our insureds. We believe our credit ratings and the financial strength and claims paying ability of our principal insurance and HMO subsidiaries are
important factors in marketing our Health Care Benefits products to certain of our customers.
Each of the ratings organizations reviews our ratings periodically, and there can be no assurance that our current ratings will be maintained in the future. In
connection with the completion of the Aetna Acquisition, each of Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s and
57

Fitch downgraded certain of our debt, financial strength and/or other credit ratings. Downgrades in our ratings could adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and financial condition.
Goodwill and other intangible assets could, in the future, become impaired.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had $110.7 billion and $112.9 billion, respectively, of goodwill and other intangible assets. Goodwill and
indefinitely-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value
may not be recoverable. When evaluating goodwill for potential impairment, we compare the fair value of our reporting units to their respective carrying amounts.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the carrying amount of a
reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess to the extent of the goodwill balance.
Estimated fair values could change if, for example, there are changes in the business climate, industry-wide changes, changes in the competitive environment,
adverse legal or regulatory actions or developments, changes in capital structure, cost of debt, interest rates, capital expenditure levels, operating cash flows or
market capitalization. Because of the significance of our goodwill and intangible assets, any future impairment of these assets could require material noncash
charges to our operating results, which also could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and global capital markets can significantly and adversely affect the value of our investments in debt and equity securities,
mortgage loans, alternative investments and other investments, and our operating results and/or our financial condition.
The global capital markets, including credit markets, continue to experience volatility and uncertainty. As an insurer, we have a substantial investment portfolio
that supports our policy liabilities and surplus and is comprised largely of debt securities of issuers located in the U.S. As a result, the income we earn from our
investment portfolio is largely driven by the level of interest rates in the U.S., and to a lesser extent the international financial markets; and volatility, uncertainty
and/or disruptions in the global capital markets, particularly the U.S. credit markets, and governments’ monetary policy, particularly U.S. monetary policy, can
significantly and adversely affect the value of our investment portfolio, our operating results and/or our financial condition by:
•
significantly reducing the value and/or liquidity of the debt securities we hold in our investment portfolio and creating realized capital losses that reduce our
operating results and/or unrealized capital losses that reduce our shareholders’ equity;
•
keeping interest rates low on high-quality short-term or medium-term debt securities (such as we have experienced during recent years) and thereby materially
reducing our net investment income and operating results as the proceeds from securities in our investment portfolio that mature or are otherwise disposed of
continue to be reinvested in lower yielding securities;
•
reducing the fair values of our investments if interest rates rise;
•
causing non-performance of or defaults on their obligations to us by third parties, including customers, issuers of securities in our investment portfolio,
mortgage borrowers and/or reinsurance and/or derivatives counterparties;
•
making it more difficult to value certain of our investment securities, for example if trading becomes less frequent, which could lead to significant period-to-
period changes in our estimates of the fair values of those securities and cause period-to-period volatility in our net income and shareholders’ equity;
•
reducing our ability to issue short-term debt securities at attractive interest rates, thereby increasing our interest expense and decreasing our operating results;
and
•
reducing our ability to issue other securities.
Although we seek, within guidelines we deem appropriate, to match the duration of our assets and liabilities and to manage our credit and counterparty exposures, a
failure adequately to do so could adversely affect our net income and our financial condition and, in extreme circumstances, our cash flows.
We have incurred and assumed significant indebtedness which has increased our consolidated interest expense and could adversely affect our business
flexibility and increase our borrowing costs.
In order to complete the Aetna Acquisition, we incurred acquisition-related debt financing of approximately $45.0 billion and assumed Aetna’s existing
indebtedness with a fair value of approximately $8.1 billion. Our substantial indebtedness and elevated debt-to-equity ratio have the effect, among other things, of
reducing our flexibility to respond to changing business and economic conditions and increasing our interest expense compared to pre-Aetna Acquisition periods.
In addition, the amount of
58

cash required to service our increased indebtedness levels and thus the demands on our cash resources are greater than the amount of cash flows required to service
our indebtedness prior to the Aetna Acquisition. We have suspended share repurchases until we reach our desired debt-to-equity ratio. The increased levels of
indebtedness also could reduce funds available to engage in investments in product development, capital expenditures, dividend payments and other activities and
may create competitive disadvantages for us relative to other companies with lower debt levels.
Risks Related to Our Relationships with Manufacturers, Providers, Suppliers and Vendors
We face risks relating to the market availability, pricing, suppliers and safety profiles of prescription drugs and other products that we purchase and sell.
Our Retail/LTC segment and our mail order and specialty pharmacy operations generate revenues in significant part by dispensing prescription drugs. Our PBM
business generates revenues primarily by contracting with clients to provide prescription drugs and related health care services to plan members. As a result, we are
dependent on our relationships with prescription drug manufacturers and suppliers. We acquire a substantial amount of our mail order and specialty pharmacies’
prescription drug supply from a limited number of suppliers. Certain of our agreements with such suppliers are short-term and cancelable by either party without
cause. In addition, these agreements may allow the supplier to distribute through channels other than us. Certain of these agreements also allow pricing and other
terms to be adjusted periodically for changing market conditions or required service levels. A termination or modification to any of these relationships could
adversely affect our prescription drug supply and have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and financial condition. Moreover, many
products distributed by our pharmacies are manufactured with ingredients that are susceptible to supply shortages. In some cases, we depend upon a single source
of supply. Any such supply shortages or loss of any such single source of supply could adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
Much of the branded and generic drug product that we sell in our pharmacies, and much of the other merchandise we sell, is manufactured in whole or in
substantial part outside of the United States. In most cases, the products or merchandise are imported by others and sold to us. As a result, significant changes in tax
or trade policies, tariffs or trade relations between the United States and other countries, such as the imposition of unilateral tariffs on imported products, could
result in significant increases in our costs, restrict our access to suppliers, depress economic activity, and have a material adverse effect on our businesses,
operating results and cash flows. In addition, other countries may change their business and trade policies and such changes, as well as any negative sentiments
towards the United States in response to increased import tariffs and other changes in U.S. trade regulations, could adversely affect our businesses.
Our suppliers are independent entities subject to their own operational and financial risks that are outside our control. If our current suppliers were to stop selling
prescription drugs to us or delay delivery, including as a result of supply shortages, supplier production disruptions, supplier quality issues, closing or bankruptcies
of our suppliers, or for other reasons, we may be unable to procure alternatives from other suppliers in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at
all.
Our operating results may be adversely affected if we are unable to contract with providers on competitive terms and develop and maintain attractive networks
with high quality providers.
We are seeking to enhance our health care provider networks by entering into joint ventures and other collaborative risk-sharing arrangements with providers.
Providers’ willingness to enter these arrangements with us depends upon, among other things, our ability to provide them with up to date quality of care data to
support these value-based contracts. These arrangements are designed to give providers incentives to engage in population health management and optimize
delivery of health care to our members. These arrangements also may allow us to expand into new geographies, target new customer groups, increase membership
and reduce medical costs and, if we provide technology or other services to the relevant health system or provider organization, may contribute to our revenue and
earnings from alternative sources. If such arrangements do not result in the lower medical costs that we project or if we fail to attract providers to such
arrangements, or are less successful at implementing such arrangements than our competitors, our medical costs may not be competitive and may be higher than we
project, our attractiveness to customers may be reduced, we may lose or be unable to grow medical membership, and our ability to profitably grow our business
and/or our operating results may be adversely affected.
While we believe joint ventures, accountable care organizations (“ACOs”) and other non-traditional health care provider organizational structures present
opportunities for us, the implementation of our joint ventures and other non-traditional structure strategies may not achieve the intended results, which could
adversely affect our operating results and cash flows. Among other things, joint ventures require us to maintain collaborative relationships with our counterparties,
continue to gain access to provider rates that make the joint ventures economically sustainable and devote significant management time to the
59

operation and management of the joint ventures. We may not be able to achieve these objectives in one or more of our joint ventures, which could adversely affect
our operating results and cash flows.
If our service providers fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to comply with applicable laws or regulations, we may be exposed to brand and
reputational harm, litigation and/or regulatory action. This risk is particularly high in our Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs
plan programs.
We contract with various third parties to perform certain functions and services and provide us with certain information technology systems. Our arrangements
with these third parties may expose us to public scrutiny, adversely affect our brand and reputation, expose us to litigation or regulatory action, and otherwise make
our operations vulnerable if we fail to adequately oversee, monitor and regulate their performance or if they fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to
comply with applicable laws or regulations. For example, certain of our vendors have been responsible for releases of sensitive information of our members and
employees, which has caused us to incur additional expenses and given rise to regulatory actions and litigation against us.
These risks are particularly high in our Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs, where third parties perform medical
management and other member related services for us. Any failure of our or these third parties’ prevention, detection or control systems related to regulatory
compliance, compliance with our internal policies, data security and/or cybersecurity or any incident involving the theft, misappropriation, loss or other
unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, members’, customers’ or other constituents’ sensitive information could require us to expend significant resources to
remediate any damage, interrupt our operations and adversely affect our brand and reputation and also expose us to whistleblower, class action and other litigation,
other proceedings, prohibitions on marketing or active or passive enrollment of members, corrective actions, fines, sanctions and/or penalties, any of which could
adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
We may experience increased medical and other benefit costs, litigation risk and customer and member dissatisfaction when providers that do not have
contracts with us render services to our Health Care Benefits members.
Some providers that render services to our Health Care Benefits members do not have contracts with us. In those cases, we do not have a pre-established
understanding with these providers as to the amount of compensation that is due to them for services rendered to our members. In some states, the amount of
compensation due to these nonparticipating providers is defined by law or regulation, but in most instances it is either not defined or it is established by a standard
that is not clearly translatable into dollar terms. In such instances providers may believe that they are underpaid for their services and may either litigate or arbitrate
their dispute with us or try to recover the difference between what we have paid them and the amount they charged us from our members, which may result in
customer and member dissatisfaction. For example, in October 2018, an arbitrator awarded certain claimant hospitals approximately $150 million in a proceeding
relating to Aetna’s out-of-network benefit payment and administration practices, and in March 2019 that award was reduced to approximately $86 million. Such
disputes may cause us to pay higher medical or other benefit costs than we projected.
Continuing consolidation and integration among providers and other suppliers may increase our medical and other covered benefits costs, make it difficult for
us to compete in certain geographies and create new competitors.
Hospitals and other providers and health systems continue to consolidate across the health care industry. While this consolidation could increase efficiency and has
the potential to improve the delivery of health care services, it also reduces competition and the number of potential contracting parties in certain geographies.
These health systems also are increasingly forming and considering forming health plans to directly offer health insurance in competition with us, a process that
has been accelerated by the ACA. In addition, ACOs (including Commercial and Medicaid-only ACOs developed as a result of state Medicaid laws), practice
management companies, consolidation among and by integrated health systems and other changes in the organizational structures that physicians, hospitals and
other providers adopt continues to change the way these providers interact with us and the competitive landscape in which we operate. These changes may increase
our medical and other covered benefits costs, may affect the way we price our products and services and estimate our medical and other covered benefits costs and
may require us to change our operations, including by withdrawing from certain geographies where we do not have a significant presence across our businesses or
are unable to collaborate or contract with providers on acceptable terms. Each of these changes may adversely affect our businesses and operating results.
60

Table of Contents
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
There are no unresolved SEC Staff Comments.
Item 2. Properties.
The Company’s principal office is an owned building complex located in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, which totals approximately one million square feet. The
Company also leases office space in other locations in the United States.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment includes owned or leased mail service dispensing pharmacies, call centers, on-site pharmacy stores, retail specialty pharmacy
stores, specialty mail service pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral services throughout the United States.
Retail/LTC Segment
As of December 31, 2020, the Retail/LTC segment operated the following properties:
•
Approximately 8,115 retail stores, of which approximately 5% were owned. Net selling space for retail stores was approximately 80.1 million square feet as of
December 31, 2020.
•
Approximately 1,845 retail pharmacies within retail chains, as well as approximately 80 clinics in Target Corporation (“Target”) stores;
•
Owned distribution centers and leased distribution facilities throughout the United States totaling approximately 10.5 million square feet; and
•
Owned and leased LTC pharmacies throughout the United States and an owned LTC repackaging facility.
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company continues to guarantee lease obligations for 76 former stores.
The Company is indemnified for these guarantee obligations by the respective initial purchasers. These guarantees generally remain in effect for the initial lease
term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. For additional information on these
guarantees, see “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment’s principal office is an owned building complex located in Hartford, Connecticut, which totals approximately 1.7 million square
feet. The Health Care Benefits segment also owns or leases office space in other locations in the United States and several other countries.
Management believes that the Company’s owned and leased facilities are suitable and adequate to meet the Company’s anticipated needs. At the end of the existing
lease terms, management believes the leases can be renewed or replaced by alternative space. For additional information on the right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities associated with the Company’s leases, see Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
I. Legal Proceedings
The information contained in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
II. Environmental Matters
Item 103 of SEC Regulation S-K requires disclosure of environmental legal proceedings with a governmental authority if management reasonably believes that the
proceedings involve potential monetary sanctions of $1 million or more.
61

Table of Contents
The Company is in the process of negotiating with the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation to resolve claims of alleged historical
noncompliance with hazardous waste regulations in connection with LTC pharmacies in the State of New York. These proceedings are not material to the
Company’s business or financial condition.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures.
Not applicable.
62

Table of Contents
Information about our Executive Officers
The following sets forth the name, age and biographical information for each of the Registrant’s executive officers as of February 16, 2021. In each case the
officer’s term of office extends to the date of the meeting of the Board following the next annual meeting of stockholders of CVS Health. Previous positions and
responsibilities held by each of the executive officers over the past five years or more are indicated below:
    Eva C. Boratto, age 54, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; Executive Vice President -
Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation from March 2017 through November 2018; Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief
Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation from July 2013 through February 2017. Ms. Boratto is also a member of the board of directors of United Parcel
Service, Inc., an international package delivery and supply chain management company.
    Troyen A. Brennan, M.D., age 66, Executive Vice President and Chief Medical Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2008; Executive Vice
President and Chief Medical Officer of Aetna Inc. from February 2006 through November 2008.
    James D. Clark, age 56, Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; Vice President -
Finance and Accounting of CVS Pharmacy, Inc. from September 2009 through October 2018.
    Daniel P. Finke, age 50, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of Health Care Benefits since February 2021; Executive Vice
President, Commercial Business and Markets of Aetna from February 2020 through January 2021; Executive Vice President, Consumer Health and Service of
Aetna from June 2018 through January 2020; Senior Vice President, Network and Clinical Services of Aetna from January 2016 through May 2018.
    Laurie P. Havanec, age 60, Executive Vice President and Chief People Officer of CVS Health Corporation since February 2021; Executive Vice President and
Chief People Officer, Otis Worldwide Corporation, an elevator, escalator and moving walkway manufacturer, from October 2019 through January 2021; Corporate
Vice President, Talent of United Technologies Corporation, a multinational manufacturing conglomerate, from April 2019 through October 2019; Vice President -
HR, Institution Businesses of Aetna from 2013 through March 2017.
    Alan M. Lotvin, M.D., age 59, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark since March 2020; Executive Vice
President - Transformation of CVS Health Corporation from June 2018 through February 2020; Executive Vice President - Specialty Pharmacy, CVS Caremark
from November 2012 through May 2018.
    Karen S. Lynch, age 58, President and Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation since February 2021; Executive Vice President of CVS Health
Corporation from November 2018 through January 2021; President of Aetna from January 2015 through January 2021; Executive Vice President, Local and
Regional Businesses of Aetna from February 2013 through December 2014; and a director of CVS Health Corporation since February 2021. Ms. Lynch is also a
member of the board of directors of U.S. Bancorp, a banking and financial services company.
    Neela Montgomery, age 46, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of Retail/Pharmacy since November 2020; Chief Executive
Officer of Crate & Barrel Holdings, a retailer of furniture, kitchenware and other home essentials, from August 2017 through August 2020; Executive Board
Member of Otto Group GmbH, a German e-commerce company, from November 2014 through July 2017. Ms. Montgomery is also a member of the board of
directors of Logitech International SA, a Swiss-American manufacturer of computer peripherals and software.
    Thomas M. Moriarty, age 57, Executive Vice President and General Counsel of CVS Health Corporation since October 2012; Chief Policy and External Affairs
Officer since March 2017; Chief Strategy Officer from March 2014 through February 2017.
    Jonathan C. Roberts, age 65, Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of CVS Health Corporation since March 2017; Executive Vice President of
CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark from September 2012 through February 2017.
63

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
Market Information
CVS Health’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CVS.”
Dividends
CVS Health has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a public company. Future dividends will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital
requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant by the Board.
See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for information regarding CVS Health’s dividends.
Holders of Common Stock
As of February 8, 2021, there were 26,078 registered holders of the registrant’s common stock according to the records maintained by the registrant’s transfer
agent.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following share repurchase program has been authorized by the Board:
In billions
Remaining as of
Authorization Date
Authorized
December 31, 2020
November 2, 2016 (“2016 Repurchase Program”)
$
15.0 
$
13.9 
The 2016 Repurchase Program permits the Company to effect repurchases from time to time through a combination of open market repurchases, privately
negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase transactions, and/or other derivative transactions. The 2016 Repurchase Program can be modified or
terminated by the Board at any time. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock.
See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the Company’s share repurchases.
64

Table of Contents
Stock Performance Graph
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return on CVS Health’s common stock (assuming reinvestment of dividends) with the cumulative
total return on the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 500 Food and Staples Retailing Industry Group Index and the S&P 500 Healthcare Sector Group Index from December
31, 2015 through December 31, 2020. The graph assumes a $100 investment in shares of CVS Health’s common stock on December 31, 2015.
December 31,
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
CVS Health Corporation
$
100 $
82 $
77 $
72 $
84 $
80 
S&P 500
100 
112 
136 
130 
171 
203 
S&P 500 Food & Staples Retail Group Index 
100 
99 
113 
114 
145 
169 
S&P 500 Health Care Group Index 
100 
97 
119 
126 
153 
173 
(1)
Includes CVS Health.
(2)
Includes five companies (COST, KR, SYY, WBA, WMT).
(3)
Includes 63 companies.
The year-ended values of each investment shown in the preceding graph are based on share price appreciation plus dividends, with the dividends reinvested as of
the last business day of the month during which such dividends were ex-dividend. The calculations exclude trading commissions and taxes. Total shareholder
returns from each investment can be calculated from the year-end investment values shown beneath the graph.
Item 6. Reserved
Not applicable.
 (1)
(2)
(1) (3)
_____________________________________________
65

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. (“MD&A”)
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this
10-K, “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K and the “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” in this 10-K.
Overview of Business
CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”), is a diversified health services
company united around a common purpose of helping people on their path to better health. In an increasingly connected and digital world, we are meeting people
wherever they are and changing health care to meet their needs. The Company has more than 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 walk-in medical clinics, a
leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 105 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving more than one million
patients per year and expanding specialty pharmacy services. We also serve an estimated 34 million people through traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan
(“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall health care
costs.
On November 28, 2018 (the “Aetna Acquisition Date”), the Company acquired Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”). As a result of the acquisition of Aetna (the “Aetna
Acquisition”), the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment. Certain aspects of Aetna’s operations, including products for which the Company no longer
solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products, are included in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment. The
consolidated financial statements reflect Aetna’s results subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
The Company has four reportable segments: Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC, Health Care Benefits and Corporate/Other, which are described below.
Overview of the Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease
management services and medical spend management. The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions,
government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care plans, plans offered on public health insurance exchanges and private health insurance
exchanges and other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States. The Pharmacy Services segment operates retail specialty pharmacy stores,
specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services.
Overview of the Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of health and wellness products and general merchandise, provides health care services
through its MinuteClinic  walk-in medical clinics, provides medical diagnostic testing, administers vaccinations for illnesses such as influenza, COVID-19 and
shingles and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations, which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other
ancillary services to long-term care facilities and other care settings. As of December 31, 2020, the Retail/LTC segment operated more than 9,900 retail locations,
approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and on-site pharmacies. For the year ended December 31,
2020, the Company dispensed approximately 27.1% of the total retail pharmacy prescriptions in the United States.
Overview of the Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment is one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information
and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals, make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care
Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy,
dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care
management services and health information technology products and services. The Health Care Benefits
®
66

segment also provided workers’ compensation administrative services through its Coventry Health Care Workers’ Compensation business (“Workers’
Compensation business”) prior to the sale of this business on July 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals,
college students, part-time and hourly workers, health plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups
and expatriates. The Company refers to insurance products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and
administrative services contract products (where the plan sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” For periods
prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised only of the Company’s SilverScript  PDP business.
Overview of the Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which primarily consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
®
67

COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world. Beginning in March 2020, the effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic began to emerge in the U.S. The Company executed preparedness plans to maintain continuity of its operations, including transitioning many
office-based colleagues to a remote work environment and installing protective equipment in our retail pharmacies. The Company also provided enhanced benefits
to its colleagues, including bonuses to frontline colleagues, dependent care financial assistance, paid sick leave for part-time colleagues and paid time off to
colleagues who test positive or are quarantined due to exposure to COVID-19. Our strong local presence and scale in communities across the country enabled us to
play an indispensable role in the national response to COVID-19, as well as provide seamless support for our customers wherever they needed us: in our CVS
locations, in their homes, and virtually. The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on the Company’s operating results for the year ended December 31,
2020, primarily in the Company’s Health Care Benefits and Retail/LTC segments.
Health Care Benefits Segment
Beginning in mid-March, the health system experienced a significant reduction in utilization of medical services (“utilization”) that is discretionary and the
cancellation of elective medical procedures. Utilization remained below historical levels through April, began to recover in May and June and reached more normal
levels in the third and fourth quarters, with select geographies impacted by COVID-19 waves.
In response to COVID-19, the Company expanded benefit coverage to its members. These expanded benefits included cost-sharing waivers for COVID-19 related
treatments, as well as assistance to members through premium credits, telehealth cost-sharing waivers and other investments.
COVID-19 also resulted in a shift in the Company’s medical membership during the year. The Company experienced declines in Commercial membership due to
reductions in workforce at our existing customers, substantially offset by increases in Medicaid membership primarily as a result of the suspension of eligibility
redeterminations and increased unemployment.
Retail/LTC Segment
During March 2020, the Company experienced increased prescription volume due to the greater use of 90-day prescriptions and early refills of maintenance
medications, as well as increased front store volume as consumers prepared for the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in the second quarter and continuing
throughout the remainder of the year, the Company experienced reduced customer traffic in its retail pharmacies and MinuteClinic locations due to shelter-in-place
orders as well as reduced new therapy prescriptions and decreased long-term care prescription volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the
Company incurred incremental operating expenses associated with the Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response efforts and waived fees associated with
prescription home delivery and associated front store products.
During 2020, the Company also played a key role in supporting the local communities in which it operates. The Company offered COVID-19 diagnostic testing at
more than 4,000 CVS Pharmacy locations as of December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company launched critical diagnostic testing for the vulnerable senior
population in long-term care facilities in partnership with three states. The Company was also selected to administer COVID-19 vaccines in both long-term care
facilities and its retail pharmacies. The Company began administering COVID-19 vaccinations in long-term care facilities and in certain of its retail pharmacies
during December 2020 and February 2021, respectively, and expects to play a significant role in COVID-19 vaccine administration in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. We believe COVID-19’s impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition
primarily will be driven by the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and
consumer behavior and health care utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and impact of stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and local
governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are beyond our knowledge and control. As a result, the impact COVID-19 will have on our
businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material.
68

Results of Operations
The following information summarizes the Company’s results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019. For discussion of the Company’s results of operations for
2019 compared to 2018, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the Company’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 18, 2020.
Summary of Consolidated Financial Results
Change
Year Ended December 31, 
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
In millions
2020
2019
2018
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
190,688 $
185,236 $
183,910 $
5,452 
2.9 % $
1,326 
0.7 %
Premiums
69,364 
63,122 
8,184 
6,242 
9.9 %
54,938 
671.3 %
Services
7,856 
7,407 
1,825 
449 
6.1 %
5,582 
305.9 %
Net investment income
798 
1,011 
660 
(213)
(21.1)%
351 
53.2 %
Total revenues
268,706 
256,776 
194,579 
11,930 
4.6 %
62,197 
32.0 %
Operating costs:
Cost of products sold
163,981 
158,719 
156,447 
5,262 
3.3 %
2,272 
1.5 %
Benefit costs
55,679 
52,529 
6,594 
3,150 
6.0 %
45,935 
696.6 %
Goodwill impairments
— 
— 
6,149 
— 
— %
(6,149)
(100.0)%
Operating expenses
35,135 
33,541 
21,368 
1,594 
4.8 %
12,173 
57.0 %
Total operating costs
254,795 
244,789 
190,558 
10,006 
4.1 %
54,231 
28.5 %
Operating income
13,911 
11,987 
4,021 
1,924 
16.1 %
7,966 
198.1 %
Interest expense
2,907 
3,035 
2,619 
(128)
(4.2)%
416 
15.9 %
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
1,440 
79 
— 
1,361 
1,722.8 %
79 
— %
Other income
(206)
(124)
(4)
(82)
(66.1)%
(120)
(3,000.0)%
Income before income tax provision
9,770 
8,997 
1,406 
773 
8.6 %
7,591 
539.9 %
Income tax provision
2,569 
2,366 
2,002 
203 
8.6 %
364 
18.2 %
Income (loss) from continuing operations
7,201 
6,631 
(596)
570 
8.6 %
7,227 
1,212.6 %
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
(9)
— 
— 
(9)
— %
— 
— %
Net income (loss)
7,192 
6,631 
(596)
561 
8.5 %
7,227 
1,212.6 %
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling
interests
(13)
3 
2 
(16)
(533.3)%
1 
50.0 %
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
7,179 $
6,634 $
(594) $
545 
8.2 % $
7,228 
1,216.8 %
Commentary - 2020 compared to 2019
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $11.9 billion or 4.6% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in total revenues was primarily driven by growth in the Health Care
Benefits and Retail/LTC segments.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the revenues of the Company’s segments.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses increased $1.6 billion or 4.8% in 2020 compared to 2019. Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained consistent at
13.1% in both 2020 and 2019. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to the reinstatement of the non-deductible health insurer fee (“HIF”)
which was $1.0 billion for 2020, incremental operating expenses associated with the Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response efforts and increased
operating expenses associated with growth in the business. The increase in operating expenses was partially offset by (i) a $269 million pre-tax gain on the sale
of the Workers’ Compensation business, which occurred on July 31, 2020, (ii) the absence of $231 million of store rationalization charges and a $205 million
pre-tax loss on the sale of the Company’s Brazilian subsidiary, Drogaria
69

Onofre Ltda. (“Onofre”), both recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019, and (iii) the favorable impact of enterprise-wide cost savings initiatives in 2020.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the operating expenses of the Company’s segments.
Operating income
•
Operating income increased $1.9 billion or 16.1% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in operating income was primarily due to:
•
Increased operating income in the Health Care Benefits segment, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, pre-tax income of $307 million
associated with the receipt of amounts owed to the Company under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) risk corridor program that was previously fully reserved for as payment was
uncertain, and the $269 million pre-tax gain on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business;
•
Increased operating income in the Pharmacy Services segment, primarily related to improved purchasing economics; and
•
The favorable impact of enterprise-wide cost savings initiatives in 2020, partially offset by:
•
Decreased operating income in the Retail/LTC segment, primarily as a result of continued reimbursement pressure and the net adverse impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the absence of $231 million of store rationalization charges and the $205 million pre-tax loss on the sale of
Onofre, both recorded in 2019.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the operating income of the Company’s segments.
Interest expense
•
Interest expense decreased $128 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower average debt in 2020. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” later
in this report for additional information.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
•
During 2020, the loss on early extinguishment of debt relates to the Company’s repayment of $6.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes pursuant to its tender
offers for such senior notes in August 2020, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $766 million, and the repayment of $4.5 billion of its
outstanding senior notes pursuant to its tender offers for such senior notes in December 2020, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$674 million. During 2019, the loss on early extinguishment of debt relates to the Company’s repayment of $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes
pursuant to its tender offers for such senior notes in August 2019, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million. See Note 8
‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Other income
•
Other income increased $82 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Other income represents pension plan asset returns in excess of interest cost on pension plan
obligations. The increase in other income in 2020 was primarily due to lower discount rates in 2020 compared to 2019 when determining the interest cost on
the Company’s pension plan obligations as well as strong plan asset returns.
Income tax provision
•
The Company’s effective income tax rate remained consistent at 26.3% in both 2020 and 2019, with the impact of the non-deductible HIF offset by the
favorable resolution of certain tax matters in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss from discontinued operations
•
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company retained guarantees on store lease obligations for a number
of former subsidiaries, including Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores, each of which subsequently filed for bankruptcy. The Company’s loss from discontinued
operations in 2020 primarily includes lease-related costs required to satisfy these lease guarantees.
•
See “Discontinued Operations” in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ and “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included
in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about the Company’s discontinued operations and the Company’s lease guarantees, respectively.
70

Outlook for 2021
With respect to 2021, the Company believes you should consider the following important information:
•
The Pharmacy Services segment is expected to benefit from continued growth in specialty pharmacy and our ability to drive further improvements in
purchasing economics, partially offset by continued price compression.
•
The Retail/LTC segment is expected to benefit from increased prescription volume, diagnostic testing and improved generic drug purchasing, partially offset
by continued reimbursement pressure and operating expenses associated with the Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response efforts. The projected adjusted
prescription growth is expected to be driven by the continued successful execution of our patient care programs, the anticipated return of provider visits as we
move through the year and vaccination administration. While lower front store traffic has persisted into the first quarter of 2021, we expect front store traffic to
increase as we move through the year.
•
The Health Care Benefits segment is expected to benefit from Medicare membership growth, partially offset by membership declines in our Medicaid
products, the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the removal of the HIF. The projected MBR is expected to increase compared to 2020, reflecting
the return to more normal levels of utilization, the removal of the HIF, lower Medicare risk adjustment revenue and the continued shift in business mix. The
COVID-19 pandemic is expected to adversely impact earnings in 2021 due to the regulatory changes included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021;
testing, treatment and vaccination costs; and lower Medicare risk adjustment revenue.
•
The Company is expected to benefit from the continuation of its enterprise-wide cost savings initiatives that are expected to ramp as we move through the
year. Key drivers include:
◦
The ongoing digitalization of our business along with technology improvements in our operations,
◦
Office real estate reductions associated with workforce management changes and
◦
Productivity/operational efficiency initiatives within each of the Company’s segments.
•
Based upon current tax legislation, the Company expects its effective income tax rate to decrease primarily due to the removal of the HIF in 2021.
•
The Company expects changes to its business environment to continue as elected and other government officials at the national and state levels continue to
propose and enact significant modifications to public policy and existing laws and regulations that govern or impact the Company’s businesses.
The Company’s current expectations described above are forward-looking statements. Please see “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K and the
“Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” in this 10-K for information regarding important factors that may cause the Company’s actual
results to differ from those currently projected and/or otherwise materially affect the Company.
71

Segment Analysis
The following discussion of segment operating results is presented based on the Company’s reportable segments in accordance with the accounting guidance for
segment reporting and is consistent with the segment disclosure in Note 17 ‘‘Segment Reporting’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The Company has three operating segments, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits, as well as a Corporate/Other segment. The Company’s
segments maintain separate financial information, and the Company’s chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) evaluates the segments’ operating results on a
regular basis in deciding how to allocate resources among the segments and in assessing segment performance. The CODM evaluates the performance of the
Company’s segments based on adjusted operating income, which is defined as operating income (GAAP measure) excluding the impact of amortization of
intangible assets and other items, if any, that neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business
performance. See the reconciliations of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income below for further context regarding the items excluded
from operating income in determining adjusted operating income. The Company uses adjusted operating income as its principal measure of segment performance
as it enhances the Company’s ability to compare past financial performance with current performance and analyze underlying business performance and trends.
Non-GAAP financial measures the Company discloses, such as consolidated adjusted operating income, should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to,
financial measures determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP.
The following is a reconciliation of financial measures of the Company’s segments to the consolidated totals:
In millions
Pharmacy
Services 
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations 
Consolidated 
Totals
2020
Total revenues
$
141,938 $
91,198 $
75,467 $
426 
$
(40,323)
$
268,706 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,688 
6,146 
6,188 
(1,306)
(708)
16,008 
2019
Total revenues
141,491 
86,608 
69,604 
512 
(41,439)
256,776 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,129 
6,705 
5,202 
(1,000)
(697)
15,339 
2018
Total revenues
134,736 
83,989 
8,962 
606 
(33,714)
194,579 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
4,955 
7,403 
528 
(856)
(769)
11,261 
(1) Total revenues of the Pharmacy Services segment include approximately $10.9 billion, $11.5 billion and $11.4 billion of retail co-payments for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. See Note
1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about retail co-payments.
(2) Intersegment eliminations relate to intersegment revenue generating activities that occur between the Pharmacy Services segment, the Retail/LTC segment and/or the Health Care Benefits
segment.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
72

The following are reconciliations of operating income to adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Year Ended December 31, 2020
In millions
Pharmacy  
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
5,454 
$
5,640 $
5,166 
$
(1,641)
$
(708)
$
13,911 
Non-GAAP adjustments:
Amortization of intangible assets 
234 
506 
1,598 
3 
— 
2,341 
Acquisition-related integration costs 
— 
— 
— 
332 
— 
332 
Gain on divestiture of subsidiary 
— 
— 
(269)
— 
— 
(269)
Receipt of fully reserved ACA risk corridor receivable
— 
— 
(307)
— 
— 
(307)
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
5,688 
$
6,146 $
6,188 
$
(1,306)
$
(708)
$
16,008 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
In millions
Pharmacy  
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
4,735 
$
5,793 $
3,639 
$
(1,483)
$
(697)
$
11,987 
Non-GAAP adjustments:
Amortization of intangible assets 
394 
476 
1,563 
3 
— 
2,436 
Acquisition-related integration costs 
— 
— 
— 
480 
— 
480 
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary 
— 
205 
— 
— 
— 
205 
Store rationalization charges
— 
231 
— 
— 
— 
231 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
5,129 
$
6,705 $
5,202 
$
(1,000)
$
(697)
$
15,339 
Year Ended December 31, 2018
In millions
Pharmacy  
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
4,607 
$
620 $
368 
$
(805)
$
(769)
$
4,021 
Non-GAAP adjustments:
Amortization of intangible assets 
348 
498 
160 
— 
— 
1,006 
Acquisition-related transaction and integration costs
— 
7 
— 
485 
— 
492 
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary 
— 
86 
— 
— 
— 
86 
Goodwill impairments 
— 
6,149 
— 
— 
— 
6,149 
Impairment of long-lived assets
— 
43 
— 
— 
— 
43 
Interest income on financing for the Aetna
Acquisition
— 
— 
— 
(536)
— 
(536)
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
4,955 
$
7,403 $
528 
$
(856)
$
(769)
$
11,261 
(1) The Company’s acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets as required under the acquisition method of accounting which consist primarily of trademarks,
customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology, provider networks and value of business acquired. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated
useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in the Company’s statements
of operations in operating expenses within each segment. Although intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the amortization of intangible assets does not directly
relate to the underwriting of the Company’s insurance products, the services performed for the Company’s customers or the sale of the Company’s products or services. Additionally,
intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of the Company’s acquisition activity. Accordingly, the Company believes excluding the amortization
of intangible assets enhances the Company’s and investors’ ability to compare the Company’s past financial performance with its current performance and to analyze underlying business
performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within the Company’s GAAP financial
statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset amortization is excluded from
the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an intangible asset becomes
impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
 (5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(6)
 (7)
 (8)
_____________________________________________
73

(2) In 2020, 2019 and 2018, acquisition-related transaction and integration costs relate to the Aetna Acquisition. In 2018, acquisition-related integration costs also relate to the acquisition of
Omnicare, Inc. (“Omnicare”). The acquisition-related transaction and integration costs are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the
Corporate/Other segment and the Retail/LTC segment.
(3) In 2020, the gain on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax gain on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business, which the Company sold on July 31, 2020 for approximately
$850 million. The gain on divestiture is reflected as a reduction in operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment. In
2019, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019. The loss on divestiture primarily relates to the elimination of the
cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income. In 2018, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of the Company’s
RxCrossroads subsidiary for $725 million on January 2, 2018. The losses on divestiture in 2019 and 2018 are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating
expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(4) In 2020, the Company received $313 million owed to it under the ACA’s risk corridor program that was previously fully reserved for as payment was uncertain. After considering offsetting
items such as the ACA’s minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rebate requirements and premium taxes, the Company recognized pre-tax income of $307 million in the Company’s
consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment.
(5) In 2019, the store rationalization charges relate to the planned closure of 46 underperforming retail pharmacy stores in the second quarter of 2019 and the planned closure of 22
underperforming retail pharmacy stores in the first quarter of 2020. The store rationalization charges primarily relate to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges and are
reflected in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(6) In 2018, the goodwill impairments relate to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment.
(7) In 2018, impairment of long-lived assets primarily relates to the impairment of property and equipment within the Retail/LTC segment and is reflected in operating expenses in the
Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
(8) In 2018, the Company recorded interest income of $536 million on the proceeds of the $40 billion of unsecured senior notes it issued in March 2018 to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition.
All amounts are for the periods prior to the close of the Aetna Acquisition, which occurred on November 28, 2018, and were recorded within the Corporate/Other segment.
74

Pharmacy Services Segment
The following table summarizes the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
In millions, except percentages
2020
2019
2018
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
140,950
$
140,946
$
134,285
$
4 
— % $
6,661 
5.0 %
Services
988
545
451
443 
81.3 %
94 
20.8 %
Total revenues
141,938
141,491
134,736
447 
0.3 %
6,755 
5.0 %
Cost of products sold
135,045
135,245
128,777
(200)
(0.1)%
6,468 
5.0 %
Operating expenses
1,439
1,511
1,352
(72)
(4.8)%
159 
11.8 %
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
1.0 
%
1.1 
%
1.0 
%
Operating income
$
5,454
$
4,735
$
4,607
$
719 
15.2 % $
128 
2.8 %
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
3.8 
%
3.3 
%
3.4 
%
Adjusted operating income 
$
5,688
$
5,129
$
4,955
$
559 
10.9 % $
174 
3.5 %
Adjusted operating income as a %
of total revenues
4.0 
%
3.6 
%
3.7 
%
Revenues (by distribution channel):
Pharmacy network 
$
85,045
$
88,755
$
87,167
$
(3,710)
(4.2)% $
1,588 
1.8 %
Mail choice 
56,071
52,141
47,049
3,930 
7.5 %
5,092 
10.8 %
Other
822
595
520
227 
38.2 %
75 
14.4 %
Pharmacy claims processed:
Total
2,112.9
2,014.2
1,889.8
98.7 
4.9 %
124.4 
6.6 %
Pharmacy network 
1,790.1
1,704.0
1,601.4
86.1 
5.1 %
102.6 
6.4 %
Mail choice 
322.8
310.2
288.4
12.6 
4.1 %
21.8 
7.6 %
Generic dispensing rate: 
Total
88.2 
%
88.2 
%
87.3 
%
Pharmacy network 
88.7 
%
88.7 
%
87.9 
%
Mail choice 
85.3 
%
85.1 
%
83.9 
%
(1) See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Pharmacy Services segment.
(2) Pharmacy network is defined as claims filled at retail and specialty retail pharmacies, including the Company’s retail pharmacies and LTC pharmacies, but excluding Maintenance Choice
activity, which is included within the mail choice category. Maintenance Choice permits eligible client plan members to fill their maintenance prescriptions through mail order delivery or at
a CVS pharmacy retail store for the same price as mail order.
(3) Mail choice is defined as claims filled at a Pharmacy Services mail order facility, which includes specialty mail claims inclusive of Specialty Connect  claims picked up at a retail pharmacy,
as well as prescriptions filled at the Company’s retail pharmacies under the Maintenance Choice program.
(4) Includes an adjustment to convert 90-day prescriptions to the equivalent of three 30-day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects the fact that these prescriptions include approximately three
times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
Commentary - 2020 compared to 2019
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $447 million, or 0.3%, to $141.9 billion in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by growth in specialty
pharmacy and brand inflation, partially offset by continued price compression and changes in net new business mix.
(1)
(2)
(3)
 (4)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2)
(3)
_____________________________________________
®
®
75

Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Pharmacy Services segment include selling, general and administrative expenses; depreciation and amortization expense; and
expenses related to specialty retail pharmacies, which include store and administrative payroll, employee benefits and occupancy costs.
•
Operating expenses decreased $72 million, or 4.8%, in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily driven by lower amortization expense in 2020, partially offset by
incremental operating expenses associated with growth in the business, including investments in the Company’s growth initiatives.
•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained relatively consistent at 1.0% and 1.1% in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating income and adjusted operating income
•
Operating income increased $719 million, or 15.2%, and adjusted operating income increased $559 million, or 10.9%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase
in both operating income and adjusted operating income was primarily driven by improved purchasing economics and growth in specialty pharmacy, partially
offset by continued price compression. The increase in operating income also was driven by lower amortization expense in 2020.
•
As you review the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The Company’s efforts to (i) retain existing clients, (ii) obtain new business and (iii) maintain or improve the rebates and/or discounts the Company
receives from manufacturers, wholesalers and retail pharmacies continue to have an impact on operating income and adjusted operating income. In
particular, competitive pressures in the PBM industry have caused the Company and other PBMs to continue to share with clients a larger portion of
rebates and/or discounts received from pharmaceutical manufacturers. In addition, marketplace dynamics and regulatory changes have limited the
Company’s ability to offer plan sponsors pricing that includes retail network “differential” or “spread,” and the Company expects these trends to
continue. The “differential” or “spread” is any difference between the drug price charged to plan sponsors, including Medicare Part D plan sponsors,
by a PBM and the price paid for the drug by the PBM to the dispensing provider.
Pharmacy claims processed
•
Total pharmacy claims processed represents the number of prescription claims processed through our pharmacy benefits manager and dispensed by either our
retail network pharmacies or our own mail and specialty pharmacies. Management uses this metric to understand variances between actual claims processed
and expected amounts as well as trends in period-over-period results. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding
the impact of pharmacy claim volume on segment total revenues and operating results.
•
The Company’s pharmacy network claims processed on a 30-day equivalent basis increased 5.1% to 1.8 billion claims in 2020 compared to 1.7 billion claims
in 2019. The increase in pharmacy network claims processed was primarily driven by net new business.
•
The Company’s mail choice claims processed on a 30-day equivalent basis increased 4.1% to 322.8 million claims in 2020 compared to 310.2 million claims
in 2019. The increase in mail choice claims was primarily driven by net new business and the continued adoption of Maintenance Choice offerings.
Generic dispensing rate
•
Generic dispensing rate is calculated by dividing the Pharmacy Services segment’s generic drug prescriptions processed or filled by its total prescriptions
processed or filled. Management uses this metric to evaluate the effectiveness of the business at encouraging the use of generic drugs when they are available
and clinically appropriate, which aids in decreasing costs for client members and retail customers. This metric provides management and investors with
information useful in understanding trends in segment total revenues and operating results.
•
The Pharmacy Services segment’s total generic dispensing rate remained consistent at 88.2% in both 2020 and 2019.
76

Retail/LTC Segment
The following table summarizes the Retail/LTC segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
In millions, except percentages
2020
2019
2018
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
89,944
$
85,729
$
83,175
$
4,215 
4.9 % $
2,554 
3.1 %
Services
1,254
879
814
375 
42.7 %
65 
8.0 %
Total revenues
91,198
86,608
83,989
4,590 
5.3 %
2,619 
3.1 %
Cost of products sold
67,284
62,688
59,906
4,596 
7.3 %
2,782 
4.6 %
Goodwill impairments
—
—
6,149
— 
— %
(6,149)
(100.0)%
Operating expenses
18,274
18,127
17,314
147 
0.8 %
813 
4.7 %
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
20.0 
%
20.9 
%
20.6 
%
Operating income
$
5,640
$
5,793
$
620
$
(153)
(2.6)% $
5,173 
834.4 %
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
6.2 
%
6.7 
%
0.7 
%
Adjusted operating income 
$
6,146
$
6,705
$
7,403
$
(559)
(8.3)% $
(698)
(9.4)%
Adjusted operating income as a %
of total revenues
6.7 
%
7.7 
%
8.8 
%
Revenues (by major goods/service
lines):
Pharmacy
$
70,176
$
66,442
$
64,179
$
3,734 
5.6 % $
2,263 
3.5 %
Front Store
19,655
19,422
19,055
233 
1.2 %
367 
1.9 %
Other
1,367
744
755
623 
83.7 %
(11)
(1.5)%
Prescriptions filled 
1,465.2
1,417.2
1,339.1
48.0 
3.4 %
78.1 
5.8 %
Same store sales increase: 
Total
5.6 
%
3.7 
%
6.0 
%
Pharmacy
7.0 
%
4.5 
%
7.9 
%
Front Store
0.9 
%
1.1 
%
0.5 
%
Prescription volume 
4.7 
%
7.2 
%
9.1 
%
Generic dispensing rate 
88.3 
%
88.3 
%
87.5 
%
(1)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Retail/LTC segment.
(2)
Includes an adjustment to convert 90‑day prescriptions to the equivalent of three 30‑day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects the fact that these prescriptions include approximately
three times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
(3)
Same store sales and prescription volume represent the change in revenues and prescriptions filled in the Company’s retail pharmacy stores that have been operating for greater than one
year, expressed as a percentage that indicates the increase or decrease relative to the comparable prior period. Same store metrics exclude revenues from MinuteClinic, revenues and
prescriptions from LTC operations and, in 2019 and 2018, revenues and prescriptions from stores in Brazil. Management uses these metrics to evaluate the performance of existing stores
on a comparable basis and to inform future decisions regarding existing stores and new locations. Same-store metrics provide management and investors with information useful in
understanding the portion of current revenues and prescriptions resulting from organic growth in existing locations versus the portion resulting from opening new stores.
Commentary - 2020 compared to 2019
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $4.6 billion, or 5.3%, to $91.2 billion in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased prescription volume,
COVID-19 diagnostic testing and brand inflation, partially offset by continued reimbursement pressure and the impact of recent generic introductions.
•
Pharmacy same store sales increased 7.0% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was driven by the 4.7% increase in pharmacy same store prescription
volume on a 30-day equivalent basis, pharmacy drug mix and brand inflation. These increases were partially offset by continued reimbursement pressure and
the impact of recent generic introductions.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
77

•
Front store same store sales increased 0.9% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases in consumer health and general
merchandise sales.
•
Other revenues increased 83.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to increased diagnostic testing in response to the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment include store payroll, store employee benefits, store occupancy costs, selling expenses, advertising expenses,
depreciation and amortization expense and certain administrative expenses.
•
Operating expenses increased $147 million, or 0.8%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to incremental operating expenses associated
with the Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response efforts, the increased volume described above and investments in the business in 2020. The increase was
partially offset by the absence of $231 million of store rationalization charges in connection with the planned closure of underperforming retail pharmacy
stores and the $205 million pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, both recorded in 2019, as well as the impact of cost savings initiatives in 2020.
•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues decreased to 20.0% in 2020 compared to 20.9% in 2019. The decrease in operating expenses as a
percentage of total revenues was primarily driven by the increases in total revenues described above.
Operating income and adjusted operating income
•
Operating income decreased $153 million, or 2.6%, and adjusted operating income decreased $559 million, or 8.3%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease
in both operating income and adjusted operating income was primarily due to continued reimbursement pressure and the net impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, partially offset by the increased pharmacy volume described above and improved generic drug purchasing. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in
reduced operating income and adjusted operating income in 2020 as a result of decreased customer traffic in the segment’s retail pharmacies and MinuteClinic
locations and incremental operating expenses associated with the Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response efforts, partially offset by COVID-19 diagnostic
testing. The decrease in operating income also was partially offset by the absence of the $231 million of store rationalization charges and the $205 million pre-
tax loss on the sale of Onofre, both recorded in 2019.
•
As you review the Retail/LTC segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The segment’s pharmacy operating income and adjusted operating income have been adversely affected by the efforts of managed care organizations,
PBMs and governmental and other third-party payors to reduce their prescription drug costs, including the use of restrictive networks, as well as
changes in the mix of business within the pharmacy portion of the Retail/LTC segment. If the reimbursement pressure accelerates, the segment may
not be able to grow revenues, and its operating income and adjusted operating income could be adversely affected.
•
The increased use of generic drugs has positively impacted the segment’s operating income and adjusted operating income but has resulted in third-
party payors augmenting their efforts to reduce reimbursement payments to retail pharmacies for prescriptions. This trend, which the Company
expects to continue, reduces the benefit the segment realizes from brand-to-generic drug conversions.
Prescriptions filled
•
Prescriptions filled represents the number of prescriptions dispensed through the Retail/LTC segment’s pharmacies. Management uses this metric to
understand variances between actual prescriptions dispensed and expected amounts as well as trends in period-over-period results. This metric provides
management and investors with information useful in understanding the impact of prescription volume on segment total revenues and operating results.
•
Prescriptions filled increased 3.4% on a 30-day equivalent basis in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily driven by the continued adoption of patient care
programs, partially offset by reduced new therapy prescriptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and decreased long-term care prescription volume.
Generic dispensing rate
•
Generic dispensing rate is calculated by dividing the Retail/LTC segment’s generic drug prescriptions filled by its total prescriptions filled. Management uses
this metric to evaluate the effectiveness of the business at encouraging the use of generic drugs when they are available and clinically appropriate, which aids
in decreasing costs for client members and retail customers. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding trends in
segment total revenues and operating results.
•
The Retail/LTC segment’s generic dispensing rate remained consistent at 88.3% in both 2020 and 2019.
78

Health Care Benefits Segment
For periods prior to November 28, 2018 (the Aetna Acquisition Date), the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised only of the Company’s SilverScript PDP
business. The following table summarizes the Health Care Benefits segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
In millions, except percentages and
basis points (“bps”)
2020
2019
2018
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
—
$
—
$
164
$
—
— % $
(164)
(100.0)%
Premiums
69,301
63,031
8,180
6,270
9.9 %
54,851 
670.6 %
Services
5,683
5,974
560
(291)
(4.9)%
5,414 
966.8 %
Net investment income
483
599
58
(116)
(19.4)%
541 
932.8 %
Total revenues
75,467
69,604
8,962
5,863
8.4 %
60,642 
676.7 %
Cost of products sold
—
—
147
—
— %
(147)
(100.0)%
Benefit costs
56,083
53,092
6,678
2,991
5.6 %
46,414 
695.0 %
MBR (Benefit costs as a % of
premium revenues) 
80.9 
%
84.2 
%
NM
(330) bps
NM
Operating expenses
$
14,218
$
12,873
$
1,769
$
1,345
10.4 % $
11,104 
627.7 %
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
18.8 
%
18.5 
%
19.7 
%
Operating income
$
5,166
$
3,639
$
368
$
1,527
42.0 % $
3,271 
888.9 %
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
6.8 
%
5.2 
%
4.1 
%
Adjusted operating income 
$
6,188
$
5,202
$
528
$
986
19.0 % $
4,674 
885.2 %
Adjusted operating income as a %
of total revenues
8.2 
%
7.5 
%
5.9 
%
Premium revenues (by business):
Government
$
48,928
$
41,818
$
6,091
$
7,110
17.0 % $
35,727
586.6 %
Commercial
20,373
21,213
2,089
(840)
(4.0)%
19,124
915.5 %
(1)
For periods prior to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised only of the Company’s SilverScript PDP business. Accordingly, the MBR for the year
ended December 31, 2018 is not meaningful (“NM”) and is not directly comparable to the MBRs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(2)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Health Care Benefits segment.
Commentary - 2020 compared to 2019
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $5.9 billion, or 8.4%, to $75.5 billion in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily driven by membership growth in the Health Care Benefits
segment’s Government products, the favorable impact of the reinstatement of the HIF for 2020 and the receipt of $313 million owed to the Company under the
ACA’s risk corridor program. These increases were partially offset by the divestitures of Aetna’s standalone PDPs (which the Company retained the financial
results of through 2019) and Workers’ Compensation business, membership declines in the segment’s Commercial products and COVID-19 related
investments benefiting customers in 2020.
Medical Benefit Ratio (“MBR”)
•
Medical benefit ratio is calculated as benefit costs divided by premium revenues and represents the percentage of premium revenues spent on medical benefits
for the Company’s Insured members. Management uses MBR to assess the underlying business performance and underwriting of its insurance products,
understand variances between actual results and expected results and identify trends in period-over-period results. MBR provides management and investors
with information useful in assessing the operating results of the Company’s Insured Health Care Benefits products.
•
The Health Care Benefits segment’s MBR decreased 330 basis points from 84.2% to 80.9% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to (i)
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in reduced benefit costs due
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
79

to the deferral of elective procedures and other discretionary utilization, partially offset by COVID-19 related investments, testing and treatment costs, (ii) the
reinstatement of the HIF for 2020 and (iii) the receipt of amounts owed to the Company under the ACA’s risk corridor program in 2020.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Health Care Benefits segment include selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization expenses.
•
Operating expenses increased $1.3 billion in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to the reinstatement of the HIF
which was $1.0 billion for 2020 and incremental operating expenses to support the increased membership described above, including operating expenses to
support additional Medicaid members onboarded during the first quarter of 2020. The increase was partially offset by the divestitures of Aetna’s standalone
PDPs and Workers’ Compensation business, the $269 million pre-tax gain on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business and the impact of cost savings
initiatives in 2020.
Operating income and adjusted operating income
•
Operating income and adjusted operating income increased $1.5 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in both
operating income and adjusted operating income was primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the divestitures of Aetna’s
standalone PDPs and Workers’ Compensation business. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in reduced benefit costs due to the deferral of elective procedures
and other discretionary utilization, partially offset by COVID-19 related investments, testing and treatment costs. Operating income also includes pre-tax
income of $307 million associated with the receipt of amounts owed to the Company under the ACA’s risk corridor program and the $269 million pre-tax gain
on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business in 2020.
The following table summarizes the Health Care Benefits segment’s medical membership as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
2020
2019
In thousands
Insured
ASC
Total
Insured
ASC
Total
Medical membership:
Commercial
3,258 
13,644 
16,902 
3,591 
14,159 
17,750 
Medicare Advantage
2,705 
— 
2,705 
2,321 
— 
2,321 
Medicare Supplement
1,082 
— 
1,082 
881 
— 
881 
Medicaid
2,100 
623 
2,723 
1,398 
558 
1,956 
Total medical membership
9,145 
14,267 
23,412 
8,191 
14,717 
22,908 
Supplemental membership information:
Medicare Prescription Drug Plan (standalone) 
5,490 
5,994 
(1)
Represents the Company’s SilverScript PDP membership only. Excludes 2.5 million members as of December 31, 2019 related to Aetna’s standalone PDPs that were sold effective
December 31, 2018. The Company retained the financial results of the divested plans through 2019 through a reinsurance agreement. Subsequent to 2019, the Company no longer retains
the financial results of the divested plans.
Medical Membership
•
Medical membership represents the number of members covered by the Company’s Insured and ASC medical products and related services at a specified point
in time. Management uses this metric to understand variances between actual medical membership and expected amounts as well as trends in period-over-
period results. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding the impact of medical membership on segment total
revenues and operating results.
•
Medical membership as of December 31, 2020 of 23.4 million increased 504 thousand compared with December 31, 2019, primarily reflecting increases in
Medicaid and Medicare products, partially offset by declines in Commercial products.
Medicare Update
On April 6, 2020, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) issued its final notice detailing final 2021 Medicare Advantage benchmark
payment rates (the “Final Notice”). Overall the Company projects the benchmark rates in the Final Notice will increase funding for its Medicare Advantage
business, excluding the impact of the HIF in 2020, by approximately 1.8% in 2021 compared to 2020.
(1)
_____________________________________________
80

On January 15, 2021, CMS issued its Final Notice detailing final 2022 Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates. Final 2022 Medicare Advantage rates
resulted in an increase in industry benchmark rates of approximately 4.1%.
The ACA ties a portion of each Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement to the plan’s “star ratings.” Plans must have a star rating of four or higher (out of five)
to qualify for bonus payments. CMS released the Company’s 2021 star ratings in October 2020. The Company’s 2021 star ratings will be used to determine which
of the Company’s Medicare Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2022. Based on the Company’s membership at
December 31, 2020, 83% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2021 star ratings of at least four stars, consistent with 83% of the
Company’s Medicare Advantage members being in plans with 2020 star ratings of at least four stars based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2019.
Corporate/Other Segment
The following table summarizes the Corporate/Other segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
In millions, except percentages
2020
2019
2018
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Premiums
$
63 $
91
$
4
$
(28)
(30.8)% $
87 
2,175.0 %
Services
48 
9
—
39 
433.3 %
9 
100.0 %
Net investment income
315 
412
602
(97)
(23.5)%
(190)
(31.6)%
Total revenues
426 
512
606
(86)
(16.8)%
(94)
(15.5)%
Benefit costs
221 
285
22
(64)
(22.5)%
263 
1,195.5 %
Operating expenses
1,846 
1,710
1,389
136 
8.0 %
321 
23.1 %
Operating loss
(1,641)
(1,483)
(805)
(158)
(10.7)%
(678)
(84.2)%
Adjusted operating loss
(1,306)
(1,000)
(856)
(306)
(30.6)%
(144)
(16.8)%
(1)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating loss (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating loss for the Corporate/Other segment.
Commentary - 2020 compared to 2019
Revenues
•
Revenues primarily relate to products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care
insurance products, that were acquired in the Aetna Acquisition. In 2018, revenues relate primarily to interest income on the proceeds from the financing of the
Aetna Acquisition.
•
Total revenues decreased $86 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower net investment income including an $80 million
decrease in net realized capital gains in 2020 compared to 2019.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses within the Corporate/Other segment consist of management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations,
which include certain aspects of executive management and the corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance
departments, expenses associated with the Company’s investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related
transaction and integration costs. Subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date, segment operating expenses also include operating costs to support the
Company’s large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
•
Operating expenses increased $136 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by incremental operating expenses associated with
the Company’s investments in transformation and its COVID-19 pandemic response efforts, as well as increased charitable contributions in 2020. The increase
was partially offset by a $148 million decrease in acquisition-related integration costs compared to the prior year.
 (1)
_____________________________________________
81

Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The Company maintains a level of liquidity sufficient to allow it to meet its cash needs in the short-term. Over the long term, the Company manages its cash and
capital structure to maximize shareholder return, maintain its financial condition and maintain flexibility for future strategic initiatives. The Company continuously
assesses its regulatory capital requirements, working capital needs, debt and leverage levels, debt maturity schedule, capital expenditure requirements, dividend
payouts, potential share repurchases and future investments or acquisitions. The Company believes its operating cash flows, commercial paper program, credit
facilities, sale-leaseback program, as well as any potential future borrowings, will be sufficient to fund these future payments and long-term initiatives. As
of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $7.9 billion in cash and cash equivalents, approximately $2.2 billion of which was held by the parent
company or nonrestricted subsidiaries.
The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted global economic activity and during the first half of the year caused significant volatility and negative pressure in
the capital markets. As a result of the uncertainty generated by COVID-19, on March 31, 2020, the Company issued $4.0 billion aggregate principal amount of
unsecured senior notes to enhance its liquidity and strengthen its capital. As markets stabilized, in August 2020, the Company purchased $6.0 billion of its
outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers, while issuing $4.0 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes. In December 2020, the
Company purchased $4.5 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers, while issuing $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured
senior notes. The Company will continue to monitor the severity and duration of the pandemic and its impact on the U.S. and global economies, consumer behavior
and health care utilization patterns and our businesses, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
The net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was as follows:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2020 vs. 2019
2019 vs. 2018
In millions
2020
2019
2018
$
%
$
%
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
15,865 $
12,848 $
8,865 $
3,017 
23.5 % $
3,983 
44.9 %
Net cash used in investing activities
(5,534)
(3,339)
(43,285)
(2,195)
65.7 %
39,946 
92.3 %
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(8,155)
(7,850)
36,819 
(305)
3.9 %
(44,669)
(121.3)%
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash
equivalents and restricted cash
— 
— 
(4)
— 
— %
4 
100.0 %
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash $
2,176 $
1,659 $
2,395 $
517 
31.2 % $
(736)
(30.7)%
Commentary - 2020 compared to 2019
•
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $3.0 billion in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher operating income in the Health Care
Benefits segment and the deferral of approximately $670 million of certain payroll tax payments to future years, as permitted in response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
•
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $2.2 billion in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to increased net purchases of investments and an
increase in cash used for acquisitions, partially offset by $840 million in proceeds from the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business. In addition, cash used
in investing activities reflected the following activity:
•
Gross capital expenditures remained relatively consistent at approximately $2.4 billion and $2.5 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. During 2020,
approximately 62% of the Company’s total capital expenditures were for technology and other corporate initiatives, 30% were for store, fulfillment
and support facilities expansion and improvements and 8% were for new store construction.
•
Net cash used in financing activities increased slightly to $8.2 billion in 2020 compared to $7.9 billion in 2019. The increase in cash used in finance activities
primarily related to an increase in net debt repaid during 2020 compared to 2019.
82

Included in net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was the following store development activity: 
2020
2019
2018
Total stores (beginning of year)
9,896 
9,921 
9,803 
New and acquired stores 
156 
102 
145 
Closed stores 
(90)
(127)
(27)
Total stores (end of year)
9,962 
9,896 
9,921 
Relocated stores 
18 
23 
34 
(1)
Includes retail drugstores and pharmacies within retail chains, primarily in Target Corporation (“Target”) stores.
(2)
Relocated stores are not included in new and acquired stores or closed stores totals.
Short-term Borrowings
Commercial Paper and Back-up Credit Facilities
The Company did not have any commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. In connection with its commercial paper program, the Company
maintains a $1.0 billion 364-day unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 12, 2021, a $1.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving
credit facility, which expires on May 18, 2022, a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 17, 2023 and a $2.0
billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 16, 2024. The credit facilities allow for borrowings at various rates that are
dependent, in part, on the Company’s public debt ratings and require the Company to pay a weighted average quarterly facility fee of approximately 0.03%,
regardless of usage. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding under any of the Company’s back-up credit facilities.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston
Since the Aetna Acquisition Date, a subsidiary of the Company is a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (the “FHLBB”). As a member, the
subsidiary has the ability to obtain cash advances, subject to certain minimum collateral requirements. The maximum borrowing capacity available from the
FHLBB as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $925 million. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no outstanding advances from the FHLBB.
Long-term Borrowings
2020 Notes
On December 16, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027 and $1.25 billion
aggregate principal amount of 1.875% unsecured senior notes due February 28, 2031 for total proceeds of approximately $1.99 billion, net of discounts and
underwriting fees. The $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes represent a further issuance of the Company’s 1.3% unsecured
senior notes due August 21, 2027 initially issued in an aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion on August 21, 2020.
On August 21, 2020, the Company issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027, $1.25 billion aggregate
principal amount of 1.75% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2030 and $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.7% unsecured senior notes due August
21, 2040 (collectively, the “August 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.97 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
On March 31, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.625% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2027, $1.5 billion aggregate
principal amount of 3.75% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2030, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.125% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2040
and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2050 (collectively, the “March 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of
approximately $3.95 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
The net proceeds of these offerings were used for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, as well as the repurchase
and/or repayment of indebtedness.
During March 2020, the Company entered into several interest rate swap transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were designated as cash flow
hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the anticipated issuance of the
March 2020 Notes. In connection with the
(1)
(2)
(2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
83

issuance of the March 2020 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The Company paid a net amount of $7 million to the hedge
counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $5 million in accumulated other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as
interest expense over the life of the March 2020 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
2019 Notes
On August 15, 2019, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.625% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2024, $750 million aggregate
principal amount of 3% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2026 and $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.25% unsecured senior notes due August 15,
2029 (collectively, the “2019 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.46 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees. The net proceeds of the 2019 Notes
were used to repay certain of the Company’s outstanding debt.
Beginning in July 2019, the Company entered into several interest rate swap and treasury lock transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were
designated as cash flow hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the
anticipated issuance of the 2019 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The
Company paid a net amount of $25 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $18 million in accumulated
other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the 2019 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ included in
Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Early Extinguishments of Debt
In December 2020, the Company purchased $4.5 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the
following: $113 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $1.4 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023, $1.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025 and
$2.0 billion of its 4.3% senior notes due 2028. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $619 million in excess of the
aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, wrote-off $45 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $10 million in fees,
for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of $674 million.
In August 2020, the Company purchased $6.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$723 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $2.3 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023 and $3.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025. In connection with
the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $706 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
purchased, wrote-off $47 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $13 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$766 million.
In August 2019, the Company purchased $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$1.3 billion of its 3.125% senior notes due 2020, $723 million of its floating rate notes due 2020, $328 million of its 4.125% senior notes due 2021, $297 million of
4.125% senior notes due 2021 issued by Aetna, $413 million of 5.45% senior notes due 2021 issued by Coventry Health Care, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Aetna, and $962 million of its 3.35% senior notes due 2021. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $76 million in
excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, incurred $8 million in fees and recognized a net gain of $5 million on the write-
off of net unamortized deferred financing premiums, for a net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million.
See Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ and Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about debt
issuances, debt repayments, share repurchases and dividend payments.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments in order to manage interest rate and foreign exchange risk and credit exposure. The Company’s use of these
derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, forward contracts, futures contracts,
warrants, put options and credit default swaps.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s back-up revolving credit facilities, unsecured senior notes and unsecured floating rate notes (see Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K) contain customary restrictive financial and operating covenants. These covenants do not include an acceleration of the Company’s
debt maturities in the event of a downgrade in the
84

Company’s credit ratings. The Company does not believe the restrictions contained in these covenants materially affect its financial or operating flexibility. As of
December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants.
Debt Ratings 
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s long-term debt was rated “Baa2” by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. (“Moody’s”) and “BBB” by Standard & Poor’s
Financial Services LLC (“S&P”), and its commercial paper program was rated “P-2” by Moody’s and “A-2” by S&P. The outlook on the Company’s long-term
debt is “Stable” by S&P. In December 2020, Moody’s changed the outlook on the Company’s long-term debt from “Negative” to “Stable.” In assessing the
Company’s credit strength, the Company believes that both Moody’s and S&P considered, among other things, the Company’s capital structure and financial
policies as well as its consolidated balance sheet, its historical acquisition activity and other financial information. Although the Company currently believes its
long-term debt ratings will remain investment grade, it cannot guarantee the future actions of Moody’s and/or S&P. The Company’s debt ratings have a direct
impact on its future borrowing costs, access to capital markets and new store operating lease costs.
Share Repurchase Programs
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock. See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on the Company’s share repurchase program.
Quarterly Cash Dividend
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the quarterly cash dividend was $0.50 per share. CVS Health has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a public company
and expects to maintain its quarterly dividend of $0.50 per share throughout 2021. Future dividends will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements,
financial condition and other factors considered relevant by the Board.
Future Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes certain estimated future cash requirements under the Company’s various contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, in total
and disaggregated into current and long-term obligations. The table below does not include future payments of claims to health care providers or pharmacies
because certain terms of these payments are not determinable at December 31, 2020 (for example, the timing and volume of future services provided under fee-for-
service arrangements and future membership levels for capitated arrangements).
In millions
Total
Current
Long-Term
Operating lease liabilities 
$
27,142 $
2,688 $
24,454 
Finance lease liabilities 
1,812 
100 
1,712 
Contractual lease obligations with Target 
2,332 
— 
2,332 
Long-term debt 
64,235 
5,405 
58,830 
Interest payments on long-term debt 
34,565 
2,409 
32,156 
Other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets 
Future policy benefits
5,983 
462 
5,521 
Unpaid claims
2,018 
532 
1,486 
Policyholders’ funds 
1,870 
1,374 
496 
Total
$
139,957 $
12,970 $
126,987 
(1)
Refer to Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the maturity of lease liabilities under operating and finance leases.
(2)
The Company leases pharmacy and clinic space from Target. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the lease arrangements with Target.
Amounts related to such operating and finance leases are reflected within the operating lease liabilities and finance lease liabilities in the table above. Pharmacy lease amounts due in excess
of the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings are reflected in the table above assuming equivalent stores continue to operate through the term of the arrangements.
(3)
Refer to Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the maturities of debt principal. Interest payments on long-term
debt are calculated using outstanding balances and interest rates in effect on December 31, 2020.
(4)
Payments of other long-term liabilities exclude Separate Accounts liabilities of approximately $4.9 billion because these liabilities are supported by assets that are legally segregated and
are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business.
(1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(3)
(4)
 (5)
 (5)
(5) (6)
_____________________________________________
85

(5)
Total payments of future policy benefits, unpaid claims and policyholders’ funds include $763 million, $2.0 billion and $210 million, respectively, of reserves for contracts subject to
reinsurance. The Company expects the assuming reinsurance carrier to fund these obligations and has reflected these amounts as reinsurance recoverable assets on the consolidated balance
sheets.
(6)
Customer funds associated with group life and health contracts of approximately $2.9 billion have been excluded from the table above because such funds may be used primarily at the
customer’s discretion to offset future premiums and/or for refunds, and the timing of the related cash flows cannot be determined. Additionally, net unrealized capital gains on debt
securities supporting experience-rated products of $135 million, before tax, have been excluded from the table above.
Restrictions on Certain Payments
In addition to general state law restrictions on payments of dividends and other distributions to stockholders applicable to all corporations, health maintenance
organizations (“HMOs”) and insurance companies are subject to further regulations that, among other things, may require those companies to maintain certain
levels of equity (referred to as surplus) and restrict the amount of dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their equity holders. These regulations are
not directly applicable to CVS Health as a holding company, since CVS Health is not an HMO or an insurance company. In addition, in connection with the Aetna
Acquisition, the Company made certain undertakings that require prior regulatory approval of dividends by certain of its HMOs and insurance companies. The
additional regulations and undertakings applicable to the Company’s HMO and insurance company subsidiaries are not expected to affect the Company’s ability to
service the Company’s debt, meet other financing obligations or pay dividends, or the ability of any of the Company’s subsidiaries to service their debt or other
financing obligations. Under applicable regulatory requirements and undertakings, at December 31, 2020, the maximum amount of dividends that may be paid by
the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries without prior approval by regulatory authorities was $2.9 billion in the aggregate.
The Company maintains capital levels in its operating subsidiaries at or above targeted and/or required capital levels and dividends amounts in excess of these
levels to meet liquidity requirements, including the payment of interest on debt and stockholder dividends. In addition, at the Company’s discretion, it uses these
funds for other purposes such as funding share and debt repurchase programs, investments in new businesses and other purposes considered advisable.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company held investments of $524 million and $537 million, respectively, that are not accounted for as Separate Accounts
assets but are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business. See Note 3 ‘‘Investments’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K
for additional information on investments related to the 2012 conversion of an existing group annuity contract from a participating to a non-participating contract.
Solvency Regulation
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (the “NAIC”) utilizes risk-based capital (“RBC”) standards for insurance companies that are designed to
identify weakly-capitalized companies by comparing each company’s adjusted surplus to its required surplus (the “RBC Ratio”). The RBC Ratio is designed to
reflect the risk profile of insurance companies. Within certain ratio ranges, regulators have increasing authority to take action as the RBC Ratio decreases. There
are four levels of regulatory action, ranging from requiring an insurer to submit a comprehensive financial plan for increasing its RBC to the state insurance
commissioner to requiring the state insurance commissioner to place the insurer under regulatory control. At December 31, 2020, the RBC Ratio of each of the
Company’s primary insurance subsidiaries was above the level that would require regulatory action. The RBC framework described above for insurers has been
extended by the NAIC to health organizations, including HMOs. Although not all states had adopted these rules at December 31, 2020, at that date, each of the
Company’s active HMOs had a surplus that exceeded either the applicable state net worth requirements or, where adopted, the levels that would require regulatory
action under the NAIC’s RBC rules. External rating agencies use their own capital models and/or RBC standards when they determine a company’s rating.
86

Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares the consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, which require management to make
certain estimates and apply judgment. Estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be
important at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, the Company reviews its accounting policies and how they are applied
and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements. While the Company believes the historical experience, current trends and other factors considered by
management support the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, actual results could
differ from estimates, and such differences could be material.
Significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K. Management believes the following
accounting policies include a higher degree of judgment and/or complexity and, thus, are considered to be critical accounting policies. The Company has discussed
the development and selection of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board (the “Audit Committee”), and the Audit Committee has
reviewed the disclosures relating to them.
Revenue Recognition
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail
pharmacy network. The Company’s pharmacy benefit arrangements are accounted for in a manner consistent with a master supply arrangement as there are no
contractual minimum volumes and each prescription is considered a separate purchasing decision and distinct performance obligation transferred at a point in time.
PBM services performed in connection with each prescription claim are considered part of a single performance obligation which culminates in the dispensing of
prescription drugs.
The Company recognizes revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with its clients when the Company has concluded it controls the
prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. The Company controls prescriptions dispensed indirectly through its retail pharmacy network
because it has separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, has discretion in setting the price for the transaction and assumes primary responsibility
for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to its client plan members while also performing the related PBM services.
Revenues include (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Company, net of any discounts earned on brand name drugs or other discounts and
refunds paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” and “Guarantees” below), (ii) the price paid to the Company by client plan members for mail order
prescriptions and the price paid to retail network pharmacies by client plan members for retail prescriptions (“retail co-payments”), and (iii) claims based
administrative fees for retail pharmacy network contracts. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the prescription drugs is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company
expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those prescription drugs. The Company has established the following revenue recognition policies for the
Pharmacy Services segment:
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by mail service dispensing pharmacies are recognized when the prescription drug is delivered to the client
plan member. At the time of delivery, the Company has performed substantially all of its performance obligations under its client contracts and does not
experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Company’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are
recognized at the Company’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Company’s online claims processing system and the Company has
transferred control of the prescription drug and performed all of its performance obligations.
For contracts under which the Company acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client plan member, revenue is recognized
using the net method.
Drug Discounts
The Company records revenue net of manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients based on their plan members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. The
Company estimates these rebates at period-end based on actual and estimated claims data and its estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients. The
estimates are based on the best available data at period-end
87

and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates due to the client. The Company adjusts its rebates payable to clients to the actual
amounts paid when these rebates are paid or as significant events occur. Any cumulative effect of these adjustments is recorded against revenues at the time it is
identified. Adjustments generally result from contract changes with clients or manufacturers that have retroactive rebate adjustments, differences between the
estimated and actual product mix subject to rebates, or whether the brand name drug was included in the applicable formulary. The effect of adjustments between
estimated and actual manufacturers’ rebate amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Guarantees
The Company also adjusts revenues for refunds owed to clients resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined service and performance
metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual pricing
and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Retail/LTC Segment
Retail Pharmacy
The Company’s retail drugstores recognize revenue at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. For pharmacy sales, each prescription claim is its
own arrangement with the customer and is a performance obligation, separate and distinct from other prescription claims under other retail network arrangements.
Revenues are adjusted for refunds owed to third party payers resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined value-based service and
performance metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and
actual pricing and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Revenue from Company gift cards purchased by customers is deferred as a contract liability until goods or services are transferred. Any amounts not expected to be
redeemed by customers (i.e., breakage) are recognized based on historical redemption patterns.
Customer returns are not material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
Loyalty and Other Programs
The Company’s customer loyalty program, ExtraCare , consists of two components, ExtraSavings
 and ExtraBucks  Rewards. ExtraSavings are coupons that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue when redeemed as the Company concluded that they do not represent a promise to the customer to deliver additional goods or
services at the time of issuance because they are not tied to a specific transaction or spending level.
ExtraBucks Rewards are accumulated by customers based on their historical spending levels. Thus, the Company has determined that there is an additional
performance obligation to those customers at the time of the initial transaction. The Company allocates the transaction price to the initial transaction and the
ExtraBucks Rewards transaction based upon the relative standalone selling price, which considers historical redemption patterns for the rewards. Revenue allocated
to ExtraBucks Rewards is recognized as those rewards are redeemed. At the end of each period, unredeemed ExtraBucks Rewards are reflected as a contract
liability.
The Company also offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass , under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course
of the subscription period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. Subscriptions are paid for on a monthly or annual
basis at the time of or in advance of the Company delivering the goods and services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as the performance
obligations are satisfied.
Long-term Care
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects
to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Each prescription claim represents a separate performance obligation of the Company, separate
and distinct from other prescription claims under customer arrangements. A significant portion of Long-term Care revenue from sales of pharmaceutical and
medical products is reimbursed by the federal Medicare Part D program and, to a lesser extent, state Medicaid programs. The Company monitors its revenues and
receivables from these reimbursement sources, as well as long-term care facilities and other third party insurance payors, and reduces revenue at the revenue
recognition date to properly account for the variable consideration due to anticipated
®
TM
®
®
88

differences between billed and reimbursed amounts. Accordingly, the total revenues and receivables reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements
are recorded at the amount expected to be ultimately received from these payors.
Patient co-payments associated with Medicare Part D, certain state Medicaid programs, Medicare Part B and certain third party payors typically are not collected at
the time products are delivered or services are rendered, but are billed to the individuals as part of normal billing procedures and subject to normal accounts
receivable collections procedures.
Walk-In Medical Clinics
For services provided by the Company’s walk-in medical clinics, revenue recognition occurs for completed services provided to patients, with adjustments taken
for third party payor contractual obligations and patient direct bill historical collection rates.
Health Care Benefits Segment
Health Care Benefits revenue is principally derived from insurance premiums and fees billed to customers. Revenue is recognized based on customer billings,
which reflect contracted rates per employee and the number of covered employees recorded in the Company’s records at the time the billings are prepared. Billings
are generally sent monthly for coverage during the following month.
The Company’s billings may be subsequently adjusted to reflect enrollment changes due to member terminations or other factors. These adjustments are known as
retroactivity adjustments. In each period, the Company estimates the amount of future retroactivity and adjusts the recorded revenue accordingly. As information
regarding actual retroactivity amounts becomes known, the Company refines its estimates and records any required adjustments to revenues in the period in which
they arise. A significant difference in the actual level of retroactivity compared to estimated levels would have a significant effect on the Company’s operating
results.
Premium Revenue
Premiums are recognized as revenue in the month in which the enrollee is entitled to receive health care services. Premiums are reported net of an allowance for
estimated terminations and uncollectible amounts. Additionally, premium revenue subject to the MLR rebate requirements of the ACA is recorded net of the
estimated minimum MLR rebates for the current calendar year. Premiums related to unexpired contractual coverage periods (unearned premiums) are reported as
other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue when earned.
Some of the Company’s contracts allow for premiums to be adjusted to reflect actual experience or the relative health status of Insured members. Such adjustments
are reasonably estimable at the outset of the contract, and adjustments to those estimates are made based on actual experience of the customer emerging under the
contract and the terms of the underlying contract.
Services Revenue
Services revenue relates to contracts that can include various combinations of services or series of services which generally are capable of being distinct and
accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Health Care Benefits segment’s services revenue primarily consists of ASC fees received in exchange for
performing certain claim processing and member services for ASC members. ASC fee revenue is recognized over the period the service is provided. Some of the
Company’s administrative services contracts include guarantees with respect to certain functions, such as customer service response time, claim processing
accuracy and claim processing turnaround time, as well as certain guarantees that a plan sponsor’s benefit claim experience will fall within a certain range. With
any of these guarantees, the Company is financially at risk if the conditions of the arrangements are not met, although the maximum amount at risk typically is
limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company by the customer involved. Each period the Company estimates its obligations under the terms
of these guarantees and records its estimate as an offset to services revenues.
Accounting for Medicare Part D
Revenues include insurance premiums earned by the Company’s PDPs, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements
with CMS. The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP member, and can be subsidized by CMS in the case of
low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially recorded within other insurance liabilities and are then
recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
Revenues also include a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design referred to as the risk corridor. The Company estimates variable consideration
in the form of amounts payable to, or receivable from, CMS under the risk corridor, and adjusts revenue based on calculations of additional subsidies to be received
from or owed to CMS at the end of the reporting year.
89

In addition to Medicare Part D premiums, the Company receives additional payments each month from CMS related to catastrophic reinsurance, low-income cost-
sharing subsidies and coverage gap benefits. If the subsidies received differ from the amounts earned from actual prescriptions transferred, the difference is
recorded in either accounts receivable, net or accrued expenses.
Impairments of Debt Securities
The Company regularly reviews its debt securities to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value has occurred. If a debt
security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company has the intent to sell the security, or it is more likely than not that the Company will have to sell the
security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost basis of the security is written down to its fair value and the difference is recognized in net
income. If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company does not have the intent to sell and it is more likely than not that the Company will not
have to sell such security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the Company bifurcates the impairment into credit-related and non-credit related components.
The amount of the credit-related component is recorded as an allowance for credit losses and recognized in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related
component is included in other comprehensive income. The Company analyzes all facts and circumstances believed to be relevant for each investment when
performing this analysis, in accordance with applicable accounting guidance.
In evaluating whether a credit related loss exists, the Company considers a variety of factors including: the extent to which the fair value is less than the amortized
cost basis; adverse conditions specifically related to the issuer of a security, an industry or geographic area; the payment structure of the security; the failure of the
issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principle payments; and any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded yield-related impairment losses on debt securities of $49 million. During the year ended
December 31, 2020, the Company did not record credit-related impairment losses on debt securities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company
recorded other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) losses on debt securities of $24 million. There were no material OTTI losses on debt securities for the year
ended December 31, 2018.
The risks inherent in assessing the impairment of a debt security include the risk that market factors may differ from projections and the risk that facts and
circumstances factored into the Company’s assessment may change with the passage of time. Unexpected changes to market factors and circumstances that were
not present in past reporting periods are among the factors that may result in a current period decision to sell debt securities that were not impaired in prior
reporting periods.
Vendor Allowances and Purchase Discounts
Vendor and manufacturer receivables were $9.8 billion and $7.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, the majority of which relate to purchase
discounts and vendor allowances as described below.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers
and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of
the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase, (ii) a discount for the prompt payment of invoices or (iii) when products are purchased indirectly
from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy), a discount (or rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recognized when
prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of
adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts billed and collected has not been material to the Company’s operating results or
financial condition. The Company accounts for the effect of any such differences as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed.
The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its wholesaler contracts if it exceeds contractually defined purchase volumes. In addition,
the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees
are recorded as a reduction of cost of products sold.
Retail/LTC Segment
Vendor allowances received by the Retail/LTC segment reduce the carrying cost of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related
inventory is sold, unless they are specifically identified as a reimbursement of incremental costs for promotional programs and/or other services provided. Amounts
that are directly linked to advertising commitments are
90

recognized as a reduction of advertising expense (included in operating expenses) when the related advertising commitment is satisfied. Any such allowances
received in excess of the actual cost incurred also reduce the carrying cost of inventory. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are
linked to purchase commitments is initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold over the life of the contract based
upon purchase volume. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are not linked to purchase commitments is also initially deferred. The
deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold on a straight-line basis over the life of the related contract.
The Company establishes a receivable for vendor income that is earned but not yet received based on historical trends and data. The majority of vendor receivables
are collected within the following fiscal quarter. Historically, adjustments to the Company’s vendor receivables resulting from the reconciliation of receivables
recognized to the amounts collected have not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
There have not been any material changes in the way the Company accounts for vendor allowances or purchase discounts during the past three years.
Inventory
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method.
The value of ending inventory is reduced for estimated inventory losses that have occurred during the interim period between physical inventory counts. Physical
inventory counts are taken on a regular basis in each retail store and LTC pharmacy, and a continuous cycle count process is the primary procedure used to validate
the inventory balances on hand in each distribution center and mail facility to ensure that the amounts reflected in the consolidated financial statements are properly
stated. The Company’s accounting for inventory contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate the inventory losses that have occurred
during the interim period between physical inventory counts. When estimating these losses, a number of factors are considered which include historical physical
inventory results on a location-by-location basis and current physical inventory loss trends.
The total reserve for estimated inventory losses covered by this critical accounting policy was $369 million and $401 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. Although management believes there is sufficient current and historical information available to record reasonable estimates for estimated inventory
losses, it is possible that actual results could differ. In order to help investors assess the aggregate risk, if any, associated with the inventory-related uncertainties
discussed above, a ten percent (10%) pre-tax change in estimated inventory losses, which is a reasonably likely change, would increase or decrease the total reserve
for estimated inventory losses by approximately $37 million as of December 31, 2020.
Although management believes that the estimates discussed above are reasonable and the related calculations conform to generally accepted accounting principles,
actual results could differ from such estimates, and such differences could be material.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
The Company determines if an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of a contract. Right-of-use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying
asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of
the remaining future minimum lease payments. As the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its
incremental borrowing rate, determined by class of underlying asset, to discount the lease payments. The operating lease right-of-use assets also include lease
payments made before commencement and are reduced by lease incentives.
The Company’s real estate leases typically contain options that permit renewals for additional periods of up to five years each. For real estate leases, the options to
extend are not considered reasonably certain at lease commencement because the Company reevaluates each lease on a regular basis to consider the economic and
strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options and regularly opens or closes stores to align with its operating strategy. Generally, the renewal option periods
are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability. Similarly,
renewal options are not included in the lease term for non-real estate leases because they are not considered reasonably certain of being exercised at lease
commencement. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheets, and lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the term of the short-term lease.
91

For real estate leases, the Company accounts for lease components and nonlease components as a single lease component. Certain real estate leases require
additional payments based on sales volume, as well as reimbursement for real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance, which are expensed as
incurred as variable lease costs. Other real estate leases contain one fixed lease payment that includes real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance.
These fixed payments are considered part of the lease payment and included in the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
Recoverability of Definite-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets, excluding goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are tested for impairment using
separate tests described below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such an asset may not be recoverable. The
Company groups and evaluates these long-lived assets for impairment at the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. If indicators of
impairment are present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group
(undiscounted and without interest charges). If the estimated future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an
impairment loss calculation is prepared. The impairment loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash
flows (discounted and with interest charges). If required, an impairment loss is recorded for the portion of the asset group’s carrying value that exceeds the asset
group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted and with interest charges).
The long-lived asset impairment loss calculation contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate each asset group’s future sales, profitability
and cash flows. When preparing these estimates, the Company considers historical results and current operating trends and consolidated sales, profitability and cash
flow results and forecasts. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors including general economic and regulatory conditions, efforts of third party
organizations to reduce their prescription drug costs and/or increased member co-payments, the continued efforts of competitors to gain market share and consumer
spending patterns.
There were no material impairment charges recognized on long-lived assets in the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the
Company recorded store rationalization charges of $231 million, primarily related to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges. During the year ended
December 31, 2018, the Company recognized a $43 million long-lived asset impairment charge, primarily related to the impairment of property and equipment.
Recoverability of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid for acquisitions over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired. Goodwill is subject to annual impairment
reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment on a
reporting unit basis. The impairment test is performed by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value with its net book value (or carrying amount), including
goodwill. The fair value of the reporting units is estimated using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the net book
value (carrying amount) of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the reporting unit’s goodwill is considered to be impaired, and an impairment is recognized in
an amount equal to the excess.
The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires the Company to make significant assumptions and estimates. These assumptions and estimates
primarily include the selection of appropriate peer group companies; control premiums and valuation multiples appropriate for acquisitions in the industries in
which the Company competes; discount rates; terminal growth rates; and forecasts of revenue, operating income, depreciation and amortization, income taxes,
capital expenditures and future working capital requirements. When determining these assumptions and preparing these estimates, the Company considers each
reporting unit’s historical results and current operating trends; consolidated revenues, profitability and cash flow results and forecasts; and industry trends. The
Company’s estimates can be affected by a number of factors, including general economic and regulatory conditions; the risk-free interest rate environment; the
Company’s market capitalization; efforts of customers and payers to reduce costs, including their prescription drug costs, and/or increase member co-payments; the
continued efforts of competitors to gain market share, consumer spending patterns and the Company’s ability to achieve its revenue growth projections and execute
on its cost reduction initiatives.
2020 Goodwill Impairment Test
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company performed its required annual impairment test of goodwill. The results of this impairment test indicated that there
was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date. The goodwill impairment test resulted in the fair values of all of the Company’s reporting units exceeding
their carrying values by significant margins, with the
92

exception of the Commercial Business and LTC reporting units, which exceeded their carrying values by approximately 6% and 12%, respectively.
In connection with the Aetna Acquisition in November 2018, the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment which included the Commercial Business
reporting unit. The transaction was accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires, among other things, the assets acquired and liabilities
assumed to be recognized at their fair values at the date of acquisition. As a result, at the time of the acquisition the fair value of the Commercial Business reporting
unit was equal to its carrying value.
The Company has experienced declines in its Commercial Insured medical membership subsequent to the closing date of the Aetna Acquisition and may continue
to do so for a number of reasons, including as a result of the competitive Commercial business environment. In addition, COVID-19 has had and may continue to
have an adverse impact on medical membership in the Commercial business due to reductions in workforce at existing customers (including due to business
failures) as well as reduced willingness to change benefit providers by prospective customers. The Company’s fair value estimate is sensitive to significant
assumptions including changes in medical membership, revenue growth rate, operating income and the discount rate. Although the Company believes the financial
projections used to determine the fair value of the Commercial Business reporting unit in the third quarter of 2020 were reasonable and achievable, the challenges
described above may affect the Company’s ability to increase medical membership or operating income in the Commercial Business reporting unit at the rate
estimated when such goodwill impairment test was performed and may continue to do so. As of December 31, 2020, the goodwill balance in the Commercial
Business reporting unit was $26.5 billion.
The LTC reporting unit continues to experience industry-wide challenges that have impacted management’s ability to grow the business at the rate that was
originally estimated when the Company acquired Omnicare in 2015. Those challenges included lower client retention rates, lower occupancy rates in skilled
nursing facilities, the deteriorating financial health of numerous skilled nursing facility customers which resulted in a number of customer bankruptcies in 2018,
and continued facility reimbursement pressures. COVID-19 has also had an adverse impact on the financial health of the Company’s long-term care facility
customers due to declines in occupancy rates and increased operating expenses. A number of these customers have relied on supplemental liquidity sources such as
grants and advance Medicare payments under programs expanded or created under the CARES Act to maintain adequate liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic
and may require additional sources of liquidity throughout the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although the Company believes the financial projections used to determine the fair value of the LTC reporting unit in the third quarter of 2020 were reasonable and
achievable, the LTC reporting unit has faced challenges that affect the Company’s ability to grow the LTC reporting unit’s business at the rate estimated when such
goodwill impairment test was performed and may continue to do so. These challenges and some of the key assumptions included in the Company’s financial
projections to determine the estimated fair value of the LTC reporting unit include client retention rates; occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities; the financial
health of skilled nursing facility customers; facility reimbursement pressures; the Company’s ability to extract cost savings from labor productivity and other
initiatives; the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of COVID-19; COVID-19’s impact on health care utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and
impact of stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and local governmental responses to COVID-19. The fair value of the LTC reporting unit also is
dependent on market multiples of peer group companies and the risk-free interest rate environment, which impacts the discount rate used in the discounted cash
flow valuation method. If the LTC reporting unit does not achieve its forecasts, it is reasonably possible in the near term that the goodwill of the LTC reporting unit
could be deemed to be impaired by a material amount. As of December 31, 2020, the goodwill balance in the LTC reporting unit was $431 million.
The COVID-19 pandemic severely impacted global economic activity in 2020, including the businesses of some of the Company’s customers, and during the first
half of the year caused significant volatility and negative pressure in the capital markets. In addition to adversely affecting the Company’s businesses, which may
have a material adverse impact on the Company’s profitability and cash flows, these developments may adversely affect the timing and collectability of payments
to the Company from customers, clients, government payers and members as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on them. For further information regarding the
potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on the Company, please see “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this report. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to
evolve. We believe COVID-19’s impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition primarily will be driven by the geographies
impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and consumer behavior and health care
utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and impact of stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic. Those
primary drivers are beyond our knowledge and control. As a result, the impact COVID-19 will have on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or
financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material. COVID-19 also may result in legal and regulatory proceedings, investigations and
claims against
93

us. If the Company’s businesses, results of operations, financial condition and/or cash flows are materially adversely affected, the goodwill of the LTC and
Commercial Business reporting units could be deemed to be impaired by a material amount.
2019 Goodwill Impairment Test
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company performed its required annual impairment test of goodwill. The results of this impairment test indicated that there
was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date. The goodwill impairment test resulted in the fair values of all of the Company’s reporting units exceeding
their carrying values by significant margins, with the exception of the Commercial Business and LTC reporting units, which exceeded their carrying values by
approximately 4% and 9%, respectively.
2018 Goodwill Impairment Tests
As discussed in Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K, during 2018, the LTC reporting unit experienced industry-wide
challenges that impacted management’s ability to grow the business at the rate that was originally estimated when the Company acquired Omnicare and when the
2017 annual goodwill impairment test was performed. Those challenges include lower client retention rates, lower occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities, the
deteriorating financial health of numerous skilled nursing facility customers which resulted in a number of customer bankruptcies in 2018, and continued facility
reimbursement pressures. Following the update of its current and long-term forecast, in June 2018, management determined that there were indicators that the LTC
reporting unit’s goodwill may be impaired and, accordingly, management performed an interim goodwill impairment test as of June 30, 2018. The results of that
interim impairment test showed that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in a $3.9 billion pre-tax goodwill
impairment charge in the second quarter of 2018.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill and concluded there was no impairment of goodwill.
The goodwill impairment tests showed that the fair values of the Pharmacy Services and Retail Pharmacy reporting units exceeded their carrying values by
significant margins and the fair value of the LTC reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 2%.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, the LTC reporting unit missed its forecast primarily due to operational issues and customer liquidity issues, including one
significant customer bankruptcy. Additionally, LTC management submitted updated projected financial results which showed significant additional deterioration
primarily due to continued industry and operational challenges, which also caused management to make further updates to its long-term forecast beyond 2019.
Based on these updated projections, management determined that there were indicators that the LTC reporting unit’s goodwill may be further impaired and,
accordingly, management performed an interim goodwill impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2018. The results of that interim impairment test showed that
the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in an additional $2.2 billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the fourth
quarter of 2018.
In 2018, the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was determined using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. In addition
to the lower financial projections, changes in risk-free interest rates and lower market multiples of peer group companies also contributed to the amount of the 2018
goodwill impairment charges.
Recoverability of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value
may not be recoverable. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. If the carrying value of
the asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value.
The indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment loss calculation contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate fair value based on the
assumption that, in lieu of ownership of an intangible asset, the Company would be willing to pay a royalty in order to utilize the benefits of the asset. Fair value is
estimated by discounting the hypothetical royalty payments to their present value over the estimated economic life of the asset. These estimates can be affected by
a number of factors including general economic conditions, availability of market information and the profitability of the Company. There were no impairment
losses recognized on indefinite-lived intangible assets in any of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Health Care Costs Payable
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, 77% and 73% respectively, of health care costs payable are estimates of the ultimate cost of (i) services rendered to the
Company’s Insured members but not yet reported to the Company and (ii) claims which have been
94

reported to the Company but not yet paid (collectively, “IBNR”). Health care costs payable also include an estimate of the cost of services that will continue to be
rendered after the financial statement date if the Company is obligated to pay for such services in accordance with contractual or regulatory requirements. The
remainder of health care costs payable is primarily comprised of pharmacy and capitation payables, other amounts due to providers pursuant to risk sharing
agreements and accruals for state assessments. The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions that consider numerous
factors. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on the Company’s reserving methodology.
During 2020 and 2019, the Company observed an increase in completion factors relative to those assumed at the prior year end. After considering the claims paid
in 2020 and 2019 with dates of service prior to the fourth quarter of the previous year, the Company observed assumed incurred claim weighted average
completion factors that were 4 and 27 basis points higher, respectively, than previously estimated, resulting in a decrease of $35 million and $240 million in 2020
and 2019, respectively, in health care costs payable that related to the prior year. The Company has considered the pattern of changes in its completion factors
when determining the completion factors used in its estimates of IBNR as of December 31, 2020. However, based on historical claim experience, it is reasonably
possible that the Company’s estimated weighted average completion factors may vary by plus or minus 11 basis points from the Company’s assumed rates, which
could impact health care costs payable by approximately plus or minus $140 million pretax.
Also during 2020 and 2019, the Company observed that health care costs for claims with claim incurred dates of three months or less before the financial statement
date were lower than previously estimated. Specifically, after considering the claims paid in 2020 and 2019 with claim incurred dates for the fourth quarter of the
previous year, the Company observed health care costs that were 4.0% and 3.2% lower, respectively, for each fourth quarter than previously estimated, resulting in
a reduction of $394 million and $284 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, in health care costs payable that related to prior year.
Management considers historical health care cost trend rates together with its knowledge of recent events that may impact current trends when developing
estimates of current health care cost trend rates. When establishing reserves as of December 31, 2020, the Company increased its assumed health care cost trend
rates for the most recent three months by 9.6% from health care cost trend rates recently observed. Assumed health care cost trend rates during the fourth quarter of
2020 are elevated compared to historical levels due to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on utilization during 2020. Specifically, beginning in mid-March, the
health system experienced a significant reduction in utilization that is discretionary and the cancellation of elective medical procedures. Utilization remained below
historical levels through April, began to recover in May and June and reached more normal levels in the third and fourth quarters, with select geographies impacted
by COVID-19 waves. Based on historical claim experience, it is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimated health care cost trend rates may vary by plus or
minus 3.5% from the assumed rates, which could impact health care costs payable by plus or minus $404 million pretax.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for any temporary differences
between financial and tax reporting bases and are adjusted as needed to reflect changes in the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary
differences reverse. Such adjustments are recorded in the period in which changes in tax laws are enacted, regardless of when they are effective. Deferred tax assets
are reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance to the extent future realization of those losses, deductions or other tax benefits is sufficiently uncertain.
Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes and the related taxes payable and deferred tax assets and liabilities since, in the
ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Additionally, the Company’s tax returns are
subject to audit by various domestic and foreign tax authorities that could result in material adjustments based on differing interpretations of the tax laws. Although
management believes that its estimates are reasonable and are based on the best available information at the time the provision is prepared, actual results could
differ from these estimates resulting in a final tax outcome that may be materially different from that which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
The tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing
authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such positions are then
measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with the related tax authority. Interest and/or
penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the income tax provision. Significant judgment is required in determining uncertain tax positions. The
Company has established accruals for uncertain tax positions using its judgment and adjusts these accruals, as warranted, due to changing facts and circumstances.
95

New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for a description of new accounting pronouncements applicable to the Company.
96

Table of Contents
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
The Company’s earnings and financial condition are exposed to interest rate risk, credit quality risk, market valuation risk, foreign currency risk, commodity risk
and operational risk.
Evaluation of Interest Rate and Credit Quality Risk
The Company manages interest rate risk by seeking to maintain a tight match between the durations of assets and liabilities when appropriate. The Company
manages credit quality risk by seeking to maintain high average credit quality ratings and diversified sector exposure within its debt securities portfolio. In
connection with its investment and risk management objectives, the Company also uses derivative financial instruments whose market value is at least partially
determined by, among other things, levels of or changes in interest rates (short-term or long-term), duration, prepayment rates, equity markets or credit
ratings/spreads. The Company’s use of these derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate
locks, forward contracts, futures contracts, warrants, put options and credit default swaps. These instruments, viewed separately, subject the Company to varying
degrees of interest rate, equity price and credit risk. However, when used for hedging, the Company expects these instruments to reduce overall risk.
Investments
The Company’s investment portfolio supported the following products at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Experience-rated products
$
1,037 $
1,100 
Remaining products
22,775 
18,587 
Total investments
$
23,812 $
19,687 
Investment risks associated with experience-rated products generally do not impact the Company’s operating results. The risks associated with investments
supporting experience-rated pension and annuity products in the large case pensions business in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment are assumed by the
contract holders and not by the Company (subject to, among other things, certain minimum guarantees). Assets supporting experience-rated products may be
subject to contract holder or participant withdrawals.
The debt securities in the Company’s investment portfolio had an average credit quality rating of A at both December 31, 2020 and 2019 with approximately $6.3
billion and $4.4 billion rated AAA at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The debt securities that were rated below investment grade (that is, having a
credit quality rating below BBB-/Baa3) were $1.9 billion and $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively (of which 2% and 4% at December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively, supported experience-rated products).
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company held $321 million and $333 million, respectively, of municipal debt securities that were guaranteed by third parties,
representing 2% of total investments at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. These securities had an average credit quality rating of AA at both December 31, 2020
and 2019 with the guarantee. These securities had an average credit quality rating of A and A+ at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, without the
guarantee. The Company does not have any significant concentration of investments with third party guarantors (either direct or indirect).
The Company generally classifies debt securities as available for sale, and carries them at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. At both December 31, 2020
and 2019, less than 1% of debt securities were valued using inputs that reflect the Company’s assumptions (categorized as Level 3 inputs in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America). See Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on
the methodologies and key assumptions used to determine the fair value of investments. For additional information related to investments, see Note 3
‘‘Investments’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The Company regularly reviews debt securities in its portfolio to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value has occurred. If a
debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company has the intent to sell the security, or it is more likely than not that the Company will have to sell the
security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost basis of the security is written down to its fair value and the difference is recognized in net
income. If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company does not have the intent to sell and it is more likely than not that the Company will not
have to sell such security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the Company bifurcates the impairment into credit-related and non-credit related components.
The amount of the credit-related component is recorded as an allowance
97

for credit losses and recognized in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related component is included in other comprehensive income. The impairment of
debt securities is considered a critical accounting policy. See ‘‘Critical Accounting Policies - Impairments of Debt Securities” in the MD&A included in Item 7 of
this 10-K for additional information.
Evaluation of Market Valuation Risks
The Company regularly evaluates its risk from market-sensitive instruments by examining, among other things, levels of or changes in interest rates (short-term or
long-term), duration, prepayment rates, equity markets and/or credit ratings/spreads. The Company also regularly evaluates the appropriateness of investments
relative to management-approved investment guidelines (and operates within those guidelines) and the business objectives of its portfolios.
On a quarterly basis, the Company reviews the impact of hypothetical net losses in its investment portfolio on the Company’s consolidated near-term financial
condition, operating results and cash flows assuming the occurrence of certain reasonably possible changes in near-term market rates and prices. Interest rate
changes (whether resulting from changes in treasury yields or credit spreads or other factors) represent the most material risk exposure category for the
Company. The Company has estimated the impact on the fair value of market sensitive instruments based on the net present value of cash flows using a
representative set of likely future interest rate scenarios. The assumptions used were as follows: an immediate increase of 100 basis points in interest rates (which
the Company believes represents a moderately adverse scenario) for long-term debt issued by the Company, as well as its interest rate sensitive investments and an
immediate decrease of 15% in prices for publicly traded domestic equity securities.
Assuming an immediate increase of 100 basis points in interest rates, the theoretical decline in the fair values of market sensitive instruments at December 31, 2020
is as follows:
•
The fair value of long-term debt issued by the Company would decline by approximately $5.3 billion ($6.7 billion pretax). Changes in the fair value of long-
term debt do not impact the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
•
The theoretical reduction in the fair value of interest rate sensitive investments partially offset by the theoretical reduction in the fair value of interest rate
sensitive liabilities would result in a net decline in fair value of approximately $490 million ($615 million pretax) related to continuing non-experience-rated
products. Reductions in the fair value of investment securities would be reflected as an unrealized loss in equity, as the Company classifies these debt
securities as available for sale. The Company does not record liabilities at fair value.
If the value of the Company’s publicly traded domestic equity securities were to decline by 15%, this would result in a net decline in fair value of $5 million
($7 million pretax).
Based on overall exposure to interest rate risk and equity price risk, the Company believes that these changes in market rates and prices would not materially affect
consolidated near-term financial condition, operating results or cash flows as of December 31, 2020.
Evaluation of Foreign Currency and Commodity Risk
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not have any material foreign currency exchange rate or commodity derivative instruments in place and
believes its exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk is not material.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, 5.5% and 6.1%, respectively, of the Company’s investment portfolio was comprised of investments that have exposure to the oil
and gas industry, with more than half that amount comprised of investment grade rated debt securities. These exposures are experiencing varied degrees of
financial strains in the current depressed oil and gas price environment, and the likelihood of the Company’s portfolio incurring additional realized capital losses on
these exposures may increase if such depressed prices persist and/or decline further.
98

Evaluation of Operational Risks
The Company also faces certain operational risks. Those risks include risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic and risks related to information security, including
cybersecurity.
The spread of COVID-19, or actions taken to mitigate its spread, could have material and adverse effects on our ability to operate our businesses effectively,
including as a result of the complete or partial closure of facilities or labor shortages. Disruptions in our supply chains, our distribution chains and/or public and
private infrastructure, including communications, financial services and supply chains, could materially and adversely impact our business operations. We have
transitioned a significant subset of our colleagues to a remote work environment in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, as have a significant number of
our third-party service providers, which may amplify certain risks to our businesses, including an increased demand for information technology resources,
increased risk of phishing and other cyber attacks, increased risk of unauthorized dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary or confidential
information about us or our medical members or other third-parties and increased risk of business interruptions.
The Company and its vendors have experienced diverse cyber attacks and expect to continue to experience cyber attacks going forward. As examples, the
Company and its vendors have experienced attempts to gain access to systems, denial of service attacks, attempted malware infections, account takeovers, scanning
activity and phishing emails. Attacks can originate from external criminals, terrorists, nation states or internal actors. The Company is dedicating and will continue
to dedicate significant resources and incur significant expenses to maintain and update on an ongoing basis the systems and processes that are designed to mitigate
the information security risks it faces and protect the security of its computer systems, software, networks and other technology assets against attempts by
unauthorized parties to obtain access to confidential information, disrupt or degrade service or cause other damage. The impact of cyber attacks has not been
material to the Company’s operations or operating results through December 31, 2020. The Board and its Audit Committee and Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee are regularly informed regarding the Company’s information security policies, practices and status.
99

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
101
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
102
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019
103
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
104
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
106
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
107
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
172
100

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions, except per share amounts
2020
2019
2018
Revenues:
 
 
 
Products
$
190,688 $
185,236 $
183,910 
Premiums
69,364 
63,122 
8,184 
Services
7,856 
7,407 
1,825 
Net investment income
798 
1,011 
660 
Total revenues
268,706 
256,776 
194,579 
Operating costs:
Cost of products sold
163,981 
158,719 
156,447 
Benefit costs
55,679 
52,529 
6,594 
Goodwill impairments
— 
— 
6,149 
Operating expenses
35,135 
33,541 
21,368 
Total operating costs
254,795 
244,789 
190,558 
Operating income
13,911 
11,987 
4,021 
Interest expense
2,907 
3,035 
2,619 
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
1,440 
79 
— 
Other income
(206)
(124)
(4)
Income before income tax provision
9,770 
8,997 
1,406 
Income tax provision
2,569 
2,366 
2,002 
Income (loss) from continuing operations
7,201 
6,631 
(596)
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
(9)
— 
— 
Net income (loss)
7,192 
6,631 
(596)
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
(13)
3 
2 
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
7,179 $
6,634 $
(594)
Basic earnings (loss) per share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
5.49 $
5.10 $
(0.57)
Loss from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
(0.01) $
— $
— 
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
5.48 $
5.10 $
(0.57)
Weighted average basic shares outstanding
1,309 
1,301 
1,044 
Diluted earnings (loss) per share:
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
5.47 $
5.08 $
(0.57)
Loss from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
(0.01) $
— $
— 
Net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
5.46 $
5.08 $
(0.57)
Weighted average diluted shares outstanding
1,314 
1,305 
1,044 
Dividends declared per share
$
2.00 $
2.00 $
2.00 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
101

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Net income (loss)
$
7,192 $
6,631 $
(596)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
Net unrealized investment gains
440 
677 
97 
Foreign currency translation adjustments
3 
162 
(29)
Net cash flow hedges
(31)
(33)
330 
Pension and other postretirement benefits
(17)
111 
(124)
Other comprehensive income
395 
917 
274 
Comprehensive income (loss)
7,587 
7,548 
(322)
Comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
(13)
3 
2 
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to CVS Health
$
7,574 $
7,551 $
(320)
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
102

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Balance Sheets
At December 31,
In millions, except per share amounts
2020
2019
Assets:
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
7,854 $
5,683 
Investments
3,000 
2,373 
Accounts receivable, net
21,742 
19,617 
Inventories
18,496 
17,516 
Other current assets
5,277 
5,113 
Total current assets
56,369 
50,302 
Long-term investments
20,812 
17,314 
Property and equipment, net
12,606 
12,044 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
20,729 
20,860 
Goodwill
79,552 
79,749 
Intangible assets, net
31,142 
33,121 
Separate accounts assets
4,881 
4,459 
Other assets
4,624 
4,600 
Total assets
$
230,715 $
222,449 
Liabilities:
Accounts payable
$
11,138 $
10,492 
Pharmacy claims and discounts payable
15,795 
13,601 
Health care costs payable
7,936 
6,879 
Policyholders’ funds
4,270 
2,991 
Accrued expenses
14,243 
12,133 
Other insurance liabilities
1,557 
1,830 
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
1,638 
1,596 
Current portion of long-term debt
5,440 
3,781 
Total current liabilities
62,017 
53,303 
Long-term operating lease liabilities
18,757 
18,926 
Long-term debt
59,207 
64,699 
Deferred income taxes
6,794 
7,294 
Separate accounts liabilities
4,881 
4,459 
Other long-term insurance liabilities
7,007 
7,436 
Other long-term liabilities
2,351 
2,162 
Total liabilities
161,014 
158,279 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 16)
Shareholders’ equity:
Preferred stock, par value $0.01: 0.1 shares authorized; none issued or outstanding
— 
— 
Common stock, par value $0.01: 3,200 shares authorized; 1,733 shares issued and 1,310 shares outstanding at
December 31, 2020 and 1,727 shares issued and 1,302 shares outstanding at December 31, 2019 and capital surplus
46,513 
45,972 
Treasury stock, at cost: 423 and 425 shares at December 31, 2020 and 2019
(28,178)
(28,235)
Retained earnings
49,640 
45,108 
Accumulated other comprehensive income
1,414 
1,019 
Total CVS Health shareholders’ equity
69,389 
63,864 
Noncontrolling interests
312 
306 
Total shareholders’ equity
69,701 
64,170 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$
230,715 $
222,449 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
103

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Cash receipts from customers
$
264,327 $
248,393 $
186,519 
Cash paid for inventory and prescriptions dispensed by retail network pharmacies
(158,636)
(149,655)
(148,981)
Insurance benefits paid
(55,124)
(52,242)
(6,897)
Cash paid to other suppliers and employees
(29,763)
(28,932)
(17,234)
Interest and investment income received
894 
955 
644 
Interest paid
(2,904)
(2,954)
(2,803)
Income taxes paid
(2,929)
(2,717)
(2,383)
Net cash provided by operating activities
15,865 
12,848 
8,865 
Cash flows from investing activities:
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
6,467 
7,049 
817 
Purchases of investments
(9,639)
(7,534)
(692)
Purchases of property and equipment
(2,437)
(2,457)
(2,037)
Proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions
101 
5 
— 
Acquisitions (net of cash acquired)
(866)
(444)
(42,226)
Proceeds from sale of subsidiaries and other assets
840 
— 
832 
Other
— 
42 
21 
Net cash used in investing activities
(5,534)
(3,339)
(43,285)
Cash flows from financing activities:
Net repayments of short-term debt
— 
(720)
(556)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
9,958 
3,736 
44,343 
Repayments of long-term debt
(15,631)
(8,336)
(5,522)
Derivative settlements
(7)
(25)
446 
Dividends paid
(2,624)
(2,603)
(2,038)
Proceeds from exercise of stock options
264 
210 
242 
Payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards
(88)
(112)
(97)
Other
(27)
— 
1 
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(8,155)
(7,850)
36,819 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
— 
— 
(4)
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
2,176 
1,659 
2,395 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the beginning of the period
5,954 
4,295 
1,900 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the end of the period
$
8,130 $
5,954 $
4,295 
104

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Reconciliation of net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities:
Net income (loss)
$
7,192 $
6,631 $
(596)
Adjustments required to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
4,441 
4,371 
2,718 
Goodwill impairments
— 
— 
6,149 
Stock-based compensation
400 
453 
280 
(Gain) loss on sale of subsidiaries
(269)
205 
86 
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
1,440 
79 
— 
Deferred income taxes
(570)
(654)
87 
Other noncash items
72 
264 
253 
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions:
Accounts receivable, net
(1,510)
(2,158)
(1,139)
Inventories
(973)
(1,075)
(1,153)
Other assets
364 
(614)
(3)
Accounts payable and pharmacy claims and discounts payable
2,769 
3,550 
2,329 
Health care costs payable and other insurance liabilities
(231)
320 
(311)
Other liabilities
2,740 
1,476 
165 
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
15,865 $
12,848 $
8,865 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
105

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
Attributable to CVS Health
Number of shares 
outstanding
Common
Stock and
Capital
Surplus 
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income (Loss)
Total 
CVS Health 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
Total 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
In millions
Common 
Shares
Treasury
Shares 
Treasury
Stock 
Retained 
Earnings
Noncontrolling 
Interests
Balance at December 31, 2017
1,712 
(698)
$
32,096 $
(37,796) $
43,556 $
(165) $
37,691 $
4 $
37,695 
Adoption of new accounting
standards
— 
— 
— 
— 
(6)
(7)
(13)
— 
(13)
Net loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
(594)
— 
(594)
(2)
(596)
Other comprehensive income (Note
13)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
274 
274 
— 
274 
Common shares issued to acquire
Aetna
— 
274 
12,923 
9,561 
— 
— 
22,484 
— 
22,484 
Stock option activity, stock awards
and other
8 
— 
421 
— 
— 
— 
421 
— 
421 
Purchase of treasury shares, net of
ESPP issuances
— 
(1)
— 
7 
— 
— 
7 
— 
7 
Common stock dividends
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2,045)
— 
(2,045)
— 
(2,045)
Acquisition of noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
329 
329 
Other decreases in noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(13)
(13)
Balance at December 31, 2018
1,720 
(425)
45,440 
(28,228)
40,911 
102 
58,225 
318 
58,543 
Adoption of new accounting
standard 
— 
— 
— 
— 
178 
— 
178 
— 
178 
Net income (loss)
— 
— 
— 
— 
6,634 
— 
6,634 
(3)
6,631 
Other comprehensive income (Note
13)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
917 
917 
— 
917 
Stock option activity, stock awards
and other
7 
2 
532 
— 
— 
— 
532 
— 
532 
Purchase of treasury shares, net of
ESPP issuances
— 
(2)
— 
(7)
— 
— 
(7)
— 
(7)
Common stock dividends
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2,615)
— 
(2,615)
— 
(2,615)
Other decreases in noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(9)
(9)
Balance at December 31, 2019
1,727 
(425)
45,972 
(28,235)
45,108 
1,019 
63,864 
306 
64,170 
Adoption of new accounting
standard (Note 1)
— 
— 
— 
— 
(3)
— 
(3)
— 
(3)
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
7,179 
— 
7,179 
13 
7,192 
Other comprehensive income (Note
13)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
395 
395 
— 
395 
Stock option activity, stock awards
and other
6 
— 
541 
— 
— 
— 
541 
— 
541 
ESPP issuances, net of purchase of
treasury shares
— 
2 
— 
57 
— 
— 
57 
— 
57 
Common stock dividends
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2,644)
— 
(2,644)
— 
(2,644)
Other decreases in noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(7)
(7)
Balance at December 31, 2020
1,733 
(423)
$
46,513 $
(28,178) $
49,640 $
1,414 $
69,389 $
312 $
69,701 
(1) Treasury shares include 1 million shares held in trust for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Treasury stock includes $29 million related to shares held in trust for
each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information.
(2) Common stock and capital surplus includes the par value of common stock of $17 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(3) Reflects the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which resulted in a reduction to retained earnings of $13 million and the
adoption of ASU 2018-02, Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income,
which resulted in a reduction to accumulated other comprehensive income of $7 million and an increase to retained earnings of $7 million, each during the year ended December 31, 2018.
(4) Reflects the adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which resulted in an increase to retained earnings of $178 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
(2)
(1)
(1)
 (3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
106

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
1.
Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business 
CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”), has more than 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100
walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 105 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving
more than one million patients per year and expanding specialty pharmacy services. The Company also serves an estimated 34 million people through traditional,
voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone
Medicare Part D prescription drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health
outcomes and lowers overall health care costs.
The coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) pandemic has severely impacted the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world. The impact of
COVID-19 on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition in the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as information
regarding certain expected impacts of COVID-19 on the Company, is discussed throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On November 28, 2018 (the “Aetna Acquisition Date”), the Company acquired Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”). As a result of the acquisition of Aetna (the “Aetna
Acquisition”), the Company added the Health Care Benefits segment. Certain aspects of Aetna’s operations, including products for which the Company no longer
solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products, are included in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment. The
consolidated financial statements reflect Aetna’s results subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date.
The Company has four reportable segments: Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC, Health Care Benefits and Corporate/Other, which are described below.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease
management services and medical spend management. The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions,
government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care plans, plans offered on public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) and
private health insurance exchanges and other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States. The Pharmacy Services segment operates retail
specialty pharmacy stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral
nutrition services.
Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of health and wellness products and general merchandise, provides health care services
through its MinuteClinic  walk-in medical clinics, provides medical diagnostic testing, administers vaccinations for illnesses such as influenza, COVID-19 and
shingles and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations, which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other
ancillary services to long-term care facilities and other care settings. As of December 31, 2020, the Retail/LTC segment operated more than 9,900 retail locations,
approximately 1,100 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and on-site pharmacies.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment is one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information
and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals, make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care
Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy,
dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care
management services and health information technology products and services. The Health Care Benefits segment also provided workers’ compensation
administrative services through its Coventry Health Care Workers’ Compensation business (“Workers’ Compensation business”) prior to the sale of this business
on July 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly workers, health
plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. The
®
107

Company refers to insurance products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services
contract products (where the plan sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” For periods prior to the Aetna
Acquisition Date, the Health Care Benefits segment was comprised only of the Company’s SilverScript  PDP business.
Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which primarily consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as its large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of CVS Health and its subsidiaries have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its majority-owned
subsidiaries and variable interest entities (“VIEs”) for which the Company is the primary beneficiary. All material intercompany balances and transactions have
been eliminated.
Reclassifications
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the
consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and temporary investments with maturities of three months or less when purchased. The Company invests in short-term
money market funds, commercial paper and time deposits, as well as other debt securities that are classified as cash equivalents within the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets, as these funds are highly liquid and readily convertible to known amounts of cash.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash included in other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets represents amounts held in escrow accounts in connection with certain recent
acquisitions. Restricted cash included in other assets on the consolidated balance sheets represents amounts held in a trust in one of the Company’s captive
insurance companies to satisfy collateral requirements associated with the assignment of certain insurance policies. All restricted cash is invested in time deposits,
money market funds or commercial paper.
The following is a reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents on the consolidated balance sheets to total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash on the
consolidated statements of cash flows as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Cash and cash equivalents
$
7,854 $
5,683 $
4,059 
Restricted cash (included in other current assets)
— 
— 
6 
Restricted cash (included in other assets)
276 
271 
230 
Total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash in the consolidated statements of cash flows
$
8,130 $
5,954 $
4,295 
®
108

Investments
Debt Securities
Debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Treasury and agency securities, mortgage-backed securities, corporate and foreign bonds and other debt securities. Debt
securities are classified as either current or long-term investments based on their contractual maturities unless the Company intends to sell an investment within the
next twelve months, in which case it is classified as current on the consolidated balance sheets. Debt securities are classified as available for sale and are carried at
fair value. See Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value’’ for additional information on how the Company estimates the fair value of these investments.
If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company has the intent to sell the security, or it is more likely than not that the Company will have to sell
the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost basis of the security is written down to its fair value and the difference is recognized in
net income. If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company does not have the intent to sell and it is more likely than not that the Company will
not have to sell such security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the Company bifurcates the impairment into credit-related and non-credit related
components. In evaluating whether a credit related loss exists, the Company considers a variety of factors including: the extent to which the fair value is less than
the amortized cost basis; adverse conditions specifically related to the issuer of a security, an industry or geographic area; the payment structure of the security; the
failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principle payments; and any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency. The amount
of the credit-related component is recorded as an allowance for credit losses and recognized in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related component is
included in other comprehensive income. Interest is not accrued on debt securities when management believes the collection of interest is unlikely.
The credit-related component is determined by comparing the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security, considering all reasonably
available information relevant to the collectability of the security, with the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected to be
collected is less than the amortized cost basis of the security, the Company records an allowance for credit losses, which is limited by the amount that the fair value
is less than amortized cost basis.
For mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities, the Company recognizes income using an effective yield based on anticipated prepayments and the
estimated economic life of the securities. When estimates of prepayments change, the effective yield is recalculated to reflect actual payments to date and
anticipated future payments. The Company’s investment in the security is adjusted to the amount that would have existed had the new effective yield been applied
since the acquisition of the security, with adjustments recognized in net income.
Equity Securities
Equity securities with readily available fair values are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in net income (loss).
Mortgage Loans
Mortgage loan investments on the consolidated balance sheets are valued at the unpaid principal balance, net of an allowance for credit losses. Mortgage loans with
a maturity date or a committed prepayment date within twelve months are classified as current on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company assesses whether
its loans share similar risk characteristics and, if so, groups such loans in a risk pool when measuring expected credit losses. The Company considers the following
characteristics when evaluating whether its loans share similar risk characteristics: loan-to-value ratios, property type (e.g., office, retail, apartment, industrial),
geographic location, vacancy rates and property condition.
Credit loss reserves are determined using a loss rate method that multiplies the unpaid principal balance of each loan within a risk pool group by an estimated loss
rate percentage. The loss rate percentage considers both the expected loan loss severity and the probability of loan default. For periods where the Company is able
to make or obtain reasonable and supportable forecasts of expected economic conditions (e.g., gross domestic product, employment), the Company adjusts its
expected loss rates to reflect these forecasted economic conditions. For periods beyond which the Company is able to make or obtain reasonable and supportable
forecasts of expected economic conditions, the Company reverts to historical loss rates in determining expected credit losses.
Interest income on a potential problem loan (i.e., high probability of default) or restructured loan is accrued to the extent it is deemed to be collectible and the loan
continues to perform under its original or restructured terms. Interest income on problem loans (i.e., more than 60 days delinquent, in bankruptcy or in process of
foreclosure) is recognized on a cash basis. Cash payments on loans in the process of foreclosure are treated as a return of principal.
109

Other Investments
Other investments consist primarily of the following:
•
Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships, which are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. Under this method, the carrying value of
the investment is based on the value of the Company’s equity ownership of the underlying investment funds provided by the general partner or manager of the
investments, the financial statements of which generally are audited. As a result of the timing of the receipt of the valuation information provided by the fund
managers, these investments are generally reported on up to a three month lag. The Company reviews investments for impairment at least quarterly and
monitors their performance throughout the year through discussions with the administrators, managers and/or general partners. If the Company becomes aware
of an impairment of a limited partnership’s investments through its review or prior to receiving the limited partnership’s financial statements at the financial
statement date, an impairment will be recognized by recording a reduction in the carrying value of the limited partnership with a corresponding charge to net
investment income.
•
Investment real estate, which is carried on the consolidated balance sheets at depreciated cost, including capital additions, net of write-downs for other-than-
temporary declines in fair value. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful life of each asset. If any real estate
investment is considered held-for-sale, it is carried at the lower of its carrying value or fair value less estimated selling costs. The Company generally estimates
fair value using a discounted future cash flow analysis in conjunction with comparable sales information. At the time of the sale, the difference between the
sales price and the carrying value is recorded as a realized capital gain or loss.
•
Privately-placed equity securities, which are carried on the consolidated balance sheets at cost less impairments, plus or minus subsequent adjustments for
observable price changes. Additionally, as a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”), a subsidiary of the Company is required to
purchase and hold shares of the FHLBB. These shares are restricted and carried at cost.
Net Investment Income
Net investment income on the Company’s investments is recorded when earned and is reflected in the Company’s net income (other than net investment income on
assets supporting experience-rated products). Experience-rated products are products in the large case pensions business where the contract holder, not the
Company, assumes investment and other risks, subject to, among other things, minimum guarantees provided by the Company. The effect of investment
performance on experience-rated products is allocated to contract holders’ accounts daily, based on the underlying investment experience and, therefore, does not
impact the Company’s net income (as long as the contract’s minimum guarantees are not triggered). Net investment income on assets supporting large case
pensions’ experience-rated products is included in net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations and is credited to contract holders’ accounts
through a charge to benefit costs.
Realized capital gains and losses on investments (other than realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting experience-rated products) are included as
a component of net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations. Realized capital gains and losses are determined on a specific identification
basis. Purchases and sales of debt and equity securities and alternative investments are reflected on the trade date. Purchases and sales of mortgage loans and
investment real estate are reflected on the closing date.
Realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting large case pensions’ experience-rated products are not included in realized capital gains and losses in
the consolidated statements of operations and instead are credited directly to contract holders’ accounts. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in
policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Unrealized capital gains and losses on investments (other than unrealized capital gains and losses on investments supporting experience-rated products) are
reflected in shareholders’ equity, net of tax, as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. Unrealized capital gains and losses on investments
supporting large case pensions’ experience-rated products are credited directly to contract holders’ accounts. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in
policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments in order to manage interest rate and foreign exchange risk and credit exposure. The Company’s use of these
derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, forward contracts, futures contracts,
warrants, put options and credit default swaps.
110

Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated net of allowances for credit losses, customer credit allowances, contractual allowances and estimated terminations. Accounts
receivable, net is composed of the following at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Trade receivables
$
7,101 $
6,717 
Vendor and manufacturer receivables
9,815 
7,856 
Premium receivables
2,628 
2,663 
Other receivables
2,198 
2,381 
   Total accounts receivable, net
$
21,742 $
19,617 
The Company’s allowance for credit losses was $358 million as of December 31, 2020. When developing an estimate of the Company’s expected credit losses, the
Company considers all available relevant information regarding the collectability of cash flows, including historical information, current conditions and reasonable
and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions over the contractual life of the receivable. The Company’s accounts receivable are short duration in nature
and typically settle in less than 30 days. The Company’s allowance for doubtful accounts was $319 million as of December 31, 2019.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method. Physical inventory counts are taken on a regular basis in
each retail store and LTC pharmacy, and a continuous cycle count process is the primary procedure used to validate the inventory balances on hand in each
distribution center and mail facility to ensure that the amounts reflected in the consolidated financial statements are properly stated. During the interim period
between physical inventory counts, the Company accrues for anticipated physical inventory losses on a location-by-location basis based on historical results and
current physical inventory trends.
Reinsurance Recoverables
The Company utilizes reinsurance agreements primarily to: (a) reduce required capital and (b) facilitate the acquisition or disposition of certain insurance contracts.
Ceded reinsurance agreements permit the Company to recover a portion of its losses from reinsurers, although they do not discharge the Company’s primary
liability as the direct insurer of the risks reinsured. Failure of reinsurers to indemnify the Company could result in losses; however, the Company does not expect
charges for unrecoverable reinsurance to have a material effect on its consolidated operating results or financial condition. The Company evaluates the financial
condition of its reinsurers and monitors concentrations of credit risk arising from similar geographic regions, activities or economic characteristics of its reinsurers.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s reinsurance recoverables consisted primarily of amounts due from third parties that are rated consistent with companies that
are considered to have the ability to meet their obligations. Reinsurance recoverables are recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance
sheets.
Health Care Contract Acquisition Costs
Insurance products included in the Health Care Benefits segment are cancelable by either the customer or the member monthly upon written notice. Acquisition
costs related to prepaid health care and health indemnity contracts are generally expensed as incurred. Acquisition costs for certain long-duration insurance
contracts are deferred and are recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance sheets and are amortized over the estimated life of the
contracts. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs is recorded in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. At December 31, 2020 and
2019, the balance of deferred acquisition costs was $546 million and $271 million, respectively, comprised primarily of commissions paid on Medicare
Supplement products within the Health Care Benefits segment.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is reported at historical cost, net of accumulated depreciation. Property, equipment and improvements to leased premises are depreciated
using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, or when applicable, the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. Estimated useful lives
generally range from 1 to 40 years for buildings, building improvements and leasehold improvements and 3 to 10 years for fixtures, equipment and internally
developed
111

software. Repair and maintenance costs are charged directly to expense as incurred. Major renewals or replacements that substantially extend the useful life of an
asset are capitalized and depreciated. Application development stage costs for significant internally developed software projects are capitalized and depreciated.
Property and equipment consists of the following at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Land
$
2,134 $
1,981 
Building and improvements
3,950 
3,541 
Fixtures and equipment
13,125 
12,401 
Leasehold improvements
6,077 
5,611 
Software
6,020 
5,400 
Total property and equipment
31,306 
28,934 
Accumulated depreciation and amortization
(18,700)
(16,890)
Property and equipment, net
$
12,606 $
12,044 
Depreciation expense (which includes the amortization of property and equipment under finance or capital leases) totaled $2.1 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.7 billion
for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about finance leases.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
The Company determines if an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of a contract. Right-of-use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying
asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of
the remaining future minimum lease payments. As the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its
incremental borrowing rate, determined by class of underlying asset, to discount the lease payments. The operating lease right-of-use assets also include lease
payments made before commencement and are reduced by lease incentives.
The Company’s real estate leases typically contain options that permit renewals for additional periods of up to five years each. For real estate leases, the options to
extend are not considered reasonably certain at lease commencement because the Company reevaluates each lease on a regular basis to consider the economic and
strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options and regularly opens or closes stores to align with its operating strategy. Generally, the renewal option periods
are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability. Similarly,
renewal options are not included in the lease term for non-real estate leases because they are not considered reasonably certain of being exercised at lease
commencement. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheets, and lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the term of the short-term lease.
For real estate leases, the Company accounts for lease components and nonlease components as a single lease component. Certain real estate leases require
additional payments based on sales volume, as well as reimbursement for real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance, which are expensed as
incurred as variable lease costs. Other real estate leases contain one fixed lease payment that includes real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance.
These fixed payments are considered part of the lease payment and included in the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the excess cost of an acquisition over the fair value
of net assets acquired and identifiable intangible assets to be recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to impairment reviews annually, or
more frequently if necessary, as further described below. See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about goodwill.
112

Intangible Assets
The Company’s identifiable intangible assets consist primarily of trademarks, trade names, customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology,
provider networks and value of business acquired (“VOBA”). These intangible assets arise primarily from the determination of their respective fair market values
at the date of acquisition. Amounts assigned to identifiable intangible assets, and their related useful lives, are derived from established valuation techniques and
management estimates.
The Company’s definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the pattern of future cash flows attributable to the asset.
Other than VOBA, definite-lived intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method. VOBA is amortized over the expected life of the acquired contracts
in proportion to estimated premiums. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if necessary, as
further described in “Long-Lived Asset Impairment” below.
See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about intangible assets.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets, excluding goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are tested for impairment using
separate tests described below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such asset may not be recoverable. The Company
groups and evaluates these long-lived assets for impairment at the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. If indicators of impairment are
present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group (undiscounted and
without interest charges). If the estimated future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment loss calculation
is prepared. The impairment loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted and with
interest charges). If required, an impairment loss is recorded for the portion of the asset group’s carrying value that exceeds the asset group’s estimated future cash
flows (discounted and with interest charges). There were no material impairment charges recognized on long-lived assets in the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded store rationalization charges of $231 million, primarily related to operating lease right-of-use
asset impairment charges. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about the right-of-use asset impairment charges. During the year ended December 31,
2018, the Company recognized a $43 million long-lived asset impairment charge, primarily related to the impairment of property and equipment.
When evaluating goodwill for potential impairment, the Company compares the fair value of its reporting units to their respective carrying amounts. The Company
estimates the fair value of its reporting units using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the carrying amount of a
reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. During the third quarter of both 2020 and 2019,
the Company performed its required annual goodwill impairment tests and concluded there were no goodwill impairments as of the testing dates or during the years
ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about goodwill impairment charges recorded during
the year ended December 31, 2018.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. The Company estimates the fair
value of its indefinite-lived trademarks using the relief from royalty method under the income approach. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds its estimated fair
value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. There were no impairment losses recognized on indefinite-lived
intangible assets in any of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Separate Accounts
Separate Accounts assets and liabilities related to large case pensions products represent funds maintained to meet specific objectives of contract holders who bear
the investment risk. These assets and liabilities are carried at fair value. Net investment income (including net realized capital gains and losses) accrue directly to
such contract holders. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims arising from the Company’s other businesses. Deposits,
withdrawals and net investment income (including net realized and net unrealized capital gains and losses) on Separate Accounts assets are not reflected in the
consolidated statements of operations or cash flows. Management fees charged to contract holders are included in services revenue and recognized over the period
earned.
113

Health Care Costs Payable
Health care costs payable consist principally of unpaid fee-for-service medical, dental and pharmacy claims, capitation costs, other amounts due to providers
pursuant to risk-sharing arrangements related to the Health Care Benefits segment’s Insured Commercial, Medicare and Medicaid products and accruals for state
assessments. Unpaid health care claims include an estimate of payments the Company will make for (i) services rendered to the Company’s Insured members but
not yet reported to the Company and (ii) claims which have been reported to the Company but not yet paid, each as of the financial statement date (collectively,
“IBNR”). Health care costs payable also include an estimate of the cost of services that will continue to be rendered after the financial statement date if the
Company is obligated to pay for such services in accordance with contractual or regulatory requirements. Such estimates are developed using actuarial principles
and assumptions which consider, among other things, historical and projected claim submission and processing patterns, assumed and historical medical cost
trends, historical utilization of medical services, claim inventory levels, changes in Insured membership and product mix, seasonality and other relevant factors.
The Company reflects changes in these estimates in benefit costs in the Company’s consolidated operating results in the period they are determined. Capitation
costs represent contractual monthly fees paid to participating physicians and other medical providers for providing medical care, regardless of the volume of
medical services provided to the Insured member. Amounts due under risk-sharing arrangements are based on the terms of the underlying contracts with the
providers and consider claims experience under the contracts through the financial statement date.
The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions that consider numerous factors. Of those factors, the Company considers
the analysis of historical and projected claim payment patterns (including claims submission and processing patterns) and the assumed health care cost trend rate
(the year-over-year change in per member per month health care costs) to be the most critical assumptions. In developing its IBNR estimate, the Company
consistently applies these actuarial principles and assumptions each period, with consideration to the variability of related factors. There have been no significant
changes to the methodologies or assumptions used to develop the Company’s estimate of IBNR in 2020.
The Company analyzes historical claim payment patterns by comparing claim incurred dates (i.e., the date services were provided) to claim payment dates to
estimate “completion factors.” The Company uses completion factors predominantly to estimate the ultimate cost of claims incurred more than three months before
the financial statement date. The Company estimates completion factors by aggregating claim data based on the month of service and month of claim payment and
estimating the percentage of claims incurred for a given month that are complete by each month thereafter. For any given month, substantially all claims are paid
within six months of the date of service, but it can take up to 48 months or longer after the date of service before all of the claims are completely resolved and paid.
These historically-derived completion factors are then applied to claims paid through the financial statement date to estimate the ultimate claim cost for a given
month’s incurred claim activity. The difference between the estimated ultimate claim cost and the claims paid through the financial statement date represents the
Company’s estimate of claims remaining to be paid as of the financial statement date and is included in the Company’s health care costs payable. The completion
factors the Company uses reflect judgments and possible adjustments based on data such as claim inventory levels, claim submission and processing patterns and,
to a lesser extent, other factors such as changes in health care cost trend rates, changes in Insured membership and changes in product mix. If claims are submitted
or processed on a faster (slower) pace than prior periods, the actual claims may be more (less) complete than originally estimated using the Company’s completion
factors, which may result in reserves that are higher (lower) than the ultimate cost of claims.
Because claims incurred within three months before the financial statement date are less mature, the Company uses a combination of historically-derived
completion factors and the assumed health care cost trend rate to estimate the ultimate cost of claims incurred for these months. The Company applies its actuarial
judgment and places a greater emphasis on the assumed health care cost trend rate for the most recent claim incurred dates as these months may be influenced by
seasonal patterns and changes in membership and product mix.
The Company’s health care cost trend rate is affected by changes in per member utilization of medical services as well as changes in the unit cost of such services.
Many factors influence the health care cost trend rate, including the Company’s ability to manage benefit costs through product design, negotiation of favorable
provider contracts and medical management programs, as well as the mix of the Company’s business. The health status of the Company’s Insured members, aging
of the population and other demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology and other factors continue to contribute to rising per member utilization
and unit costs. Changes in health care practices, inflation, new technologies, increases in the cost of prescription drugs (including specialty pharmacy drugs),
direct-to-consumer marketing by pharmaceutical companies, clusters of high-cost cases, claim intensity, changes in the regulatory environment, health care
provider or member fraud and numerous other factors also contribute to the cost of health care and the Company’s health care cost trend rate.
114

For each reporting period, the Company uses an extensive degree of judgment in the process of estimating its health care costs payable. As a result, considerable
variability and uncertainty is inherent in such estimates, particularly with respect to claims with claim incurred dates of three months or less before the financial
statement date; and the adequacy of such estimates is highly sensitive to changes in assumed completion factors and the assumed health care cost trend rates. For
each reporting period the Company recognizes the actuarial best estimate of health care costs payable considering the potential volatility in assumed completion
factors and health care cost trend rates, as well as other factors. The Company believes its estimate of health care costs payable is reasonable and adequate to cover
its obligations at December 31, 2020; however, actual claim payments may differ from the Company’s estimates. A worsening (or improvement) of the Company’s
health care cost trend rates or changes in completion factors from those that the Company assumed in estimating health care costs payable at December 31, 2020
would cause these estimates to change in the near term, and such a change could be material.
Each quarter, the Company re-examines previously established health care costs payable estimates based on actual claim payments for prior periods and other
changes in facts and circumstances. Given the extensive degree of judgment in this estimate, it is possible that the Company’s estimates of health care costs
payable could develop either favorably (that is, its actual benefit costs for the period were less than estimated) or unfavorably. The changes in the Company’s
estimate of health care costs payable may relate to a prior quarter, prior year or earlier periods. For a roll forward of the Company’s health care costs payable, see
Note 7 ‘‘Health Care Costs Payable.’’ The Company’s reserving practice is to consistently recognize the actuarial best estimate of its ultimate liability for health
care costs payable.
Other Insurance Liabilities
Unpaid Claims
Unpaid claims consist primarily of reserves associated with certain short-duration group disability and term life insurance contracts, including an estimate for
IBNR as of the financial statement date. Reserves associated with certain short-duration group disability and term life insurance contracts are based upon the
Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits, which is based on assumed investment yields and assumptions regarding mortality, morbidity and
recoveries from the U.S. Social Security Administration. The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions which consider,
among other things, contractual requirements, claim incidence rates, claim recovery rates, seasonality and other relevant factors. The Company discounts certain
claim liabilities related to group long-term disability and life insurance waiver of premium contracts. The discount rates generally reflect the Company’s expected
investment returns for the investments supporting all incurral years of these liabilities. The discount rates for retrospectively-rated contracts are set at contractually
specified levels. The Company’s estimates of unpaid claims are subject to change due to changes in the underlying experience of the insurance contracts, changes
in investment yields or other factors, and these changes are recorded in current and future benefits in the consolidated statements of operations in the period they
are determined. The Company estimates its reserve for claims IBNR for life products largely based on completion factors. The completion factors used are based
on the Company’s historical experience and reflect judgments and possible adjustments based on data such as claim inventory levels, claim payment patterns,
changes in business volume and other factors. If claims are submitted or processed on a faster (slower) pace than historical periods, the actual claims may be more
(less) complete than originally estimated using completion factors, which may result in reserves that are higher (lower) than required to cover future life benefit
payments. There have been no significant changes to the methodologies or assumptions used to develop the Company’s estimate of unpaid claims IBNR in 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, unpaid claims balances of $532 million and $1.5 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term insurance
liabilities, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, unpaid claims balances of $704 million and $1.8 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other
long-term insurance liabilities, respectively.
Substantially all life and disability insurance liabilities have been fully ceded to unrelated third parties through indemnity reinsurance agreements; however, the
Company remains directly obligated to the policyholders.
Future Policy Benefits
Future policy benefits consist primarily of reserves for limited payment pension and annuity contracts and long-term care insurance contracts. Reserves for limited
payment pension and annuity contracts are computed using actuarial principles that consider, among other things, assumptions reflecting anticipated mortality,
retirement, expense and interest rate experience. Such assumptions generally vary by plan, year of issue and policy duration. Assumed interest rates on such
contracts ranged from 3.3% to 11.3% in the year ended December 31, 2020 and from 3.5% to 11.3% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company
periodically reviews mortality assumptions against both industry standards and its experience. Reserves for long-duration long-term care contracts represent the
Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits to be paid to or on behalf of policyholders less the present value of future net premiums. The assumed
interest rate on such contracts was 5.1% in both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits
under such contracts is based upon mortality, morbidity and interest rate assumptions. As of December 31, 2020, future policy benefits
115

balances of $462 million and $5.5 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term insurance liabilities, respectively. As of December 31,
2019, future policy benefits balances of $508 million and $5.6 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term insurance liabilities,
respectively.
Premium Deficiency Reserves
The Company evaluates its insurance contracts to determine if it is probable that a loss will be incurred. A premium deficiency loss is recognized when it is
probable that expected future claims, including maintenance costs (for example, direct costs such as claim processing costs), will exceed existing reserves plus
anticipated future premiums and reinsurance recoveries. Anticipated investment income is considered in the calculation of premium deficiency losses for short-
duration contracts. For purposes of determining premium deficiency losses, contracts are grouped consistent with the Company’s method of acquiring, servicing
and measuring the profitability of such contracts. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company established a premium deficiency reserve of $11 million and
$4 million, respectively, related to Medicaid products in the Health Care Benefits segment.
Policyholders’ Funds
Policyholders’ funds consist primarily of reserves for pension and annuity investment contracts and customer funds associated with certain health contracts.
Reserves for such contracts are equal to cumulative deposits less withdrawals and charges plus interest credited thereon, net of experience-rated adjustments. In
2020, interest rates for pension and annuity investment contracts ranged from 4.1% to 5.1%. In 2019, interest rates for pension and annuity investment contracts
ranged from 3.5% to 5.2%. Reserves for contracts subject to experience rating reflect the Company’s rights as well as the rights of policyholders and plan
participants. The Company also holds funds for health savings accounts (“HSAs”) on behalf of members associated with high deductible health plans. These
amounts are held to pay for qualified health care expenses incurred by these members. The HSA balances were approximately $2.7 billion and $2.2 billion at
December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are reflected in other current assets with a corresponding liability in policyholders’ funds.
Policyholders’ funds liabilities that are expected to be paid within twelve months from the balance sheet date are classified as current on the consolidated balance
sheets. Policyholders’ funds liabilities that are expected to be paid greater than twelve months from the balance sheet date are included in other long-term liabilities
on the consolidated balance sheets.
Self-Insurance Liabilities
The Company is self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, workers’ compensation and auto liability. The Company obtains third party insurance
coverage to limit exposure from these claims. The Company is also self-insured for certain losses related to health and medical liabilities. The Company’s self-
insurance accruals, which include reported claims and claims incurred but not reported, are calculated using standard insurance industry actuarial assumptions and
the Company’s historical claims experience. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, self-insurance liabilities totaled $927 million and $856 million, respectively, and
were recorded as accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
For non-U.S. dollar functional currency locations, (i) assets and liabilities are translated at end-of-period exchange rates, (ii) revenues and expenses are translated at
average exchange rates in effect during the period and (iii) equity is translated at historical exchange rates. The resulting cumulative translation adjustments are
included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
For U.S. dollar functional currency locations, foreign currency assets and liabilities are remeasured into U.S. dollars at end-of-period exchange rates, except for
nonmonetary balance sheet accounts which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Revenues and expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect
during each period, except for those expenses related to the nonmonetary balance sheet amounts which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Gains or losses
from foreign currency remeasurement are included in net income (loss).
Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and the effects of foreign currency remeasurements were not material in the years ended December 31, 2020 or
2018. On July 1, 2019, the Company sold its Brazilian subsidiary, Drogaria Onofre Ltda. (“Onofre”) for an immaterial amount. The Company recorded a loss on
the divestiture, which included the elimination of the subsidiary’s $154 million cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income
during the year ended December 31, 2019.
116

Revenue Recognition
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail
pharmacy network. The Company’s pharmacy benefit arrangements are accounted for in a manner consistent with a master supply arrangement as there are no
contractual minimum volumes and each prescription is considered a separate purchasing decision and distinct performance obligation transferred at a point in time.
PBM services performed in connection with each prescription claim are considered part of a single performance obligation which culminates in the dispensing of
prescription drugs.
The Company recognizes revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with its clients when the Company has concluded it controls the
prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. The Company controls prescriptions dispensed indirectly through its retail pharmacy network
because it has separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, has discretion in setting the price for the transaction and assumes primary responsibility
for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to its client plan members while also performing the related PBM services.
Revenues include (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Company, net of any discounts earned on brand name drugs or other discounts and
refunds paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” and “Guarantees” below), (ii) the price paid to the Company by client plan members for mail order
prescriptions and the price paid to retail network pharmacies by client plan members for retail prescriptions (“retail co-payments”), and (iii) claims based
administrative fees for retail pharmacy network contracts. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the prescription drugs is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company
expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those prescription drugs. The Company has established the following revenue recognition policies for the
Pharmacy Services segment:
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by mail service dispensing pharmacies are recognized when the prescription drug is delivered to the client
plan member. At the time of delivery, the Company has performed substantially all of its performance obligations under its client contracts and does not
experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Company’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are
recognized at the Company’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Company’s online claims processing system and the Company has
transferred control of the prescription drug and performed all of its performance obligations.
For contracts under which the Company acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client plan member, revenue is recognized
using the net method.
Drug Discounts
The Company records revenue net of manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients based on their plan members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. The
Company estimates these rebates at period-end based on actual and estimated claims data and its estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients. The
estimates are based on the best available data at period-end and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates due to the client. The
Company adjusts its rebates payable to clients to the actual amounts paid when these rebates are paid or as significant events occur. Any cumulative effect of these
adjustments is recorded against revenues at the time it is identified. Adjustments generally result from contract changes with clients or manufacturers that have
retroactive rebate adjustments, differences between the estimated and actual product mix subject to rebates, or whether the brand name drug was included in the
applicable formulary. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual manufacturers’ rebate amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating
results or financial condition.
Guarantees
The Company also adjusts revenues for refunds owed to clients resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined service and performance
metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual pricing
and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
117

Retail/LTC Segment
Retail Pharmacy
The Company’s retail drugstores recognize revenue at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. For pharmacy sales, each prescription claim is its
own arrangement with the customer and is a performance obligation, separate and distinct from other prescription claims under other retail network arrangements.
Revenues are adjusted for refunds owed to third party payers resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined value-based service and
performance metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and
actual pricing and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Revenue from Company gift cards purchased by customers is deferred as a contract liability until goods or services are transferred. Any amounts not expected to be
redeemed by customers (i.e., breakage) are recognized based on historical redemption patterns.
Customer returns are not material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
Loyalty and Other Programs
The Company’s customer loyalty program, ExtraCare , consists of two components, ExtraSavings
 and ExtraBucks  Rewards. ExtraSavings are coupons that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue when redeemed as the Company concluded that they do not represent a promise to the customer to deliver additional goods or
services at the time of issuance because they are not tied to a specific transaction or spending level.
ExtraBucks Rewards are accumulated by customers based on their historical spending levels. Thus, the Company has determined that there is an additional
performance obligation to those customers at the time of the initial transaction. The Company allocates the transaction price to the initial transaction and the
ExtraBucks Rewards transaction based upon the relative standalone selling price, which considers historical redemption patterns for the rewards. Revenue allocated
to ExtraBucks Rewards is recognized as those rewards are redeemed. At the end of each period, unredeemed ExtraBucks Rewards are reflected as a contract
liability.
The Company also offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass , under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course
of the subscription period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. Subscriptions are paid for on a monthly or annual
basis at the time of or in advance of the Company delivering the goods and services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as the performance
obligations are satisfied.
Long-term Care
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects
to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Each prescription claim represents a separate performance obligation of the Company, separate
and distinct from other prescription claims under customer arrangements. A significant portion of Long-term Care revenue from sales of pharmaceutical and
medical products is reimbursed by the federal Medicare Part D program and, to a lesser extent, state Medicaid programs. The Company monitors its revenues and
receivables from these reimbursement sources, as well as long-term care facilities and other third party insurance payors, and reduces revenue at the revenue
recognition date to properly account for the variable consideration due to anticipated differences between billed and reimbursed amounts. Accordingly, the total
revenues and receivables reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements are recorded at the amount expected to be ultimately received from these
payors.
Patient co-payments associated with Medicare Part D, certain state Medicaid programs, Medicare Part B and certain third party payors typically are not collected at
the time products are delivered or services are rendered, but are billed to the individuals as part of normal billing procedures and subject to normal accounts
receivable collections procedures.
Walk-In Medical Clinics
For services provided by the Company’s walk-in medical clinics, revenue recognition occurs for completed services provided to patients, with adjustments taken
for third party payor contractual obligations and patient direct bill historical collection rates.
Health Care Benefits Segment
Health Care Benefits revenue is principally derived from insurance premiums and fees billed to customers. Revenue is recognized based on customer billings,
which reflect contracted rates per employee and the number of covered employees
®
TM
®
®
118

recorded in the Company’s records at the time the billings are prepared. Billings are generally sent monthly for coverage during the following month.
The Company’s billings may be subsequently adjusted to reflect enrollment changes due to member terminations or other factors. These adjustments are known as
retroactivity adjustments. In each period, the Company estimates the amount of future retroactivity and adjusts the recorded revenue accordingly. As information
regarding actual retroactivity amounts becomes known, the Company refines its estimates and records any required adjustments to revenues in the period in which
they arise.
Premium Revenue
Premiums are recognized as revenue in the month in which the enrollee is entitled to receive health care services. Premiums are reported net of an allowance for
estimated terminations and uncollectible amounts. Additionally, premium revenue subject to the minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rebate requirements of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (as amended, collectively, the “ACA”) is recorded net of
the estimated minimum MLR rebates for the current calendar year. Premiums related to unexpired contractual coverage periods (unearned premiums) are reported
as other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue when earned.
Some of the Company’s contracts allow for premiums to be adjusted to reflect actual experience or the relative health status of Insured members. Such adjustments
are reasonably estimable at the outset of the contract, and adjustments to those estimates are made based on actual experience of the customer emerging under the
contract and the terms of the underlying contract.
Services Revenue
Services revenue relates to contracts that can include various combinations of services or series of services which generally are capable of being distinct and
accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Health Care Benefits segment’s services revenue primarily consists of ASC fees received in exchange for
performing certain claim processing and member services for ASC members. ASC fee revenue is recognized over the period the service is provided. Some of the
Company’s administrative services contracts include guarantees with respect to certain functions, such as customer service response time, claim processing
accuracy and claim processing turnaround time, as well as certain guarantees that a plan sponsor’s benefit claim experience will fall within a certain range. With
any of these guarantees, the Company is financially at risk if the conditions of the arrangements are not met, although the maximum amount at risk typically is
limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company by the customer involved. Each period the Company estimates its obligations under the terms
of these guarantees and records its estimate as an offset to services revenues.
Accounting for Medicare Part D
Revenues include insurance premiums earned by the Company’s PDPs, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements
with the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”). The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP
member, and can be subsidized by CMS in the case of low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially
recorded within other insurance liabilities and are then recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
Revenues also include a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design referred to as the risk corridor. The Company estimates variable consideration
in the form of amounts payable to, or receivable from, CMS under the risk corridor, and adjusts revenue based on calculations of additional subsidies to be received
from or owed to CMS at the end of the reporting year.
In addition to Medicare Part D premiums, the Company receives additional payments each month from CMS related to catastrophic reinsurance, low-income cost-
sharing subsidies and coverage gap benefits. If the subsidies received differ from the amounts earned from actual prescriptions transferred, the difference is
recorded in either accounts receivable, net or accrued expenses.
119

Disaggregation of Revenue
The following table disaggregates the Company’s revenue by major source in each segment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
2020
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
141,116 $
70,176 $
— $
— 
$
(40,003)
$
171,289 
Front Store
— 
19,655 
— 
— 
— 
19,655 
Premiums
— 
— 
69,301 
63 
— 
69,364 
Net investment income
— 
— 
483 
315 
— 
798 
Other
822 
1,367 
5,683 
48 
(320)
7,600 
Total
$
141,938 $
91,198 $
75,467 $
426 
$
(40,323)
$
268,706 
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network
$
85,045 
Mail choice 
56,071 
Other
822 
Total
$
141,938 
2019
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy 
$
140,896 $
66,442 $
— $
— 
$
(41,413)
$
165,925 
Front Store
— 
19,422 
— 
— 
— 
19,422 
Premiums
— 
— 
63,031 
91 
— 
63,122 
Net investment income
— 
— 
599 
412 
— 
1,011 
Other 
595 
744 
5,974 
9 
(26)
7,296 
Total
$
141,491 $
86,608 $
69,604 $
512 
$
(41,439)
$
256,776 
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network
$
88,755 
Mail choice 
52,141 
Other
595 
Total
$
141,491 
2018
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
134,216 $
64,179 $
164 $
— 
$
(33,714)
$
164,845 
Front Store
— 
19,055 
— 
— 
— 
19,055 
Premiums
— 
— 
8,180 
4 
— 
8,184 
Net investment income
— 
— 
58 
602 
— 
660 
Other
520 
755 
560 
— 
— 
1,835 
Total
$
134,736 $
83,989 $
8,962 $
606 
$
(33,714)
$
194,579 
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network
$
87,167 
Mail choice 
47,049 
Other
520 
Total
$
134,736 
 (1)
(2)
(3)
(3)
 (1)
(2)
 (1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
120

(1)
Pharmacy Services pharmacy network is defined as claims filled at retail and specialty retail pharmacies, including the Company’s retail pharmacies and LTC pharmacies, but excluding
Maintenance Choice  activity, which is included within the mail choice category. Maintenance Choice permits eligible client plan members to fill their maintenance prescriptions through
mail order delivery or at a CVS pharmacy retail store for the same price as mail order.
(2)
Pharmacy Services mail choice is defined as claims filled at a Pharmacy Services mail order facility, which includes specialty mail claims inclusive of Specialty Connect  claims picked up
at a retail pharmacy, as well as prescriptions filled at the Company’s retail pharmacies under the Maintenance Choiceprogram.
(3)
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current period presentation.
Contract Balances
Contract liabilities primarily represent the Company’s obligation to transfer additional goods or services to a customer for which the Company has received
consideration, and include ExtraBucks Rewards and unredeemed Company gift cards. The consideration received remains a contract liability until goods or
services have been provided to the customer. In addition, the Company recognizes breakage on Company gift cards based on historical redemption patterns.
The following table provides information about receivables and contract liabilities from contracts with customers as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Trade receivables (included in accounts receivable, net)
$
7,101 $
6,717 
Contract liabilities (included in accrued expenses)
71 
73 
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the contract liabilities balance includes increases related to customers’ earnings in ExtraBucks Rewards or
issuances of Company gift cards and decreases for revenues recognized during the period as a result of the redemption of ExtraBucks Rewards or Company gift
cards and breakage of Company gift cards. Below is a summary of such changes:
In millions
2020
2019
Contract liabilities, beginning of period
$
73 $
67 
Rewards earnings and gift card issuances
357 
365 
Redemption and breakage
(359)
(359)
Contract liabilities, end of period
$
71 $
73 
Cost of Products Sold
The Company accounts for cost of products sold as follows:
Pharmacy Services Segment
Cost of products sold includes: (i) the cost of prescription drugs sold during the reporting period directly through the Company’s mail service dispensing
pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail pharmacy network, (ii) shipping and handling costs, and (iii) the operating costs of the Company’s mail
service dispensing pharmacies and client service operations and related information technology support costs including depreciation and amortization. The cost of
prescription drugs sold component of cost of products sold includes: (i) the cost of the prescription drugs purchased from manufacturers or distributors and shipped
to members in clients’ benefit plans from the Company’s mail service dispensing pharmacies, net of any volume-related or other discounts (see “Vendor
Allowances and Purchase Discounts” below) and (ii) the cost of prescription drugs sold (including retail co-payments) through the Company’s retail pharmacy
network under contracts where the Company is the principal, net of any volume-related or other discounts.
Retail/LTC Segment
Cost of products sold includes: the cost of merchandise sold during the reporting period, including prescription drug costs, and the related purchasing costs,
warehousing and delivery costs (including depreciation and amortization) and actual and estimated inventory losses.
Vendor Allowances and Purchase Discounts
The Company accounts for vendor allowances and purchase discounts as follows:
®
®
 
 
121

Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers
and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of
the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase, (ii) a discount for the prompt payment of invoices or (iii) when products are purchased indirectly
from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy), a discount (or rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recognized when
prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of
adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts billed and collected has not been material to the Company’s operating results or
financial condition. The Company accounts for the effect of any such differences as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed.
The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its wholesaler contracts if it exceeds contractually defined purchase volumes. In addition,
the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees
are recorded as a reduction of cost of products sold.
Retail/LTC Segment
Vendor allowances received by the Retail/LTC segment reduce the carrying cost of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related
inventory is sold, unless they are specifically identified as a reimbursement of incremental costs for promotional programs and/or other services provided. Amounts
that are directly linked to advertising commitments are recognized as a reduction of advertising expense (included in operating expenses) when the related
advertising commitment is satisfied. Any amounts received in excess of the actual cost incurred also reduce the carrying cost of inventory. The total value of any
upfront payments received from vendors that are linked to purchase commitments is initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of
products sold over the life of the contract based upon purchase volume. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are not linked to
purchase commitments is also initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold on a straight-line basis over the life of the
related contract. The total amortization of these upfront payments was not material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements in any of the periods
presented.
Health Care Reform
Health Insurer Fee
Since January 1, 2014, the ACA has imposed an annual premium-based health insurer fee (“HIF”) for each calendar year, payable in September, which was not
deductible for tax purposes. The Company has been required to estimate a liability for the HIF at the beginning of the calendar year in which the fee was payable
with a corresponding deferred asset that was amortized ratably to operating expenses over the calendar year. The Company recorded the liability for the HIF in
accrued expenses and recorded the deferred asset in other current assets. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, operating expenses included $1.0 billion
and $157 million, respectively, related to the Company’s share of the HIF. There was no expense related to the HIF in 2019, since there was a one-year suspension
of the HIF for 2019. In December 2019, the HIF was repealed for calendar years after 2020.
Risk Adjustment
The ACA established a permanent risk adjustment program to transfer funds from qualified individual and small group insurance plans with below average risk
scores to plans with above average risk scores. Based on the risk of the Company’s qualified plan members relative to the average risk of members of other
qualified plans in comparable markets, as defined by the ACA, the Company estimates its ultimate risk adjustment receivable (recorded in accounts receivable) or
payable (recorded in accrued expenses) for the current calendar year and reflects the pro-rata year-to-date impact as an adjustment to premium revenue.
Risk Corridor
The ACA established a temporary risk corridor program, which expired at the end of 2016, for qualified individual and small group health insurance plans. Under
this program, health insurance companies were to make payments to, or receive payments from, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”)
based on their ratio of allowable costs to target costs (as defined by the ACA).
The Company filed a lawsuit in August 2019 to recover the $313 million it was owed under the ACA’s risk corridor program, which had been stayed pending the
Supreme Court decision. In April 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that health insurance companies may sue the federal government for amounts owed as
calculated under the ACA’s temporary risk corridor program.
122

In October 2020, the Company received the $313 million it was owed under the ACA’s risk corridor program. The Company recorded the risk corridor payment as
an increase to premium revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020. After considering offsetting items such as the ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements
and premium taxes, the Company recorded pre-tax income of $307 million and after-tax income of $223 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2019, the Company did not record any ACA risk corridor receivables because payment was uncertain.
Advertising Costs
Advertising costs, which are reduced by the portion funded by vendors, are expensed when the related advertising takes place. Net advertising costs, which are
included in operating expenses, were $461 million, $396 million and $364 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the
stock award (generally three to five years) using the straight-line method.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected
future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are
determined on the basis of the differences between the consolidated financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for
the year or years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in the tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in
income in the period that includes the enactment date of such change.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”) was enacted on December 22, 2017. Among numerous changes to existing tax laws, the TCJA permanently reduced the
federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018. The effects of changes in tax rates on deferred tax balances are required to be taken
into consideration in the period in which the changes are enacted, regardless of when they are effective. As a result of the reduction of the corporate income tax rate
under the TCJA, the Company estimated the revaluation of its net deferred tax liabilities and recorded a provisional income tax benefit of approximately
$1.5 billion for year ended December 31, 2017. In 2018, the Company completed its process of determining the TCJA’s final impact and recorded an additional
income tax benefit of $100 million.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that it believes these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, the
Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable
income, tax planning strategies, and the Company’s recent operating results. The Company establishes a valuation allowance when it does not consider it more
likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered.
The Company records uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process whereby (1) the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax
positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition
threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax
authority.
Interest and/or penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the income tax provision.
Measurement of Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Employee Benefit Plans
The Company sponsors defined benefit pension plans (“pension plans”) and other postretirement employee benefit plans (“OPEB plans”) for its employees and
retirees. The Company recognizes the funded status of its pension and OPEB plans on the consolidated balance sheets based on the year-end measurements of plan
assets and benefit obligations. When the fair value of plan assets are in excess of the plan benefit obligations, the amounts are reported in other current assets and
other assets. When the fair value of plan benefit obligations are in excess of plan assets, the amounts are reported in accrued expenses and other long-term
liabilities based on the amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits payable in the next twelve months included in the benefit obligation exceeds the fair
value of plan assets. The net periodic benefit cost (income) for the Company’s pension and OPEB plans do not contain a service cost component as these plans
have been frozen for an extended
123

period of time. Non-service cost components of pension and postretirement net periodic benefit cost (income) are included in other income in the consolidated
statements of operations.
Earnings (Loss) per Common Share
Earnings (loss) per share is computed using the two-class method. The Company calculates basic earnings (loss) per share based on the weighted average number
of common shares outstanding for the period. See Note 14 ‘‘Earnings (Loss) Per Share’’ for additional information.
Shares Held in Trust
The Company maintains grantor trusts, which held approximately one million shares of its common stock at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. These shares are
designated for use under various employee compensation plans. Since the Company holds these shares, they are excluded from the computation of basic and
diluted shares outstanding.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company has investments in (i) a generic pharmaceutical sourcing entity, (ii) certain hedge fund and private equity investments and (iii) certain real estate
partnerships that are considered VIEs. The Company does not have a future obligation to fund losses or debts on behalf of these investments; however, it may
voluntarily contribute funds. In evaluating whether the Company is the primary beneficiary of a VIE, the Company considers several factors, including whether the
Company has (a) the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses and the
right to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Variable Interest Entities - Primary Beneficiary
In 2014, the Company and Cardinal Health, Inc. (“Cardinal”) established Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (“Red Oak”), a generic pharmaceutical sourcing entity in which
the Company and Cardinal each own 50%. The Red Oak arrangement has an initial term of 10 years. Under this arrangement, the Company and Cardinal
contributed their sourcing and supply chain expertise to Red Oak and agreed to source and negotiate generic pharmaceutical supply contracts for both companies
through Red Oak; however, Red Oak does not own or hold inventory on behalf of either company. No physical assets (e.g., property and equipment) were
contributed to Red Oak by either company, and minimal funding was provided to capitalize Red Oak. The Company has determined that it is the primary
beneficiary of this VIE because it has the ability to direct the activities of Red Oak. Consequently, the Company consolidates Red Oak in its consolidated financial
statements within the Retail/LTC segment.
Cardinal is required to pay the Company 39 quarterly payments beginning in October 2014. As milestones are met, the quarterly payments increase. The Company
received from Cardinal $183 million during each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The payments reduce the Company’s carrying value of
inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related inventory is sold. Revenues associated with Red Oak expenses reimbursed by Cardinal for
the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, and amounts due to or due from Cardinal at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were immaterial.
Variable Interest Entities - Other Variable Interest Holder
The Company has invested in certain VIEs for which it has determined that it is not the primary beneficiary, consisting of the following:
•
Hedge fund and private equity investments - The Company invests in hedge fund and private equity investments in order to generate investment returns for its
investment portfolio supporting its insurance businesses.
•
Real estate partnerships - The Company invests in various real estate partnerships, including those that construct, own and manage low-income housing
developments. For the low income housing development investments, substantially all of the projected benefits to the Company are from tax credits and other
tax benefits.
The Company is not the primary beneficiary of these VIEs because the nature of the Company’s involvement with the activities of these VIEs does not give the
Company the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact their economic performance. The Company records the amount of its investment in these
VIEs as long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets and recognizes its share of each VIE’s income or losses in net income (loss). The Company’s
maximum exposure to loss from these VIEs is limited to its investment balances as disclosed below and the risk of recapture of previously recognized tax credits
related to the real estate partnerships, which the Company does not consider significant.
124

The total amount of other variable interest holder VIE assets included in long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019
was as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
Hedge fund investments
$
342 $
271 
Private equity investments
547 
538 
Real estate partnerships
200 
212 
Total
$
1,089 $
1,021 
Related Party Transactions
The Company has an equity method investment in SureScripts, LLC (“SureScripts”), which operates a clinical health information network. The Company utilizes
this clinical health information network in providing services to its client plan members and retail customers. The Company expensed fees for the use of this
network of $56 million, $32 million and $45 million in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company’s investment in and equity
in the earnings of SureScripts for all periods presented is immaterial.
The Company has an equity method investment in Heartland Healthcare Services, LLC (“Heartland”). Heartland operates several LTC pharmacies in four states.
Heartland paid the Company $77 million, $96 million and $135 million for pharmaceutical inventory purchases during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019
and 2018, respectively. Additionally, the Company performs certain collection functions for Heartland and then transfers those customer cash collections to
Heartland. The Company’s investment in and equity in the earnings of Heartland for all periods presented is immaterial.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company made charitable contributions of $50 million and $30 million, respectively, to the CVS Health
Foundation, a non-profit entity that focuses on health, education and community involvement programs. The charitable contributions were recorded as operating
expenses in the consolidated statements of operations within the Corporate/Other segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Discontinued Operations
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company retained guarantees on store lease obligations for a number of
former subsidiaries, including Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores, each of which subsequently filed for bankruptcy. The Company’s loss from discontinued
operations includes lease-related costs that the Company believes it will likely be required to satisfy pursuant to these lease guarantees. See “Lease Guarantees” in
Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ for additional information.
Below is a summary of the results of discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In millions
2020
Loss from discontinued operations
$
(12)
Income tax benefit
3 
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$
(9)
Results from discontinued operations were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
New Accounting Pronouncements Recently Adopted
Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). This standard requires
the use of a forward-looking expected credit loss impairment model for trade and other receivables, held-to-maturity debt securities, loans and other instruments.
This standard also requires impairments and recoveries for available-for-sale debt securities to be recorded through an allowance account and revises certain
disclosure requirements. The Company adopted this new accounting standard on January 1, 2020. The Company adopted the credit loss impairment model on a
modified retrospective basis and recorded a $3 million cumulative effect adjustment to reduce retained earnings as of the adoption date. The Company adopted the
available-for-sale debt security impairment model on a prospective
125

basis. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated operating results, cash flows or financial condition.
Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement that is a Service Contract
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and other - Internal-Use Software (Topic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for
Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement that is a Service Contract. This standard requires a customer in a cloud computing arrangement
that is a service contract to follow the internal-use software guidance in Topic 350-40 to determine which implementation costs to capitalize as assets. The
Company adopted this new accounting guidance on January 1, 2020 on a prospective basis. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the
Company’s consolidated operating results, cash flows, financial condition or related disclosures.
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740). This standard simplifies the accounting for income
taxes by eliminating certain exceptions to the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740 related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation,
the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. The standard also
simplifies aspects of the accounting for franchise taxes and enacted changes in tax laws or rates and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up
in the tax basis of goodwill. The Company adopted this new accounting standard on January 1, 2021. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact
on the Company’s consolidated operating results, cash flows, financial condition or related disclosures.
Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Insurance Contracts
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-12, Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Contracts (Topic 944). This standard requires the
Company to review cash flow assumptions for its long-duration insurance contracts at least annually and recognize the effect of changes in future cash flow
assumptions in net income. This standard also requires the Company to update discount rate assumptions quarterly and recognize the effect of changes in these
assumptions in other comprehensive income. The rate used to discount the Company’s liability for future policy benefits will be based on an estimate of the yield
for an upper-medium grade fixed-income instrument with a duration profile matching that of the Company’s liabilities. In addition, this standard changes the
amortization method for deferred acquisition costs and requires additional disclosures regarding the long duration insurance contract liabilities in the Company’s
interim and annual financial statements. The standard is effective for public companies for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning
after December 15, 2022. The Company is currently evaluating the effect that implementation of this standard will have on the Company’s consolidated operating
results, cash flows, financial condition and related disclosures.
2.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
Acquisition of Aetna
On the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding shares and voting interests of Aetna for a combination of cash and stock. Under the
terms of the merger agreement, Aetna shareholders received $145.00 in cash and 0.8378 CVS Health shares for each Aetna share. The transaction valued Aetna at
approximately $212 per share or approximately $70 billion. Including the assumption of Aetna’s debt, the total value of the transaction was approximately $78
billion. The Company financed the cash portion of the purchase price through a combination of cash on hand and by issuing approximately $45 billion of new debt,
including senior notes and term loans. The Company acquired Aetna to help improve the consumer health care experience by combining Aetna’s health care
benefits products and services with CVS Health’s more than 9,900 retail locations, approximately 1,100 walk-in medical clinics and integrated pharmacy
capabilities with the goal of becoming the new, trusted front door to health care.
126

The transaction has been accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires, among other things, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed
to be recognized at their fair values at the date of acquisition. The following table summarizes the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the
date of acquisition:
In millions
Cash and cash equivalents
$
6,565 
Accounts receivable
4,094 
Other current assets
3,894 
Investments (current and long-term)
17,984 
Goodwill
47,755 
Intangible assets
22,571 
Other assets
8,249 
Total assets acquired
111,112 
Health care costs payable
5,302 
Other current liabilities
9,940 
Debt (current and long-term)
8,098 
Deferred income taxes
4,608 
Other long-term liabilities
13,078 
Total liabilities assumed
41,026 
Noncontrolling interests
320 
Total consideration transferred
$
69,766 
The Company’s assessment of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed was finalized during the fourth quarter of 2019. Measurement period
adjustments to assets acquired and liabilities assumed during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily were due to additional information received related to
certain intangible asset valuations and contingencies and the related impact on the accounting for income taxes and goodwill. There were no material income
statement measurement period adjustments recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The Company’s consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2018, included $5.6 billion of revenues and $146 million of income before income
tax provision associated with the operating results of Aetna from the Aetna Acquisition Date to December 31, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the
Company incurred transaction costs of $147 million associated with the Aetna Acquisition that were recorded within operating expenses.
Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Information
The following unaudited pro forma information presents a summary of the Company’s combined operating results for the year ended December 31, 2018 as if the
Aetna acquisition and the related financing transactions had occurred on January 1, 2018. The following pro forma financial information is not necessarily
indicative of the Company’s operating results as they would have been had the acquisition been effected on the assumed date, nor is it necessarily an indication of
trends in future results for a number of reasons, including differences between the assumptions used to prepare the pro forma financial information, basic shares
outstanding and dilutive equivalents, cost savings from operating efficiencies, potential synergies, and the impact of incremental costs incurred in integrating the
businesses.
In millions, except per share data
Year Ended December 31,
2018
Total revenues
$
243,232 
Income from continuing operations
1,152 
Basic earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
0.89 
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
0.88 
127

The pro forma results for the year ended December 31, 2018 include adjustments related to the following purchase accounting and acquisition-related items:
•
Elimination of intercompany transactions between CVS Health and Aetna;
•
Elimination of estimated foregone interest income associated with (i) cash assumed to have been used to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition and (ii)
adjusting the amortized cost of Aetna’s investment portfolio to fair value as of the completion of the Aetna Acquisition;
•
Elimination of historical intangible asset, deferred acquisition cost and capitalized software amortization expense and addition of amortization expense
based on the values of identified intangible assets;
•
Additional interest expense from (i) the long-term debt issued to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition and (ii) the amortization of the fair value adjustment
to assumed long-term debt.
•
Additional depreciation expense related to the adjustment of Aetna’s property and equipment to fair value;
•
Adjustments to align CVS Health’s and Aetna’s accounting policies;
•
Elimination of transaction related costs; and
•
Tax effects of the adjustments noted above.
Divestiture of Workers’ Compensation Business
On July 31, 2020, the Company sold its Workers’ Compensation business for approximately $850 million. The results of this business have historically been
reported within the Health Care Benefits segment. The Company recorded a pre-tax gain on the divestiture of $269 million in the year ended December 31, 2020,
which is reflected as a reduction in operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment.
Divestiture of Brazilian Subsidiary
On July 1, 2019, the Company sold its Brazilian subsidiary, Onofre, for an immaterial amount. Onofre operated 50 retail pharmacy stores, the results of which
historically had been reported within the Retail/LTC segment. The Company recorded a pre-tax loss on the divestiture of $205 million in the year ended December
31, 2019, which primarily relates to the elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income and is reflected in
operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
Divestiture of RxCrossroads Subsidiary
On January 2, 2018, the Company sold its RxCrossroads subsidiary, the results of which had historically been reported within the Retail/LTC segment, to
McKesson Corporation for $725 million. The Company recorded a pre-tax loss on the divestiture of $86 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 which was
reflected in operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
3.
Investments
Total investments at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
2020
2019
In millions
Current
Long-term
Total
Current
Long-term
Total
Debt securities available for sale
$
2,774 
$
18,414 $
21,188 $
2,251 
$
14,671 $
16,922 
Mortgage loans
226 
821 
1,047 
122 
1,091 
1,213 
Other investments
— 
1,577 
1,577 
— 
1,552 
1,552 
Total investments
$
3,000 
$
20,812 $
23,812 $
2,373 
$
17,314 $
19,687 
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company held investments of $524 million and $537 million, respectively, related to the 2012 conversion of an existing
group annuity contract from a participating to a non-participating contract. The conversion occurred prior to the Aetna Acquisition. These investments are included
in the total investments of large case pensions supporting non-experience-rated products. Although these investments are not accounted for as Separate Accounts
assets, they are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business and only support future policy benefits obligations under
that group annuity contract.
128

Debt Securities
Debt securities available for sale at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Amortized
Cost 
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
December 31, 2020
 
 
 
Debt securities:
 
 
 
U.S. government securities
$
2,341 
$
128 
$
— 
$
2,469 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
2,556 
172 
— 
2,728 
U.S. corporate securities
7,879 
1,023 
(8)
8,894 
Foreign securities
2,595 
324 
(1)
2,918 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
673 
32 
— 
705 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
962 
84 
— 
1,046 
Other asset-backed securities
2,369 
36 
(2)
2,403 
Redeemable preferred securities
21 
4 
— 
25 
Total debt securities 
$
19,396 
$
1,803 
$
(11)
$
21,188 
December 31, 2019
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
$
1,791 
$
62 
$
(1)
$
1,852 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
2,202 
108 
(1)
2,309 
U.S. corporate securities
7,167 
573 
(3)
7,737 
Foreign securities
2,149 
200 
(1)
2,348 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
508 
25 
— 
533 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
654 
46 
— 
700 
Other asset-backed securities
1,397 
13 
(5)
1,405 
Redeemable preferred securities
30 
8 
— 
38 
Total debt securities 
$
15,898 
$
1,035 
$
(11)
$
16,922 
(1)
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the available-for-sale debt security impairment model under ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments -Credit Losses (Topic 326). The new
impairment model requires the write down of amortized cost through an allowance for credit losses, rather than through a reduction of the amortized cost basis of the available-for-sale debt
security. There was no allowance for credit losses recorded on available-for-sale debt securities at December 31, 2020. As the Company adopted the new available-for-sale debt security
impairment model on a prospective basis, there was no allowance for credit losses recorded on available-for-sale debt securities at December 31, 2019.
(2)
Investment risks associated with the Company’s experience-rated products generally do not impact the Company’s consolidated operating results. At December 31, 2020, debt securities
with a fair value of $919 million, gross unrealized capital gains of $135 million and no gross unrealized capital losses and at December 31, 2019, debt securities with a fair value of $965
million, gross unrealized capital gains of $83 million and no gross unrealized capital losses were included in total debt securities, but support experience-rated products. Changes in net
unrealized capital gains (losses) on these securities are not reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income.
(1)
(2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
129

The amortized cost and fair value of debt securities at December 31, 2020 are shown below by contractual maturity.  Actual maturities may differ from contractual
maturities because securities may be restructured, called or prepaid, or the Company intends to sell a security prior to maturity.
In millions
 Amortized 
Cost
Fair 
Value
Due to mature:
 
Less than one year
$
1,276 
$
1,291 
One year through five years
6,346 
6,698 
After five years through ten years
3,748 
4,121 
Greater than ten years
4,022 
4,924 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
673 
705 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
962 
1,046 
Other asset-backed securities
2,369 
2,403 
Total
$
19,396 
$
21,188 
Mortgage-Backed and Other Asset-Backed Securities
All of the Company’s residential mortgage-backed securities at December 31, 2020 were issued by the Government National Mortgage Association, the Federal
National Mortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and carry agency guarantees and explicit or implicit guarantees by the U.S.
Government. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s residential mortgage-backed securities had an average credit quality rating of AAA and a weighted average
duration of 2.4 years.
The Company’s commercial mortgage-backed securities have underlying loans that are dispersed throughout the United States. Significant market observable
inputs used to value these securities include loss severity and probability of default. At December 31, 2020, these securities had an average credit quality rating of
AAA and a weighted average duration of 6.1 years.
The Company’s other asset-backed securities have a variety of underlying collateral (e.g., automobile loans, credit card receivables, home equity loans and
commercial loans). Significant market observable inputs used to value these securities include the unemployment rate, loss severity and probability of default. At
December 31, 2020, these securities had an average credit quality rating of AA and a weighted average duration of 1.1 years.
130

Summarized below are the debt securities the Company held at December 31, 2020 and 2019 that were in an unrealized capital loss position, aggregated by the
length of time the investments have been in that position:
Less than 12 months
Greater than 12 months
Total
In millions, except number of securities
Number 
of 
Securities
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Number 
of 
Securities
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Number 
of 
Securities
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
December 31, 2020
Debt securities:
 
 
U.S. government securities
32 
$
205 $
— 
— 
$
— $
— 
32 
$
205 $
— 
States, municipalities and political
subdivisions
49 
83 
— 
— 
— 
— 
49 
83 
— 
U.S. corporate securities
145 
155 
8 
2 
— 
— 
147 
155 
8 
Foreign securities
41 
69 
1 
5 
5 
— 
46 
74 
1 
Residential mortgage-backed
securities
23 
26 
— 
3 
— 
— 
26 
26 
— 
Commercial mortgage-backed
securities
22 
75 
— 
— 
— 
— 
22 
75 
— 
Other asset-backed securities
156 
256 
1 
49 
41 
1 
205 
297 
2 
Total debt securities
468 
$
869 $
10 
59 
$
46 $
1 
527 
$
915 $
11 
December 31, 2019
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
52 
$
168 $
1 
— 
$
— $
— 
52 
$
168 $
1 
States, municipalities and political
subdivisions
66 
115 
1 
2 
5 
— 
68 
120 
1 
U.S. corporate securities
181 
305 
2 
2 
— 
1 
183 
305 
3 
Foreign securities
39 
75 
1 
— 
— 
— 
39 
75 
1 
Residential mortgage-backed
securities
30 
16 
— 
9 
— 
— 
39 
16 
— 
Commercial mortgage-backed
securities
16 
49 
— 
— 
— 
— 
16 
49 
— 
Other asset-backed securities
138 
254 
1 
187 
182 
4 
325 
436 
5 
Total debt securities
522 
$
982 $
6 
200 
$
187 $
5 
722 
$
1,169 $
11 
The Company reviewed the securities in the table above and concluded that they are performing assets generating investment income to support the needs of the
Company’s business. In performing this review, the Company considered factors such as the quality of the investment security based on research performed by the
Company’s internal credit analysts and external rating agencies and the prospects of realizing the carrying value of the security based on the investment’s current
prospects for recovery. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not intend to sell these securities, and did not believe it was more likely than not that it would
be required to sell these securities prior to the anticipated recovery of their amortized cost basis.
131

The maturity dates for debt securities in an unrealized capital loss position at December 31, 2020 were as follows:
 
Supporting experience- 
rated products
Supporting remaining 
products
Total
In millions
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Due to mature:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less than one year
$
— 
$
— 
$
9 $
— 
$
9 $
— 
One year through five years
— 
— 
300 
4 
300 
4 
After five years through ten years
4 
— 
165 
4 
169 
4 
Greater than ten years
3 
— 
36 
1 
39 
1 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
— 
26 
— 
26 
— 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
2 
— 
73 
— 
75 
— 
Other asset-backed securities
5 
— 
292 
2 
297 
2 
Total
$
14 
$
— 
$
901 $
11 
$
915 $
11 
Mortgage Loans
The Company’s mortgage loans are collateralized by commercial real estate. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had the following
activity in its mortgage loan portfolio:
In millions
2020
2019
New mortgage loans
$
63 $
131 
Mortgage loans fully repaid
187 
234 
Mortgage loans foreclosed
— 
— 
The Company assesses mortgage loans on a regular basis for credit impairments, and assigns a credit quality indicator to each loan. The Company’s credit quality
indicator is internally developed and categorizes each loan in its portfolio on a scale from 1 to 7. These indicators are based upon several factors, including current
loan-to-value ratios, current and future property cash flow, property condition, market trends, creditworthiness of the borrower and deal structure.
•
Category 1 - Represents loans of superior quality.
•
Categories 2 to 4 - Represent loans where credit risk is minimal to acceptable; however, these loans may display some susceptibility to economic changes.
•
Categories 5 and 6 - Represent loans where credit risk is not substantial, but these loans warrant management’s close attention.
•
Category 7 - Represents loans where collections are potentially at risk; if necessary, an impairment is recorded.
132

Based upon the Company’s assessments at December 31, 2020 and 2019, the amortized cost basis of the Company’s mortgage loans within each credit quality
indicator by year of origination was as follows:
Amortized Cost Basis by Year of Origination
In millions, except credit quality indicator
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
Prior
Total
December 31, 2020
1
$
— $
— $
— $
22 $
— $
37 $
59 
2 to 4
46 
96 
91 
124 
101 
494 
952 
5 and 6
— 
— 
3 
4 
— 
29 
36 
7
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Total
$
46 $
96 $
94 $
150 $
101 $
560 $
1,047 
December 31, 2019
1
$
— $
— $
15 $
— $
43 $
58 
2 to 4
93 
93 
206 
140 
611 
1,143 
5 and 6
— 
— 
— 
— 
12 
12 
7
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Total
$
93 $
93 $
221 $
140 $
666 $
1,213 
At December 31, 2020 scheduled mortgage loan principal repayments were as follows:
In millions
2021
$
226 
2022
147 
2023
121 
2024
172 
2025
93 
Thereafter
288 
Total
$
1,047 
Net Investment Income
Sources of net investment income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Debt securities
$
598 $
589 $
61 
Mortgage loans
60 
71 
6 
Other investments
123 
194 
593 
Gross investment income
781 
854 
660 
Investment expenses
(35)
(42)
(3)
Net investment income (excluding net realized capital gains or losses)
746 
812 
657 
Net realized capital gains 
52 
199 
3 
Net investment income 
$
798 $
1,011 $
660 
(1)
Net realized capital gains are net of yield-related impairment losses on debt securities of $49 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no credit-related losses on debt
securities in the year ended December 31, 2020. Net realized capital gains are net of other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) losses on debt securities of $24 million for the year ended
December 31, 2019. There were no material OTTI losses on debt securities for the year ended December 31, 2018.
(2)
Net investment income includes $42 million, $44 million and $4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to investments supporting experience-
rated products.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
133

Capital gains and losses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to investments in equity securities held as of December 31, 2020 were not
material.
Excluding amounts related to experience-rated products, proceeds from the sale of available for sale debt securities and the related gross realized capital gains and
losses in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date in 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Proceeds from sales
$
3,913 $
4,773 $
389 
Gross realized capital gains
80 
146 
2 
Gross realized capital losses
62 
17 
2 
4.
Fair Value
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires certain assets and liabilities to be reflected at their fair
value and others to be reflected on another basis, such as an adjusted historical cost basis. In this note, the Company provides details on the fair value of financial
assets and liabilities and how it determines those fair values. The Company presents this information for those financial instruments that are measured at fair value
for which the change in fair value impacts net income (loss) attributable to CVS Health or other comprehensive income separately from other financial assets and
liabilities.
Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
Certain of the Company’s financial instruments are measured at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. The fair values of these instruments are based on
valuations that include inputs that can be classified within one of three levels of a hierarchy established by GAAP.  The following are the levels of the hierarchy
and a brief description of the type of valuation information (“valuation inputs”) that qualifies a financial asset or liability for each level:
•
Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
•
Level 2 – Valuation inputs other than Level 1 that are based on observable market data. These include: quoted prices for similar assets in active markets,
quoted prices for identical assets in inactive markets, valuation inputs that are observable that are not prices (such as interest rates and credit risks) and
valuation inputs that are derived from or corroborated by observable markets.
•
Level 3 – Developed from unobservable data, reflecting the Company’s assumptions.
Financial assets and liabilities are classified based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the valuation. When quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets and liabilities are available, the Company uses these quoted market prices to determine the fair value of financial assets and liabilities and classifies
these assets and liabilities in Level 1. In other cases where a quoted market price for identical assets and liabilities in an active market is either not available or not
observable, the Company estimates fair value using valuation methodologies based on available and observable market information or by using a matrix pricing
model. These financial assets and liabilities are classified in Level 2. If quoted market prices are not available, the Company determines fair value using broker
quotes or an internal analysis of each investment’s financial performance and cash flow projections. Thus, financial assets and liabilities may be classified in Level
3 even though there may be some significant inputs that may be observable.
The following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for the Company’s financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value, including the
general classification of such assets and liabilities pursuant to the valuation hierarchy.
Cash and Cash Equivalents – The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents approximates fair value as maturities are less than three months. When
quoted prices are available in an active market, cash equivalents are classified in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. Fair values of cash equivalent
instruments that do not trade on a regular basis in active markets are classified as Level 2.
Debt Securities – Where quoted prices are available in an active market, debt securities are classified in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. The
Company’s Level 1 debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Treasury securities.
134

The fair values of the Company’s Level 2 debt securities are obtained using models, such as matrix pricing, which use quoted market prices of debt
securities with similar characteristics or discounted cash flows to estimate fair value. The Company reviews these prices to ensure they are based on
observable market inputs that include quoted prices for similar assets in active markets, quoted prices for identical assets in inactive markets and inputs
that are observable that are not prices (such as interest rates and credit risks). The Company also reviews the methodologies and the assumptions used to
calculate prices from these observable inputs. On a quarterly basis, the Company selects a sample of its Level 2 debt securities’ prices and compares them
to prices provided by a secondary source. Variances over a specified threshold are identified and reviewed to confirm the price provided by the primary
source represents an appropriate estimate of fair value. In addition, the Company’s internal investment team consistently compares the prices obtained for
select Level 2 debt securities to the team’s own independent estimates of fair value for those securities. The Company obtained one price for each of its
Level 2 debt securities and did not adjust any of those prices at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The Company also values certain debt securities using Level 3 inputs. For Level 3 debt securities, fair values are determined by outside brokers or, in the
case of certain private placement securities, are priced internally. Outside brokers determine the value of these debt securities through a combination of
their knowledge of the current pricing environment and market flows. The Company did not have any broker quoted debt securities for the years ended
December 31, 2020 and 2019. For some private placement securities, the Company’s internal staff determines the value of these debt securities by
analyzing spreads of corporate and sector indices as well as interest spreads of comparable public bonds. Examples of these private placement Level 3
debt securities include certain U.S. and foreign securities and certain tax-exempt municipal securities.
Equity Securities – The Company currently has two classifications of equity securities: those that are publicly traded and those that are privately
placed. Publicly-traded equity securities are classified in Level 1 because quoted prices are available for these securities in an active market. For privately
placed equity securities, there is no active market; therefore, these securities are classified in Level 3 because the Company prices these securities through
an internal analysis of each investment’s financial statements and cash flow projections. Significant unobservable inputs consist of earnings and revenue
multiples, discount for lack of marketability and comparability adjustments. An increase or decrease in any of these unobservable inputs would have
resulted in a change in the fair value measurement.
135

There were no financial liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 or 2019. Financial assets
measured at fair value on a recurring basis on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2020
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
4,210 $
3,869 $
— 
$
8,079 
Debt securities:
 
 
 
 
U.S. government securities
2,370 
99 
— 
2,469 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
2,727 
1 
2,728 
U.S. corporate securities
— 
8,842 
52 
8,894 
Foreign securities
— 
2,918 
— 
2,918 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
705 
— 
705 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
1,046 
— 
1,046 
Other asset-backed securities
— 
2,403 
— 
2,403 
Redeemable preferred securities
— 
24 
1 
25 
Total debt securities
2,370 
18,764 
54 
21,188 
Equity securities
17 
— 
30 
47 
Total
$
6,597 $
22,633 $
84 
$
29,314 
December 31, 2019
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
3,397 $
2,286 $
— 
$
5,683 
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
1,785 
67 
— 
1,852 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
2,309 
— 
2,309 
U.S. corporate securities
— 
7,700 
37 
7,737 
Foreign securities
— 
2,348 
— 
2,348 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
533 
— 
533 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
700 
— 
700 
Other asset-backed securities
— 
1,405 
— 
1,405 
Redeemable preferred securities
— 
26 
12 
38 
Total debt securities
1,785 
15,088 
49 
16,922 
Equity securities
34 
— 
39 
73 
Total
$
5,216 $
17,374 $
88 
$
22,678 
136

The changes in the balances of Level 3 financial assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
In millions
States, 
municipalities 
and political 
subdivisions
U.S. 
corporate 
securities
Equity 
securities
Redeemable 
preferred 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
— 
$
37 
$
39 
$
12 
$
88 
Net realized and unrealized capital gains (losses):
Included in earnings 
— 
(11)
(3)
18 
4 
Included in other comprehensive income
— 
— 
— 
(5)
(5)
Purchases
— 
27 
3 
— 
30 
Sales
— 
— 
(9)
(24)
(33)
Settlements
— 
(1)
— 
— 
(1)
Transfers into Level 3, net
1 
— 
— 
— 
1 
Ending balance
$
1 
$
52 
$
30 
$
1 
$
84 
The change in unrealized capital losses included in other comprehensive income associated with Level 3 financial assets which were held as of December 31, 2020
was $4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The changes in the balances of Level 3 financial assets during the year ended December 31, 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Foreign 
securities
U.S. 
corporate 
securities
Equity 
securities
Redeemable 
preferred 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
3 
$
67 
$
54 
$
7 
$
131 
Net realized and unrealized capital gains (losses):
Included in earnings 
— 
(33)
13 
— 
(20)
Included in other comprehensive income
— 
18 
— 
5 
23 
Purchases
2 
3 
13 
— 
18 
Sales
— 
(6)
(41)
— 
(47)
Settlements
(1)
(12)
— 
— 
(13)
Transfers out of Level 3, net
(4)
— 
— 
— 
(4)
Ending balance
$
— 
$
37 
$
39 
$
12 
$
88 
The total gross transfers into (out of) Level 3 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
Gross transfers into Level 3
$
1 
$
— 
Gross transfers out of Level 3
— 
(4)
Net transfers out of Level 3
$
1 
$
(4)
137

Financial Instruments Not Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
The carrying value and estimated fair value classified by level of fair value hierarchy for financial instruments carried on the consolidated balance sheets at
adjusted cost or contract value at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Carrying 
Value
 Estimated Fair Value
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2020
Assets:
 
Mortgage loans
$
1,047 
$
— $
— 
$
1,070 $
1,070 
Equity securities 
145 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Liabilities:
Investment contract liabilities:
With a fixed maturity
5 
— 
— 
5 
5 
Without a fixed maturity
322 
— 
— 
371 
371 
Long-term debt
64,647 
75,940 
— 
— 
75,940 
December 31, 2019
Assets:
Mortgage loans
$
1,213 
$
— $
— 
$
1,239 $
1,239 
Equity securities 
149 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Liabilities:
Investment contract liabilities:
With a fixed maturity
5 
— 
— 
5 
5 
Without a fixed maturity
372 
— 
— 
392 
392 
Long-term debt
68,480 
74,306 
— 
— 
74,306 
(1)
It was not practical to estimate the fair value of these cost-method investments as it represents shares of unlisted companies. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional
information regarding the valuation of cost method investments.
Separate Accounts Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
Separate Accounts assets relate to the Company’s large case pensions products which represent funds maintained to meet specific objectives of contract
holders. Since contract holders bear the investment risk of these assets, a corresponding Separate Accounts liability has been established equal to the assets. These
assets and liabilities are carried at fair value. Net investment income and capital gains and losses on Separate Accounts assets accrue directly to such contract
holders. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims arising from the Company’s other businesses. Deposits, withdrawals, net
investment income and realized and unrealized capital gains and losses on Separate Accounts assets are not reflected in the consolidated statements of operations,
shareholders’ equity or cash flows.
Separate Accounts assets include debt and equity securities. The valuation methodologies used for these assets are similar to the methodologies described above in
this Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value.’’ Separate Accounts assets also include investments in common/collective trusts that are carried at fair value. Common/collective trusts
invest in other investment funds otherwise known as the underlying funds. The Separate Accounts’ interests in the common/collective trust funds are based on the
fair values of the investments of the underlying funds and therefore are classified in Level 2. The assets in the underlying funds primarily consist of equity
securities. Investments in common/collective trust funds are valued at their respective net asset value (“NAV”) per share/unit on the valuation date.
(1)
(1)
_____________________________________________
138

Separate Accounts financial assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2019
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
2 $
186 $
— 
$
188 $
2 $
143 $
— 
$
145 
Debt securities
1,465 
2,634 
— 
4,099 
1,224 
2,589 
— 
3,813 
Equity securities
— 
2 
— 
2 
— 
2 
— 
2 
Common/collective trusts
— 
563 
— 
563 
— 
499 
— 
499 
Total 
$
1,467 $
3,385 $
— 
$
4,852 $
1,226 $
3,233 $
— 
$
4,459 
(1)
Excludes $29 million of other receivables at December 31, 2020.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no gross transfers of Separate Accounts financial assets into or out of Level 3.
Offsetting Financial Assets and Liabilities
Certain financial assets and liabilities are offset in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets or are subject to master netting arrangements or similar agreements
with the applicable counterparty. Financial assets subject to offsetting and enforceable master netting arrangements were $2 million as of December 31, 2020.
Financial liabilities subject to offsetting and enforceable master netting arrangements were $3 million as of December 31, 2019.
5.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Goodwill
Below is a summary of the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Total
Balance at December 31, 2018
$
23,388 
$
10,806 $
44,484 $
78,678 
Segment realignment
194 
— 
(194)
— 
Purchase accounting adjustments
— 
— 
1,071 
1,071 
Other
(1)
1 
— 
— 
Balance at December 31, 2019
23,581 
10,807 
45,361 
79,749 
Acquisitions
34 
— 
274 
308 
Divestiture of Workers’ Compensation business
— 
— 
(505)
(505)
Balance at December 31, 2020
$
23,615 
$
10,807 $
45,130 $
79,552 
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in the carrying amount of goodwill was primarily driven by the divestiture of the Workers’ Compensation
business, partially offset by goodwill associated with immaterial acquisitions. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the increase in the carrying amount of
goodwill was primarily driven by purchase accounting adjustments associated with the Aetna Acquisition. See Note 2 ‘‘Acquisitions and Divestitures’’ for further
discussion regarding the Workers’ Compensation business divestiture and the Aetna Acquisition.
During 2019, the Company also realigned the composition of its segments to correspond with changes to its operating model and to reflect how the Chief Operating
Decision Maker (the “CODM”) reviews information and manages the business. As a result of this realignment, the Company reallocated the associated goodwill
balance to the Pharmacy Services and Health Care Benefits segments based on a relative fair value approach.
Goodwill Impairment
During the third quarter of both 2020 and 2019, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill. The results of these impairment tests
indicated that there was no impairment of goodwill. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, cumulative goodwill impairments were $6.1 billion.
(1)
_____________________________________________
139

The LTC reporting unit has experienced industry-wide challenges that have impacted management’s ability to grow the business at the rate that was originally
estimated when the Company acquired Omnicare, Inc. (“Omnicare”) in 2015. Those challenges include lower client retention rates, lower occupancy rates in
skilled nursing facilities, the deteriorating financial health of numerous skilled nursing facility customers which resulted in a number of customer bankruptcies in
2018, and continued facility reimbursement pressures.
Following the update of its current and long-term forecasts in June 2018, management determined that there were indicators that the LTC reporting unit’s goodwill
may be impaired and, accordingly, management performed an interim goodwill impairment test as of June 30, 2018. The results of that interim impairment test
showed that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than the carrying value, resulting in a $3.9 billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the second
quarter of 2018.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill and concluded there was no impairment of goodwill or
trade names.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, the LTC reporting unit missed its forecast primarily due to operational issues and customer liquidity issues, including one
significant customer bankruptcy. Additionally, LTC management submitted updated projected financial results which showed significant additional deterioration
primarily due to continued industry and operational challenges including lower occupancy rates in skilled nursing facilities, significant deterioration in the financial
health of numerous skilled nursing facility customers and continued facility reimbursement pressures. Based on these updated projections, management determined
that there were indicators that the LTC reporting unit’s goodwill may be further impaired and, accordingly, management performed an interim goodwill
impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2018. The results of that interim impairment test showed that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than
the carrying value, resulting in an additional $2.2 billion pre-tax goodwill impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining goodwill balance in the LTC reporting unit was $431 million.
Intangible Assets
The following table is a summary of the Company’s intangible assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions, except weighted average life
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Weighted 
Average 
Life (years)
2020
Trademarks (indefinite-lived)
$
10,498 
$
— 
$
10,498 
N/A
Customer contracts/relationships and covenants not to compete
24,952 
(8,923)
16,029 
14.9
Technology
1,060 
(739)
321 
3.0
Provider networks
4,203 
(440)
3,763 
20.0
Value of Business Acquired
590 
(119)
471 
20.0
Other
320 
(260)
60 
7.7
Total
$
41,623 
$
(10,481)
$
31,142 
15.2
2019
Trademarks (indefinite-lived)
$
10,498 
$
— 
$
10,498 
N/A
Customer contracts/relationships and covenants not to compete
25,447 
(8,128)
17,319 
14.8
Technology
1,060 
(386)
674 
3.0
Provider networks
4,200 
(229)
3,971 
20.0
Value of Business Acquired
590 
(63)
527 
20.0
Other
364 
(232)
132 
8.1
Total
$
42,159 
$
(9,038)
$
33,121 
15.1
140

Amortization expense for intangible assets totaled $2.3 billion, $2.4 billion and $1.0 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The projected annual amortization expense for the Company’s intangible assets for the next five years is as follows:
In millions
2021
$
2,249 
2022
1,842 
2023
1,812 
2024
1,770 
2025
1,718 
6.
Leases
The Company adopted ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASC 842”) on January 1, 2019 on a modified retrospective basis. As a result, the Company’s lease
disclosures as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are reported under ASC 842. Comparative financial information for the year ended
December 31, 2018 has not been restated and continues to be reported under ASC 840, the lease accounting standard in effect for that period.
Disclosure Subsequent to the Adoption of the New Lease Accounting Standard (ASU 2016-02)
The Company leases most of its retail stores and mail order facilities and certain distribution centers and corporate offices under operating or finance leases,
typically with initial terms of 15 to 25 years. The Company also leases certain equipment and other assets under operating or finance leases, typically with initial
terms of 3 to 10 years.
In addition, the Company leases pharmacy space at the stores of another retail chain for which the noncancelable contractual term of the pharmacy lease
arrangement exceeds the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings. For these pharmacy lease arrangements, the Company concluded that for accounting
purposes the lease term was the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings. Consequently, most of these individual pharmacy leases are finance leases.
The following table is a summary of the components of net lease cost for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Operating lease cost
$
2,670 $
2,720 
Finance lease cost:
Amortization of right-of-use assets
56 
38 
Interest on lease liabilities
58 
44 
Total finance lease costs
114 
82 
Short-term lease costs
22 
24 
Variable lease costs
599 
581 
Less: sublease income
55 
50 
Net lease cost
$
3,350 $
3,357 
Supplemental cash flow information related to leases for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows paid for operating leases
$
2,724 $
2,701 
Operating cash flows paid for interest portion of finance leases
58 
44 
Financing cash flows paid for principal portion of finance leases
34 
26 
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for lease obligations:
Operating leases
1,679 
1,824 
Finance leases
313 
283 
141

Supplemental balance sheet information related to leases as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
In millions, except remaining lease term and discount rate
2020
2019
Operating leases:
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$
20,729
$
20,860
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
$
1,638
$
1,596
Long-term operating lease liabilities
18,757
18,926
Total operating lease liabilities
$
20,395
$
20,522
Finance leases:
Property and equipment, gross
$
1,107
$
790
Accumulated depreciation
(106)
(38)
Property and equipment, net
$
1,001
$
752
Current portion of long-term debt
$
33
$
27
Long-term debt
1,050
781
Total finance lease liabilities
$
1,083
$
808
Weighted average remaining lease term (in years)
Operating leases
13.3
13.8
Finance leases
20.3
20.5
Weighted average discount rate
Operating leases
4.5 
%
4.6 
%
Finance leases
5.6 
%
6.7 
%
The following table summarizes the maturity of lease liabilities under finance and operating leases as of December 31, 2020:
In millions
Finance 
Leases
Operating 
Leases 
Total
2021
$
100 $
2,688 
$
2,788 
2022
98 
2,583 
2,681 
2023
96 
2,496 
2,592 
2024
95 
2,269 
2,364 
2025
95 
2,089 
2,184 
Thereafter
1,328 
15,017 
16,345 
Total lease payments 
1,812 
27,142 
28,954 
Less: imputed interest
(729)
(6,747)
(7,476)
Total lease liabilities
$
1,083 $
20,395 
$
21,478 
(1)
Future operating lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of $306 million due in the future under noncancelable subleases.
(2)
The Company leases pharmacy and clinic space from Target Corporation. Amounts related to such finance and operating leases are reflected above. Pharmacy lease amounts due in excess
of the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings of approximately $2.3 billion are not reflected in this table since the estimated economic life of the buildings is shorter than the
contractual term of the pharmacy lease arrangement.
Sale-Leaseback Transactions
The Company finances a portion of its store development program through sale-leaseback transactions. The properties are generally sold at net book value, which
generally approximates fair value, and the resulting leases generally qualify and are accounted for as operating leases. The operating leases that resulted from these
transactions are included in the tables above.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
142

The Company does not have any retained or contingent interests in the stores and does not provide any guarantees, other than a guarantee of lease payments, in
connection with the sale-leaseback transactions. Proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions totaled $101 million and $5 million in the years ended December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively. Gains from sale-leaseback transactions totaled $3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no material gains from
sale-leaseback transactions in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Store Rationalization Charges
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company performed a review of its retail stores and determined it would close 46 underperforming retail pharmacy stores
during the second quarter of 2019. As a result, management determined that there were indicators of impairment with respect to the impacted stores, including the
associated operating lease right-of-use assets. Accordingly, an interim long-lived asset impairment test was performed. The results of the impairment test indicated
that the fair value of each store asset group was lower than the carrying value. The fair value was determined using a discounted cash flow method based on
estimated sublease income. In the three months ended March 31, 2019, the Company recorded a store rationalization charge of $135 million, primarily related to
these operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges, which was recorded within operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment.
During the third quarter of 2019, in connection with its annual budgeting process, the Company performed an updated review of its retail stores and determined it
would close an additional 22 underperforming retail pharmacy stores during the first quarter of 2020. As a result, management determined that there were
indicators of impairment with respect to the impacted stores, including the associated operating lease right-of-use assets. Accordingly, an interim long-lived asset
impairment test was performed. The results of the impairment test indicated that the fair value of each store asset group was lower than the carrying value. The fair
value was determined using a discounted cash flow method based on estimated sublease income. In the three months ended September 30, 2019, the Company
recorded a store rationalization charge of $96 million, primarily related to these operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges, which was recorded within
operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment.
Comparative Disclosure Prior to the Adoption of the New Lease Accounting Standard (ASU 2016-02)
The following table is a summary of the Company’s net rental expense for operating leases for the year ended December 31, 2018:
In millions
2018
Minimum rentals
$
2,528 
Contingent rentals
28 
Rental expense
2,556 
Less: sublease income
(21)
Total rental expense, net
$
2,535 
143

7.
Health Care Costs Payable
The following is information about incurred and cumulative paid health care claims development as of December 31, 2020, net of reinsurance, and the total IBNR
liabilities plus expected development on reported claims included within the net incurred claims amounts. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for
information on how the Company estimates IBNR reserves and health care costs payable as well as changes to those methodologies, if any. The Company’s
estimate of IBNR liabilities is primarily based on trend and completion factors. Claim frequency is not used in the calculation of the Company’s liability. In
addition, it is impracticable to disclose claim frequency information for health care claims due to the Company’s inability to gather consistent claim frequency
information across its multiple claims processing systems. Any claim frequency count disclosure would not be comparable across the Company’s different claim
processing systems and would not be consistent from period to period based on the volume of claims processed through each system. As a result, health care claim
count frequency is not included in the disclosures below.
The information about incurred and paid health care claims development for the year ended December 31, 2019 is presented as required unaudited supplemental
information.
In millions
Incurred Health Care Claims, 
Net of Reinsurance 
For the Years Ended December 31,
Date of Service
2019
2020
(Unaudited)
2019
$
51,426 
$
51,056 
2020
54,529 
Total $
105,585 
In millions
Cumulative Paid Health Care Claims, 
Net of Reinsurance 
For the Years Ended December 31,
Date of Service
2019
2020
(Unaudited)
2019
$
44,987 
$
50,394 
2020
47,567 
Total $
97,961 
All outstanding liabilities for health care costs payable prior to 2019, net of reinsurance
144 
Total outstanding liabilities for health care costs payable, net of reinsurance $
7,768 
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s liabilities for IBNR plus expected development on reported claims totaled approximately $6.1 billion. Substantially all of
the Company’s liabilities for IBNR plus expected development on reported claims at December 31, 2020 related to the current calendar year.
The reconciliation of the December 31, 2020 health care net incurred and paid claims development tables to the health care costs payable liability on the
consolidated balance sheet is as follows:
In millions
December 31, 2020
Short-duration health care costs payable, net of reinsurance
$
7,768 
Reinsurance recoverables
10 
Premium deficiency reserve
11 
Insurance lines other than short duration
147 
Total health care costs payable
$
7,936 
144

Prior to the Aetna Acquisition on November 28, 2018, the Company’s health care costs payable balance was immaterial and related to unpaid pharmacy claims for
its SilverScript PDP. The following table shows the components of the change in health care costs payable during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Health care costs payable, beginning of period
$
6,879 $
6,147 $
5 
Less: Reinsurance recoverables
5 
4 
— 
Health care costs payable, beginning of period, net
6,874 
6,143 
5 
Acquisitions, net
414 
— 
5,357 
Reclassification from pharmacy claims and discounts payable 
— 
— 
776 
Add: Components of incurred health care costs
  Current year
55,835 
52,723 
6,594 
  Prior years
(429)
(524)
(42)
Total incurred health care costs 
55,406 
52,199 
6,552 
Less: Claims paid
  Current year
48,770 
46,158 
6,303 
  Prior years
6,009 
5,314 
260 
Total claims paid
54,779 
51,472 
6,563 
Add: Premium deficiency reserve
11 
4 
16 
Health care costs payable, end of period, net
7,926 
6,874 
6,143 
Add: Reinsurance recoverables
10 
5 
4 
Health care costs payable, end of period
$
7,936 $
6,879 $
6,147 
(1)
As of the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company reclassified $776 million of the Pharmacy Services segment’s unpaid retail pharmacy claims to third parties from pharmacy claims and
discounts payable to health care costs payable as the third party liability was incurred to support the Health Care Benefits segment’s insured members.
(2)
Total incurred health care costs for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 in the table above exclude (i) $11 million, $4 million and $16 million, respectively, for a premium
deficiency reserve related to the Company’s Medicaid products, (ii) $41 million, $41 million and $4 million, respectively, of benefit costs recorded in the Health Care Benefits segment that
are included in other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and (iii) $221 million, $285 million and $22 million, respectively, of benefit costs recorded in the
Corporate/Other segment that are included in other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company’s estimates of prior years’ health care costs payable decreased by $429 million and $524 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, because claims
were settled for amounts less than originally estimated (i.e., the amount of claims incurred was lower than originally estimated), primarily due to lower health care
cost trends as well as the actual claim submission time being faster than originally assumed (i.e., the Company’s completion factors were higher than originally
assumed) in estimating health care costs payable at the end of the prior year. This development does not directly correspond to an increase in the Company’s
operating results as these reductions were offset by estimated current period health care costs when the Company established the estimate of the current year health
care costs payable.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
145

8.
Borrowings and Credit Agreements
The following table is a summary of the Company’s borrowings as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Long-term debt
3.125% senior notes due March 2020
$
— 
$
723 
Floating rate notes due March 2020 (2.515% at December 31, 2019)
— 
277 
2.8% senior notes due July 2020
— 
2,750 
3.35% senior notes due March 2021
2,038 
2,038 
Floating rate notes due March 2021 (0.950% and 2.605% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively)
1,000 
1,000 
4.125% senior notes due May 2021
222 
222 
2.125% senior notes due June 2021
1,750 
1,750 
4.125% senior notes due June 2021
203 
203 
5.45% senior notes due June 2021
187 
187 
3.5% senior notes due July 2022
1,500 
1,500 
2.75% senior notes due November 2022
1,000 
1,000 
2.75% senior notes due December 2022
1,250 
1,250 
4.75% senior notes due December 2022
399 
399 
3.7% senior notes due March 2023
2,336 
6,000 
2.8% senior notes due June 2023
1,300 
1,300 
4% senior notes due December 2023
414 
1,250 
3.375% senior notes due August 2024
650 
650 
2.625% senior notes due August 2024
1,000 
1,000 
3.5% senior notes due November 2024
750 
750 
5% senior notes due December 2024
299 
299 
4.1% senior notes due March 2025
950 
5,000 
3.875% senior notes due July 2025
2,828 
2,828 
2.875% senior notes due June 2026
1,750 
1,750 
3% senior notes due August 2026
750 
750 
3.625% senior notes due April 2027
750 
— 
6.25% senior notes due June 2027
372 
372 
1.3% senior notes due August 2027
2,250 
— 
4.3% senior notes due March 2028
7,050 
9,000 
3.25% senior notes due August 2029
1,750 
1,750 
3.75% senior notes due April 2030
1,500 
— 
1.75% senior notes due August 2030
1,250 
— 
1.875% senior notes due February 2031
1,250 
— 
4.875% senior notes due July 2035
652 
652 
6.625% senior notes due June 2036
771 
771 
6.75% senior notes due December 2037
533 
533 
4.78% senior notes due March 2038
5,000 
5,000 
6.125% senior notes due September 2039
447 
447 
4.125% senior notes due April 2040
1,000 
— 
2.7% senior notes due August 2040
1,250 
— 
5.75% senior notes due May 2041
133 
133 
4.5% senior notes due May 2042
500 
500 
4.125% senior notes due November 2042
500 
500 
5.3% senior notes due December 2043
750 
750 
4.75% senior notes due March 2044
375 
375 
5.125% senior notes due July 2045
3,500 
3,500 
3.875% senior notes due August 2047
1,000 
1,000 
5.05% senior notes due March 2048
8,000 
8,000 
4.25% senior notes due April 2050
750 
— 
Finance lease liabilities
1,083 
808 
Other
326 
279 
Total debt principal
65,318 
69,246 
Debt premiums
238 
262 
Debt discounts and deferred financing costs
(909)
(1,028)
64,647 
68,480 
Less:
Current portion of long-term debt
(5,440)
(3,781)
Long-term debt
$
59,207 
$
64,699 
146

The following is a summary of the Company’s required repayments of debt principal due during each of the next five years and thereafter, as of December 31,
2020:
In millions
2021
$
5,405 
2022
4,154 
2023
4,055 
2024
2,706 
2025
3,785 
Thereafter
44,130 
Total
64,235 
Finance lease liabilities 
1,083 
Total debt principal
$
65,318 
(1)
See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for a summary of maturities of the Company’s finance lease liabilities.
Short-term Borrowings
Commercial Paper and Back-up Credit Facilities
The Company did not have any commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. In connection with its commercial paper program, the Company
maintains a $1.0 billion 364-day unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 12, 2021, a $1.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving
credit facility, which expires on May 18, 2022, a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 17, 2023 and a $2.0
billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 16, 2024. The credit facilities allow for borrowings at various rates that are
dependent, in part, on the Company’s public debt ratings and require the Company to pay a weighted average quarterly facility fee of approximately 0.03%,
regardless of usage. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding under any of the Company’s back-up credit facilities.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”)
Since the Aetna Acquisition Date, a subsidiary of the Company is a member of the FHLBB. As a member, the subsidiary has the ability to obtain cash advances,
subject to certain minimum collateral requirements. The maximum borrowing capacity available from the FHLBB as of December 31, 2020 was approximately
$925 million. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no outstanding advances from the FHLBB.
Long-term Borrowings
2020 Notes
On December 16, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027 and $1.25 billion
aggregate principal amount of 1.875% unsecured senior notes due February 28, 2031 for total proceeds of approximately $1.99 billion, net of discounts and
underwriting fees. The $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes represent a further issuance of the Company’s 1.3% unsecured
senior notes due August 21, 2027 initially issued in an aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion on August 21, 2020.
On August 21, 2020, the Company issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027, $1.25 billion aggregate
principal amount of 1.75% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2030 and $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.7% unsecured senior notes due August
21, 2040 (collectively, the “August 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.97 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
On March 31, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.625% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2027, $1.5 billion aggregate
principal amount of 3.75% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2030, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.125% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2040
and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2050 (collectively, the “March 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of
approximately $3.95 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
The net proceeds of these offerings were used for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, as well as the repurchase
and/or repayment of indebtedness.
(1)
_____________________________________________
147

During March 2020, the Company entered into several interest rate swap transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were designated as cash flow
hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the anticipated issuance of the
March 2020 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the March 2020 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The Company paid a net
amount of $7 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $5 million in accumulated other comprehensive
income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the March 2020 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ for additional information.
2019 Notes
On August 15, 2019, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.625% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2024, $750 million aggregate
principal amount of 3% unsecured senior notes due August 15, 2026 and $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.25% unsecured senior notes due August 15,
2029 (collectively, the “2019 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.46 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees. The net proceeds of the 2019 Notes
were used to repay certain of the Company’s outstanding debt.
Beginning in July 2019, the Company entered into several interest rate swap and treasury lock transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were
designated as cash flow hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the
anticipated issuance of the 2019 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the 2019 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The
Company paid a net amount of $25 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $18 million in accumulated
other comprehensive income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the 2019 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ for
additional information.
Early Extinguishments of Debt
In December 2020, the Company purchased $4.5 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the
following: $113 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $1.4 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023, $1.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025 and
$2.0 billion of its 4.3% senior notes due 2028. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $619 million in excess of the
aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, wrote-off $45 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $10 million in fees,
for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of $674 million.
In August 2020, the Company purchased $6.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$723 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $2.3 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023 and $3.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025. In connection with
the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $706 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
purchased, wrote-off $47 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $13 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$766 million.
In August 2019, the Company purchased $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$1.3 billion of its 3.125% senior notes due 2020, $723 million of its floating rate notes due 2020, $328 million of its 4.125% senior notes due 2021, $297 million of
4.125% senior notes due 2021 issued by Aetna, $413 million of 5.45% senior notes due 2021 issued by Coventry Health Care, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Aetna, and $962 million of its 3.35% senior notes due 2021. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $76 million in
excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, incurred $8 million in fees and recognized a net gain of $5 million on the write-
off of net unamortized deferred financing premiums, for a net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s back-up revolving credit facilities, unsecured senior notes and unsecured floating rate notes contain customary restrictive financial and operating
covenants. These covenants do not include an acceleration of the Company’s debt maturities in the event of a downgrade in the Company’s credit ratings. The
Company does not believe the restrictions contained in these covenants materially affect its financial or operating flexibility. As of December 31, 2020, the
Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants.
148

9.
Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits
Defined Contribution Plans
As of December 31, 2020, the Company sponsors several active 401(k) savings plans that cover all employees who meet plan eligibility requirements.
The Company makes matching contributions consistent with the provisions of the respective plans. At the participant’s option, account balances, including the
Company’s matching contribution, can be invested among various investment options under each plan. The CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan offers the
Company’s common stock fund as an investment option. The Company also maintains nonqualified, unfunded deferred compensation plans for certain key
employees. The plans provide participants the opportunity to defer portions of their eligible compensation and for certain nonqualified plans, participants receive
matching contributions equivalent to what they could have received under the CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan absent certain restrictions and limitations under
the Internal Revenue Code. The Company’s contributions under its defined contribution plans were $520 million, $550 million and $334 million in the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company’s contributions for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 include contributions to the
Aetna 401(k) Plan subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date. On January 1, 2020, the Aetna 401(k) Plan was merged into the CVS Health Future Fund 401(k)
Plan.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. Aetna sponsors a tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan that was frozen in 2010. Aetna
also sponsors a nonqualified supplemental pension plan that was frozen in 2007. Aetna’s pension plan benefit obligations and the fair value of plan assets were
remeasured as of the Aetna Acquisition Date. The Company also sponsors several other defined benefit pension plans that are unfunded nonqualified supplemental
retirement plans.
Pension Benefit Obligation and Plan Assets
The following tables outline the change in pension benefit obligation and plan assets over the specified periods:
In millions
2020
2019
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation, beginning of year
$
6,239 $
5,841 
Interest cost
168 
225 
Actuarial loss
413 
530 
Benefit payments
(358)
(357)
Benefit obligation, end of year
6,462 
6,239 
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets, beginning of year
6,395 
5,663 
Actual return on plan assets
783 
1,064 
Employer contributions
25 
25 
Benefit payments
(358)
(357)
Fair value of plan assets, end of year
6,845 
6,395 
Funded status
$
383 $
156 
The change in the pension benefit obligation during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily driven by the change in the discount rate during
each respective period.
149

The assets (liabilities) recognized on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019 for the pension plans consisted of the following:
In millions
2020
2019
Non-current assets reflected in other assets
$
744 $
494 
Current liabilities reflected in accrued expenses
(76)
(25)
Non-current liabilities reflected in other long-term liabilities
(285)
(313)
Net assets
$
383 $
156 
Net Periodic Benefit Cost (Income)
The components of net periodic benefit cost (income) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are shown below:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Components of net periodic benefit cost (income):
Interest cost
$
168 $
225 $
25 
Expected return on plan assets
(388)
(357)
(33)
Amortization of net actuarial loss
2 
1 
2 
Net periodic benefit cost (income)
$
(218) $
(131) $
(6)
Pension Plan Assumptions
The Company uses a series of actuarial assumptions to determine its benefit obligation and net periodic benefit cost (income), the most significant of which include
discount rates and expected return on plan assets assumptions.
Discount Rates - The discount rate is determined using a yield curve as of the annual measurement date. The yield curve consists of a series of individual
discount rates, with each discount rate corresponding to a single point in time, based on high-quality bonds. Projected benefit payments are discounted to
the measurement date using the corresponding rate from the yield curve that is consistent with the maturity profile of the expected liability cash flows.
Expected Return on Plan Assets - The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by using the plan’s target allocation and return
expectations based on many factors including forecasted long-term capital market real returns and the inflationary outlook on a plan by plan basis. See
“Pension Plan Assets” below for additional details regarding the pension plan assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company also considers other assumptions including mortality, interest crediting rate, termination and retirement rates and cost of living adjustments.
The Company determined its benefit obligation based on the following weighted average assumptions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
2020
2019
Discount rate
2.5 %
3.2 %
The Company determined its net periodic benefit cost (income) based on the following weighted average assumptions for the years ended December 31, 2020,
2019 and 2018:
2020
2019
2018
Discount rate
2.9 %
4.0 %
4.0 %
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
6.3 %
6.5 %
6.6 %
150

Pension Plan Assets
Subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition Date, the Company’s pension plan assets primarily include debt and equity securities held in separate accounts,
common/collective trusts and real estate investments. The valuation methodologies used to value these debt and equity securities and common/collective trusts are
similar to the methodologies described in Note 4 “Fair Value.” Pension plan assets also include investments in other assets that are carried at fair value. The
following is a description of the valuation methodologies used to value real estate investments and these additional investments, including the general classification
pursuant to the fair value hierarchy.
Real Estate - Real estate investments are valued by independent third party appraisers. The appraisals comply with the Uniform Standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice, which include, among other things, the income, cost, and sales comparison approaches to estimating property value. Therefore, these
investments are classified in Level 3.
Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships - Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships are carried at fair value which is estimated using
the NAV per unit as reported by the administrator of the underlying investment fund as a practical expedient to fair value. Therefore, these investments
have been excluded from the fair value table below.
Pension plan assets with changes in fair value measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2020 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
118 $
81 $
— $
199 
Debt securities:
    U.S. government securities
575 
36 
— 
611 
    States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
170 
— 
170 
    U.S. corporate securities
— 
2,006 
— 
2,006 
    Foreign securities
— 
167 
— 
167 
    Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
287 
— 
287 
    Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
83 
— 
83 
    Other asset-backed securities
— 
133 
— 
133 
    Redeemable preferred securities
— 
5 
— 
5 
Total debt securities
575 
2,887 
— 
3,462 
Equity securities:
    U.S. domestic
1,046 
— 
— 
1,046 
    International
537 
— 
— 
537 
    Domestic real estate
15 
— 
— 
15 
Total equity securities
1,598 
— 
— 
1,598 
Other investments:
    Real estate
— 
— 
343 
343 
    Common/collective trusts 
— 
266 
— 
266 
    Derivatives
— 
(3)
— 
(3)
Total other investments
— 
263 
343 
606 
Total pension investments 
$
2,291 $
3,231 $
343 $
5,865 
(1)
The assets in the underlying funds of common/collective trusts consist of $84 million of equity securities and $182 million of debt securities.
(2)
Excludes $142 million of other receivables as well as $624 million of private equity limited partnership investments and $214 million of hedge fund limited partnership investments as
these amounts are measured at NAV per share or an equivalent and are not subject to leveling within the fair value hierarchy.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
151

Pension plan assets with changes in fair value measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2019 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
92 $
65 $
— $
157 
Debt securities:
    U.S. government securities
592 
31 
— 
623 
    States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
157 
— 
157 
    U.S. corporate securities
— 
1,849 
1 
1,850 
    Foreign securities
— 
178 
— 
178 
    Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
385 
— 
385 
    Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
89 
— 
89 
    Other asset-backed securities
— 
150 
— 
150 
    Redeemable preferred securities
— 
5 
— 
5 
Total debt securities
592 
2,844 
1 
3,437 
Equity securities:
    U.S. domestic
931 
1 
— 
932 
    International
481 
— 
— 
481 
    Domestic real estate
25 
— 
— 
25 
Total equity securities
1,437 
1 
— 
1,438 
Other investments:
    Real estate
— 
— 
353 
353 
    Common/collective trusts 
— 
288 
— 
288 
    Derivatives
— 
(2)
— 
(2)
Total other investments
— 
286 
353 
639 
Total pension investments 
$
2,121 $
3,196 $
354 $
5,671 
(1)
The assets in the underlying funds of common/collective trusts consist of $137 million of equity securities and $151 million of debt securities.
(2)
Excludes $540 million of private equity limited partnership investments and $184 million of hedge fund limited partnership investments as these amounts are measured at NAV per share or
an equivalent and are not subject to leveling within the fair value hierarchy.
The changes in the balance of Level 3 pension plan assets during 2020 were as follows:
2020
In millions
Real estate
U.S. corporate 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
353 $
1 
$
354 
Actual return on plan assets
(2)
— 
(2)
Purchases, sales and settlements
(8)
— 
(8)
Transfers out of Level 3
— 
(1)
(1)
Ending balance
$
343 $
— 
$
343 
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
152

The changes in the balance of Level 3 pension plan assets during 2019 were as follows:
2019
In millions
Real estate
U.S. corporate 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
425 $
5 
$
430 
Actual return on plan assets
5 
— 
5 
Purchases, sales and settlements
(77)
(5)
(82)
Transfers into Level 3
— 
1 
1 
Ending balance
$
353 $
1 
$
354 
The Company’s pension plan invests in a diversified mix of assets designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its future benefit obligations. The
risk of unexpected investment and actuarial outcomes is regularly evaluated. This evaluation is performed through forecasting and assessing ranges of investment
outcomes over short- and long-term horizons and by assessing the pension plan’s liability characteristics. Complementary investment styles and strategies are
utilized by professional investment management firms to further improve portfolio and operational risk characteristics. Public and private equity investments are
used primarily to increase overall plan returns. Real estate investments are viewed favorably for their diversification benefits and above-average dividend
generation. Fixed income investments provide diversification benefits and liability hedging attributes that are desirable, especially in falling interest rate
environments.
At December 31, 2020, target investment allocations for the Company’s pension plan were: 20% in equity securities, 68% in fixed income and debt securities, 6%
in real estate, 3% in private equity limited partnerships and 3% in hedge funds. Actual asset allocations may differ from target allocations due to tactical decisions
to overweight or underweight certain assets or as a result of normal fluctuations in asset values. Asset allocations are consistent with stated investment policies and,
as a general rule, periodically rebalanced back to target asset allocations. Asset allocations and investment performance are formally reviewed periodically
throughout the year by the pension plan’s Investment Subcommittee. Forecasting of asset and liability growth is performed at least annually.
Cash Flows
The Company generally contributes to its tax-qualified pension plan based on minimum funding requirements determined under applicable federal laws and
regulations. Employer contributions related to the nonqualified supplemental pension plans generally represent payments to retirees for current benefits. The
Company contributed $25 million, $25 million and $12 million to its pension plans during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. No contributions are required for the
tax-qualified pension plan in 2021. The Company expects to make an immaterial amount of contributions for all other pension plans in 2021. The Company
estimates the following future benefit payments, which are calculated using the same actuarial assumptions used to measure the pension benefit obligation as of
December 31, 2020:
In millions
2021
$
423 
2022
376 
2023
375 
2024
375 
2025
375 
2026-2030
1,807 
Multiemployer Pension Plans
The Company also contributes to a number of multiemployer pension plans under the terms of collective-bargaining agreements that cover its union-represented
employees. The risks of participating in these multiemployer plans are different from single-employer pension plans in the following respects: (i) assets contributed
to the multiemployer plan by one employer may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers, (ii) if a participating employer stops
contributing to the plan, the unfunded obligations of the plan may be borne by the remaining participating employers, and (iii) if the Company chooses to stop
participating in some of its multiemployer plans, the Company may be required to pay those plans an amount based on the underfunded status of the applicable
plan, which is referred to as a withdrawal liability.
153

None of the multiemployer pension plans in which the Company participates are individually significant to the Company. The Company’s contributions to
multiemployer pension plans were $19 million, $18 million and $18 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Other Postretirement Benefits
The Company provides postretirement health care and life insurance benefits to certain retirees who meet eligibility requirements. During 2018, the Company
acquired additional OPEB plans in connection with the Aetna Acquisition. The Company’s funding policy is generally to pay covered expenses as they are
incurred. For retiree medical plan accounting, the Company reviews external data and its own historical trends for health care costs to determine the health care
cost trend rates. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s other postretirement benefits had an accumulated postretirement benefit obligation of $226
million and $246 million, respectively. Net periodic benefit costs related to these other postretirement benefits were $12 million, $7 million and $2 million in 2020,
2019 and 2018, respectively.
The Company estimates the following future benefit payments, which are calculated using the same actuarial assumptions used to measure the accumulated other
postretirement benefit obligation as of December 31, 2020:
In millions
2021
$
13 
2022
13 
2023
13 
2024
13 
2025
13 
2026-2030
61 
Pursuant to various collective bargaining agreements, the Company also contributes to multiemployer health and welfare plans that cover certain union-represented
employees. The plans provide postretirement health care and life insurance benefits to certain employees who meet eligibility requirements. The Company’s
contributions to multiemployer health and welfare plans totaled $54 million, $57 million and $58 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
10.
Income Taxes
The income tax provision for continuing operations consisted of the following for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Current:
Federal
$
2,615 $
2,450 $
1,480 
State
518 
565 
499 
3,133 
3,015 
1,979 
Deferred:
Federal
(450)
(535)
22 
State
(114)
(114)
1 
(564)
(649)
23 
Total
$
2,569 $
2,366 $
2,002 
The TCJA was enacted on December 22, 2017. Among numerous changes to existing tax laws, the TCJA permanently reduced the federal corporate income tax
rate from 35% to 21% effective on January 1, 2018. The effects of changes in tax rates on deferred tax balances are required to be taken into consideration in the
period in which the changes are enacted, regardless of when they are effective. As a result of the reduction of the corporate income tax rate under the TCJA, the
Company estimated the revaluation of its net deferred tax liabilities and recorded a provisional income tax benefit of approximately $1.5 billion for
154

year ended December 31, 2017. In 2018, the Company completed its process of determining the TCJA’s final impact and recorded an additional income tax benefit
of $100 million.
The following table is a reconciliation of the statutory income tax rate to the Company’s effective income tax rate for continuing operations for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
2020
2019
2018
Statutory income tax rate
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
State income taxes, net of federal tax benefit
3.2 
4.0 
27.7 
Effect of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
— 
— 
(7.1)
Health insurer fee
2.2 
— 
2.2 
Goodwill impairments
— 
— 
89.5 
Basis difference upon disposition of subsidiary
(1.2)
— 
5.0 
Other
1.1 
1.3 
4.1 
Effective income tax rate
26.3 %
26.3 %
142.4 %
The following table is a summary of the components of the Company’s deferred income tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2020
2019
Deferred income tax assets:
Lease and rents
$
5,742 $
5,731 
Inventory
80 
23 
Employee benefits
238 
191 
Bad debts and other allowances
395 
294 
Retirement benefits
— 
47 
Net operating loss and capital loss carryforwards
568 
480 
Deferred income
43 
36 
Insurance reserves
489 
430 
Payroll tax deferral
173 
— 
Other
500 
451 
Valuation allowance
(454)
(374)
Total deferred income tax assets
7,774 
7,309 
Deferred income tax liabilities:
Retirement benefits
(29)
— 
Investments
(421)
(289)
Lease and rents
(5,368)
(5,464)
Depreciation and amortization
(8,750)
(8,850)
Total deferred income tax liabilities
(14,568)
(14,603)
Net deferred income tax liabilities
$
(6,794) $
(7,294)
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had net operating and capital loss carryovers of $568 million, which expire between 2021 and 2040. The Company
considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax
planning strategies and the Company’s recent operating results. The Company established a valuation allowance of $454 million because it does not consider it
more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will be recovered.
155

A reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of unrecognized tax benefits in 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Beginning balance
$
655 $
661 $
344 
Additions based on tax positions related to the current year
3 
4 
1 
Additions based on tax positions related to prior years
182 
115 
324 
Reductions for tax positions of prior years
(56)
(111)
(5)
Expiration of statutes of limitation
(2)
(7)
(2)
Settlements
(14)
(7)
(1)
Ending balance
$
768 $
655 $
661 
The increase in the balance of unrecognized tax benefits during 2018 was mainly due to the Aetna Acquisition.
The Company and most of its subsidiaries are subject to U.S. federal income tax as well as income tax of numerous state and local jurisdictions. The Company
participated in the Compliance Assurance Process through 2019, which is a program made available by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) to certain
qualifying large taxpayers, under which participants work collaboratively with the IRS to identify and resolve potential tax issues through open, cooperative and
transparent interaction prior to the annual filing of their federal income tax returns. The IRS has completed its examinations of the Company’s consolidated U.S.
federal income tax returns for tax years 2013 and 2018. The IRS has substantially completed its examinations of the Company’s consolidated U.S. federal income
tax returns for tax years 2014 through 2017 and 2019.
The Company and its subsidiaries are also currently under income tax examinations by a number of state and local tax authorities. As of December 31, 2020, no
examination has resulted in any proposed adjustments that would result in a material change to the Company’s operating results, financial condition or liquidity.
Substantially all material state and local income tax matters have been concluded for fiscal years through 2014. Certain state exams are likely to be concluded and
certain state statutes of limitations will lapse in 2021, but the change in the balance of the Company’s uncertain tax positions is projected to be immaterial. In
addition, it is reasonably possible that the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits could change within the next twelve months due to the anticipated conclusion of
various examinations with the IRS for various years. An estimate of the range of the possible change cannot be made at this time.
The Company records interest expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and penalties in the income tax provision. The Company accrued interest expense of
approximately $34 million, $49 million and $19 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company had approximately $121 million and $173 million
accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the Company’s effective income tax rate is approximately
$651 million, after considering the federal benefit of state income taxes.
11.
Stock Incentive Plans
The terms of the CVS Health 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan (“ICP”) provide for grants of annual incentive and long-term performance awards to executive
officers and other officers and employees of the Company or any subsidiary of the Company, as well as equity compensation to outside directors of CVS Health.
Payment of such annual incentive and long-term performance awards will be in cash, stock, other awards or other property, at the discretion of the Management
Planning and Development Committee (the “MP&D Committee”) of CVS Health’s Board of Directors (the “Board”). The ICP allows for a maximum of 58 million
shares of CVS Health common stock to be reserved and available for grants. As of December 31, 2020, there were approximately 38 million shares of CVS Health
common stock available for future grants under the ICP.
As of the Aetna Acquisition Date, approximately 22 million shares of Aetna common stock subject to awards outstanding under the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010
Stock Incentive Plan (“SIP”) were assumed by CVS Health. In addition, in accordance with the merger agreement, shares which were available for future issuance
under the SIP were converted into approximately 32 million shares of CVS Health common stock reserved and available for issuance pursuant to future awards.
Subsequent to the
156

expiration of the SIP on May 21, 2020, the ICP is the only compensation plan under which the Company grants stock options, restricted stock and other stock-
based awards to its employees.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the
stock award (generally three to five years) using the straight-line method. The following table is a summary of stock-based compensation for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Stock options and stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) 
$
71 $
76 $
70 
Restricted stock units and performance stock units 
329 
377 
210 
Total stock-based compensation
$
400 $
453 $
280 
(1)
Includes the ESPP.
(2)
Stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2018 includes $14 million and $27 million associated with accelerated vesting of SARs and restricted stock replacement
awards, respectively, issued to Aetna employees who were terminated subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition.
ESPP
The Company’s Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) provides for the purchase of up to 60 million shares of CVS Health common stock. Under the ESPP,
eligible employees may purchase common stock at the end of each six month offering period at a purchase price equal to 90% of the lower of the fair market value
on the first day or the last day of the offering period. During 2020, approximately 3 million shares of common stock were purchased under the provisions of the
ESPP at an average price of $53.85 per share. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 34 million shares of common stock were available for issuance under the
ESPP.
The fair value of stock-based compensation associated with the ESPP is estimated on the date of grant (the first day of the six month offering period) using the
Black-Scholes option pricing model.
The following table is a summary of the assumptions used to value the ESPP awards for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
2020
2019
2018
Dividend yield 
1.46 %
1.70 %
1.45 %
Expected volatility 
37.21 %
27.96 %
28.02 %
Risk-free interest rate 
0.81 %
2.27 %
1.87 %
Expected life (in years) 
0.5
0.5
0.5
Weighted-average grant date fair value
$
13.85 
$
10.51 
$
12.26 
(1)
The dividend yield is calculated based on semi-annual dividends paid and the fair market value of CVS Health stock at the grant date.
(2)
The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of CVS Health’s daily stock price over the previous six month period.
(3)
The risk-free interest rate is selected based on the Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected term of ESPP purchases (i.e., six months).
(4)
The expected life is based on the semi-annual purchase period.
Restricted Stock Units and Performance Stock Units
The Company’s restricted stock units and performance stock units are considered nonvested share awards and require no payment from the employee. The fair
value of the restricted stock units is based on the market price of CVS Health common stock on the grant date and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
vesting period. For each restricted stock unit granted, employees receive one share of common stock, net of taxes, at the end of the vesting period.
The Company’s performance stock units contain performance vesting conditions in addition to a service vesting condition. Vesting of the Company’s performance
stock units is dependent upon the degree to which the Company achieves its performance goals, which are generally set for a three-year performance period and are
approved at the time of grant by the MP&D Committee.
(1) (2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
157

The fair value of performance stock units granted with service and performance vesting conditions is based on the market price of CVS Health common stock on
the grant date and is recognized over the vesting period. Certain of the performance stock units also contain a market vesting condition based on the performance of
CVS Health common stock relative to a comparator group. The fair value of these performance stock units is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation as of the
grant date and is recognized over the vesting period.
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. All unvested Aetna performance stock unit and restricted stock unit awards as of the Aetna
Acquisition Date were converted into replacement CVS Health restricted stock awards.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $493 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to the Company’s restricted stock units and performance stock
units that are expected to vest. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.3 years. The total fair value of restricted stock units
vested during 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $229 million, $265 million and $262 million, respectively.
The following table is a summary of the restricted stock unit and performance stock unit activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
In thousands, except weighted average grant date fair value
Units
Weighted Average 
Grant Date 
Fair Value
Outstanding at beginning of year, nonvested
13,125 $
61.57 
Granted
6,849 $
58.38 
Vested
(3,793) $
60.40 
Forfeited
(1,357) $
59.10 
Outstanding at end of year, nonvested
14,824 $
58.12 
Stock Options and SARs
All stock option grants are awarded at fair value on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and
stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Stock options granted generally become exercisable over a four-
year period from the grant date. Stock options granted through 2018 generally expire seven years after the grant date. Stock options granted subsequent to 2018
generally expire ten years after the grant date.
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. All unvested Aetna SARs outstanding as of the Aetna Acquisition Date were converted
into replacement CVS Health SARs. The replacement SARs granted will be settled in CVS Health common stock, net of taxes, based on the appreciation of the
stock price on the exercise date over the market price on the date of grant. The fair value of SARs is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and
stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. SARs generally become exercisable over a three-year period from
the grant date. SARs generally expire ten years after the grant date.
The following table is a summary of stock option and SAR activity that occurred for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Cash received from stock options exercised (including ESPP)
$
264 $
210 $
242 
Payments for taxes for net share settlement of equity awards
88 
112 
97 
Intrinsic value of stock options and SARs exercised
24 
30 
79 
Fair value of stock options and SARs vested
252 
467 
324 
158

The fair value of each stock option and SAR is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model based on the following assumptions at the time of grant:
2020
2019
2018
Dividend yield 
3.42 %
3.68 %
2.76 %
Expected volatility 
25.22 %
21.76 %
21.27 %
Risk-free interest rate 
0.61 %
0.56 %
2.77 %
Expected life (in years) 
6.3
6.3
4.8
Weighted-average grant date fair value
$
8.78 
$
6.27 
$
24.55 
(1)
The dividend yield is based on annual dividends paid and the fair market value of CVS Health stock at the grant date.
(2)
The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of CVS Health’s daily stock price over a period equal to the expected life of each option or SAR grant after
adjustments for infrequent events such as stock splits.
(3)
The risk-free interest rate is selected based on yields from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected term of the options or SARs being valued.
(4)
The expected life represents the number of years the options or SARs are expected to be outstanding from grant date based on historical option or SAR holder exercise experience.
The increase in the weighted-average grant date fair value in 2018 was due to the issuance of the replacement SARs in connection with the Aetna Acquisition in the
year ended December 31, 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock options and SARs totaled $45 million, which the Company expects to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.8 years. After considering anticipated forfeitures, the Company expects approximately 10 million of the unvested
stock options and SARs to vest over the requisite service period.
The following table is a summary of the Company’s stock option and SAR activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
In thousands, except weighted average exercise price and remaining contractual term
Shares
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise 
 Price
Weighted 
Average 
Remaining 
Contractual 
Term
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value
Outstanding at beginning of year
23,902 $
69.98 
Granted
4,759 $
58.50 
Exercised
(2,601) $
52.95 
Forfeited
(1,164) $
57.61 
Expired
(941) $
83.34 
Outstanding at end of year
23,955 $
69.62 
4.86 $
185,487 
Exercisable at end of year
13,545 $
78.05 
2.79
78,289 
Vested at end of year and expected to vest in the future
23,448 $
69.87 
4.78
180,102 
12.
Shareholders’ Equity
Share Repurchases
The following share repurchase program has been authorized by the Board:
In billions
Authorization Date
Authorized
Remaining as of 
December 31, 2020
November 2, 2016 (“2016 Repurchase Program”)
$
15.0 
$
13.9 
The 2016 Repurchase Program permits the Company to effect repurchases from time to time through a combination of open market repurchases, privately
negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase transactions, and/or other derivative transactions. The 2016 Repurchase Program can be modified or
terminated by the Board at any time.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
159

During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock pursuant to the 2016 Repurchase
Program.
Dividends
The quarterly cash dividend declared by the Board was $0.50 per share in 2020 and 2019. CVS Health has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a
public company. Future dividend payments will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant
by the Board.
Regulatory Requirements
On November 28, 2018, the Company completed the Aetna Acquisition. Aetna’s insurance business operations are conducted through subsidiaries that principally
consist of HMOs and insurance companies. The Company’s HMO and insurance subsidiaries report their financial statements in accordance with accounting
practices prescribed by state regulatory authorities which may differ from GAAP. The combined statutory net income for the years ended and estimated combined
statutory and capital surplus at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 for the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Statutory net income 
$
3,667 $
2,842 
NM
Estimated statutory capital and surplus
13,238 
10,975 
10,084 
(1)
Statutory net income of the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries for the year ended December 31, 2018 (which includes Aetna and its subsidiaries from November 28, 2018 to
December 31, 2018) is not material (“NM”).
The Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries paid $3.1 billion of gross dividends to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition to general state law restrictions on payments of dividends and other distributions to stockholders applicable to all corporations, HMOs and insurance
companies are subject to further regulations that, among other things, may require those companies to maintain certain levels of equity and restrict the amount of
dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their equity holders. In addition, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company made certain
undertakings that require prior regulatory approval of dividends by certain of its HMOs and insurance companies. At December 31, 2020, these amounts were as
follows:
In millions
Estimated minimum statutory surplus required by regulators
$
5,395 
Investments on deposit with regulatory bodies
712 
Estimated maximum dividend distributions permitted in 2021 without prior regulatory approval
2,900 
Noncontrolling Interests
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, noncontrolling interests were $312 million and $306 million, respectively, primarily related to third party interests in the
Company’s operating entities. The noncontrolling entities’ share is included in total shareholders’ equity on the consolidated balance sheets.
(1)
_____________________________________________
160

13.
Other Comprehensive Income
Shareholders’ equity included the following activity in accumulated other comprehensive income in 2020, 2019 and 2018:
At December 31,
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Net unrealized investment gains:
Beginning of year balance
$
774 $
97 $
— 
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications ($497, $927 and $132 pretax)
415 
763 
97 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income ($31, $(105) and $1 pretax) 
25 
(86)
— 
Other comprehensive income
440 
677 
97 
End of year balance
1,214 
774 
97 
Foreign currency translation adjustments:
Beginning of year balance
4 
(158)
(129)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
3 
8 
(29)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
— 
154 
— 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
3 
162 
(29)
End of year balance
7 
4 
(158)
Net cash flow hedges:
Beginning of year balance
279 
312 
(15)
Adoption of new accounting standard 
— 
— 
(3)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications ($(7), $(25) and $465 pretax)
(5)
(18)
344 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) ($(35), $(20) and $(19) pretax) 
(26)
(15)
(14)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
(31)
(33)
330 
End of year balance
248 
279 
312 
Pension and other postretirement benefits:
Beginning of year balance
(38)
(149)
(21)
Adoption of new accounting standard 
— 
— 
(4)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications ($(30), $162 and $(178) pretax)
(22)
120 
(132)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss ($7, $(12) and $11 pretax) 
5 
(9)
8 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
(17)
111 
(124)
End of year balance
(55)
(38)
(149)
Total beginning of year accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
1,019 
102 
(165)
Adoption of new accounting standard 
— 
— 
(7)
Total other comprehensive income
395 
917 
274 
Total end of year accumulated other comprehensive income
$
1,414 $
1,019 $
102 
(1)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income for specifically identified debt securities are included in net investment income in the consolidated statements of
operations.
(2)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss represent the elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment associated with the sale of Onofre, which was sold on
July 1, 2019. The loss on the divestiture of Onofre is reflected in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
(3)
Reflects the adoption of ASU 2018-02, Income Statement Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220); Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income during the year ended December 31, 2018.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(3)
(5)
(3)
_____________________________________________
161

(4)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) for specifically identified cash flow hedges are included within interest expense in the consolidated statements
of operations. The Company expects to reclassify approximately $13 million, net of tax, in net gains associated with its cash flow hedges into net income within the next 12 months.
(5)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss for specifically identified pension and other postretirement benefits are included in other income in the consolidated
statements of operations.
14.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Earnings (loss) per share is computed using the two-class method. For periods in which the Company reports net income, diluted earnings per share is determined
by using the weighted average number of common and dilutive common equivalent shares outstanding during the period, unless the effect is antidilutive. SARs and
options to purchase 15 million and 17 million shares of common stock were outstanding, but were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share for
the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, because their exercise prices were greater than the average market price of the common shares and,
therefore, the effect would be antidilutive. For the same reason, options to purchase 13 million shares of common stock were outstanding, but were excluded from
the calculation of diluted earnings per share, for the year ended December 31, 2018. In addition, due to the loss from continuing operations attributable to CVS
Health in the year ended December 31, 2018, 3 million potentially dilutive common equivalent shares were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per
share, as the impact of these shares was antidilutive for that period.
The following is a reconciliation of basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions, except per share amounts
2020
2019
2018
Numerator for earnings (loss) per share calculation:
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
7,201 $
6,631 $
(596)
Income allocated to participating securities
— 
(5)
(3)
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
(13)
3 
2 
Income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
7,188 $
6,629 $
(597)
Denominator for earnings (loss) per share calculation:
Weighted average shares, basic
1,309 
1,301 
1,044 
Effect of dilutive securities
5 
4 
— 
Weighted average shares, diluted
1,314 
1,305 
1,044 
Earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations:
Basic
$
5.49 $
5.10 $
(0.57)
Diluted
$
5.47 $
5.08 $
(0.57)
15.
Reinsurance
The Company utilizes reinsurance agreements primarily to: (a) reduce required capital and (b) facilitate the acquisition or disposition of certain insurance contracts.
Ceded reinsurance agreements permit the Company to recover a portion of its losses from reinsurers, although they do not discharge the Company’s primary
liability as the direct insurer of the risks reinsured.
On November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plans to a subsidiary of WellCare Health Plans,
Inc. (“WellCare”), effective December 31, 2018. In connection with that sale, subsidiaries of WellCare and Aetna entered into reinsurance agreements under which
WellCare ceded to Aetna 100% of the insurance risk related to the divested standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plans for the 2019 PDP plan year.
In February 2021, the Company entered into two four-year reinsurance agreements with an unrelated reinsurer that allow it to reduce required capital and provide
collateralized excess of loss reinsurance coverage on a portion of the Health Care Benefits segment’s group Commercial Insured business.
162

Reinsurance recoverables (recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance sheets) at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
Reinsurer
Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company
$
2,364 $
3,085 
Lincoln Life & Annuity Company of New York
406 
413 
WellCare Health Plans
13 
355 
VOYA Retirement Insurance and Annuity Company
170 
175 
All Other
102 
103 
Total
$
3,055 $
4,131 
Direct, assumed and ceded premiums earned for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Direct
$
69,711 $
62,968 $
8,365 
Assumed
478 
2,108 
38 
Ceded
(825)
(1,954)
(219)
Net premiums
$
69,364 $
63,122 $
8,184 
The impact of reinsurance on benefit costs for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Direct
$
56,077 $
52,592 $
6,773 
Assumed
329 
1,562 
32 
Ceded
(727)
(1,625)
(211)
Net benefit costs
$
55,679 $
52,529 $
6,594 
There is not a material difference between premiums on a written basis versus an earned basis.
The Company also has various agreements with unrelated reinsurers that do not qualify for reinsurance accounting under GAAP, and consequently are accounted
for using deposit accounting. The Company entered into these contracts to reduce the risk of catastrophic loss which in turn reduces the Company’s capital and
surplus requirements. Total deposit assets and liabilities related to reinsurance agreements that do not qualify for reinsurance accounting under GAAP were not
material as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
16.
Commitments and Contingencies
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. We believe COVID-19’s impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition
primarily will be driven by the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and
consumer behavior and health care utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and impact of stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and local
governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are beyond our knowledge and control. As a result, the impact COVID-19 will have on our
businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material. COVID-19 also may result in legal
and regulatory proceedings, investigations and claims against us.
Guarantees
The Company has the following significant guarantee arrangements at December 31, 2020:
•
ASC Claim Funding Accounts - The Company has arrangements with certain banks for the processing of claim payments for its ASC customers. The banks
maintain accounts to fund claims of the Company’s ASC customers. The customer is
163

responsible for funding the amount paid by the bank each day. In these arrangements, the Company guarantees that the banks will not sustain losses if the
responsible ASC customer does not properly fund its account. The aggregate maximum exposure under these arrangements is generally limited to $250
million. The Company can limit its exposure to these guarantees by suspending the payment of claims for ASC customers that have not adequately funded the
amount paid by the bank.
•
Separate Accounts Assets - Certain Separate Accounts assets associated with the large case pensions business in the Corporate/Other segment represent funds
maintained as a contractual requirement to fund specific pension annuities that the Company has guaranteed. Minimum contractual obligations underlying the
guaranteed benefits in these Separate Accounts were approximately $1.4 billion at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting
Policies’’ for additional information on Separate Accounts. Contract holders assume all investment and mortality risk and are required to maintain Separate
Accounts balances at or above a specified level. The level of required funds is a function of the risk underlying the Separate Account’s investment strategy. If
contract holders do not maintain the required level of Separate Accounts assets to meet the annuity guarantees, the Company would establish an additional
liability. Contract holders’ balances in the Separate Accounts at December 31, 2020 exceeded the value of the guaranteed benefit obligation. As a result, the
Company was not required to maintain any additional liability for its related guarantees at December 31, 2020.
Lease Guarantees
Between 1995 and 1997, the Company sold or spun off a number of subsidiaries, including Bob’s Stores and Linens ‘n Things, each of which subsequently filed
for bankruptcy, and Marshalls. In many cases, when a former subsidiary leased a store, the Company provided a guarantee of the former subsidiary’s lease
obligations for the initial lease term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. When the
subsidiaries were disposed of and accounted for as discontinued operations, the Company’s guarantees remained in place, although each initial purchaser agreed to
indemnify the Company for any lease obligations the Company was required to satisfy. If any of the purchasers or any of the former subsidiaries fail to make the
required payments under a store lease, the Company could be required to satisfy those obligations, and any significant adverse impact of COVID-19 on such
purchasers and/or former subsidiaries increases the risk that the Company will be required to satisfy those obligations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company
guaranteed 76 such store leases (excluding the lease guarantees related to Linens ‘n Things, which have been recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance
sheets), with the maximum remaining lease term extending through 2030.
Guaranty Fund Assessments, Market Stabilization and Other Non-Voluntary Risk Sharing Pools
Under guaranty fund laws existing in all states, insurers doing business in those states can be assessed (in most states up to prescribed limits) for certain obligations
of insolvent insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. The life and health insurance guaranty associations in which the Company participates that
operate under these laws respond to insolvencies of long-term care insurers and life insurers as well as health insurers. The Company’s assessments generally are
based on a formula relating to the Company’s health care premiums in the state compared to the premiums of other insurers. Certain states allow assessments to be
recovered over time as offsets to premium taxes. Some states have similar laws relating to HMOs and/or other payors such as not-for-profit consumer-governed
health plans established under the ACA.
In 2009, the Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner placed long-term care insurer Penn Treaty Network America Insurance Company and one of its subsidiaries
(collectively, “Penn Treaty”) in rehabilitation, an intermediate action before insolvency, and subsequently petitioned a state court to convert the rehabilitation into a
liquidation. Penn Treaty was placed in liquidation in March 2017. The Company has recorded a liability for its estimated share of future assessments by applicable
life and health insurance guaranty associations. It is reasonably possible that in the future the Company may record a liability and expense relating to other
insolvencies which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results, financial condition and cash flows, and the risk is heightened by any
significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the solvency of other insurers, including long-term care and life insurers. While historically the
Company has ultimately recovered more than half of guaranty fund assessments through statutorily permitted premium tax offsets, significant increases in
assessments could lead to legislative and/or regulatory actions that limit future offsets.
HMOs in certain states in which the Company does business are subject to assessments, including market stabilization and other risk-sharing pools, for which the
Company is assessed charges based on incurred claims, demographic membership mix and other factors. The Company establishes liabilities for these assessments
based on applicable laws and regulations. In certain states, the ultimate assessments the Company pays are dependent upon the Company’s experience relative to
other entities subject to the assessment, and the ultimate liability is not known at the financial statement date. While the ultimate amount of
164

the assessment is dependent upon the experience of all pool participants, the Company believes it has adequate reserves to cover such assessments.
The Company’s total guaranty fund assessments liability was $78 million and $84 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and was recorded in
accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets.
Litigation and Regulatory Proceedings
The Company has been involved or is currently involved in numerous legal proceedings, including litigation, arbitration, government investigations, audits,
reviews and claims. These include routine, regular and special investigations, audits and reviews by CMS, state insurance and health and welfare departments, state
attorneys general, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (the “DEA”) and other governmental authorities.
Legal proceedings, in general, and securities, class action and multi-district litigation, in particular, and governmental special investigations, audits and reviews can
be expensive and disruptive. Some of the litigation matters may purport or be determined to be class actions and/or involve parties seeking large and/or
indeterminate amounts, including punitive or exemplary damages, and may remain unresolved for several years. The Company also may be named from time to
time in qui tam actions initiated by private third parties that could also be separately pursued by a governmental body. The results of legal proceedings, including
government investigations, are often uncertain and difficult to predict, and the costs incurred in these matters can be substantial, regardless of the outcome.
The Company records accruals for outstanding legal matters when it believes it is probable that a loss will be incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated.
The Company evaluates, on a quarterly basis, developments in legal matters that could affect the amount of any accrual and developments that would make a loss
contingency both probable and reasonably estimable. If a loss contingency is not both probable and reasonably estimable, the Company does not establish an
accrued liability. None of the Company’s accruals for outstanding legal matters are material individually or in the aggregate to the Company’s financial condition.
Except as otherwise noted, the Company cannot predict with certainty the timing or outcome of the legal matters described below, and the Company is unable to
reasonably estimate a possible loss or range of possible loss in excess of amounts already accrued for these matters. The Company believes that its defenses and
assertions in pending legal proceedings have merit and does not believe that any of these pending matters, after consideration of applicable reserves and rights to
indemnification, will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position. Substantial unanticipated verdicts, fines and rulings, however, do
sometimes occur, which could result in judgments against the Company, entry into settlements or a revision to its expectations regarding the outcome of certain
matters, and such developments could have a material adverse effect on its results of operations. In addition, as a result of governmental investigations or
proceedings, the Company may be subject to damages, civil or criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions including possible suspension or loss of licensure
and/or exclusion from participating in government programs. The outcome of such governmental investigations of proceedings could be material to the Company.
Usual and Customary Pricing Litigation
The Company and certain current and former directors and officers are named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits that allege that the Company’s retail
pharmacies overcharged for prescription drugs by not submitting the correct usual and customary price during the claims adjudication process. These actions are
brought by a number of different types of plaintiffs, including plan members, private payors, government payors, and shareholders based on different legal theories.
Some of these cases are brought as putative class actions, and in some instances, classes have been certified. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
PBM Litigation and Investigations
The Company is named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits and is subject to a number of investigations concerning its PBM practices.
The Company is facing multiple lawsuits, including several putative class actions, regarding drug pricing and its rebate arrangements with drug manufacturers.
These complaints, brought under a variety of legal theories, generally allege that rebate agreements between the drug manufacturers and PBMs caused inflated
prices for certain drug products. The Company is defending itself against these claims. The Company has also received subpoenas, civil investigative demands
(“CIDs”) and
165

other requests for documents and information from, and is being investigated by, Attorneys General of several states and the District of Columbia regarding its
PBM practices, including pricing and rebates. The Company has been providing documents and information in response to these subpoenas, CIDs and requests for
information.
United States ex rel. Behnke v. CVS Caremark Corporation, et al. (U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania). In April 2018, the Court unsealed a
complaint filed in February 2014. The government has declined to intervene in this case. The relator alleges that the Company submitted, or caused to be
submitted, to Part D of the Medicare program Prescription Drug Event data and/or Direct and Indirect Remuneration reports that misrepresented true prices paid by
the Company’s PBM to pharmacies for drugs dispensed to Part D beneficiaries with prescription benefits administered by the Company’s PBM. The Company is
defending itself against these claims.
Controlled Substances Litigation, Audits and Subpoenas
In December 2017, the U.S. Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation consolidated numerous cases filed against various defendants by plaintiffs such as counties,
cities, hospitals, Indian tribes and third-party payors, alleging claims generally concerning the impacts of widespread prescription opioid abuse. The consolidated
multidistrict litigation captioned In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
Ohio. This multidistrict litigation presumptively includes hundreds of relevant federal court cases that name the Company as a defendant. A significant number of
similar cases that name the Company as a defendant in some capacity are pending in state courts. In addition, the Company has been named as a defendant in
similar cases brought by certain state Attorneys General. The Company is defending itself against all such claims. Additionally, the Company has received
subpoenas, CIDs and/or other requests for information regarding opioids from state Attorneys General and insurance and other regulators of several U.S.
jurisdictions. The Company has been cooperating with the government with respect to these subpoenas, CIDs and other requests for information.
In January 2020, the U.S. Department of Justice (the “DOJ”) served the Company with a DEA administrative subpoena. The subpoena seeks documents relating to
practices with respect to prescription opioids and other controlled substances at CVS Pharmacy locations in connection with an investigation concerning potential
violations of the federal Controlled Substances Act and the federal False Claims Act. The Company has been cooperating with the government with respect to this
subpoena.
Prescription Processing Litigation and Investigations
U.S. ex rel. Bassan et al. v. Omnicare, Inc. and CVS Health Corp. and U.S. ex rel. Mohajer et al. v. Omnicare, Inc. and CVS Health Corp. (U.S. District Court for
the Southern District of New York). In December 2019, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York (the “SDNY”) filed complaints-in-
intervention in these two previously sealed qui tam cases. With respect to the Bassan complaint, all states and Washington, D.C. have declined to intervene at this
time. The government’s investigation related to these complaints included the previously disclosed CID that the Company received in October 2015 from the
SDNY concerning the Company’s Omnicare pharmacies’ cycle fill process for assisted living facilities. The complaints allege that for certain non-skilled nursing
facilities, Omnicare improperly filled prescriptions beyond one year where a valid prescription did not exist and that these dispensing events violated the federal
False Claims Act. The Mohajer relators have amended their complaint to include claims based on similar theories related to certain skilled nursing facilities. The
Company is defending itself against these claims.
In July 2017, the Company also received a subpoena from the California Department of Insurance requesting documents concerning the Company’s Omnicare
pharmacies’ cycle fill process for assisted living facilities. The Company has been cooperating with the California Department of Insurance and providing
documents and information in response to this subpoena..
In December 2016, the Company received a CID from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of New York requesting documents and information in
connection with a federal False Claims Act investigation concerning whether the Company’s retail pharmacies improperly submitted certain insulin claims to Part
D of the Medicare program rather than Part B of the Medicare program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and providing documents and
information in response to this CID.
Provider Proceedings
The Company is named as a defendant in purported class actions and individual lawsuits arising out of its practices related to the payment of claims for services
rendered to its members by providers with whom the Company has a contract and with
166

whom the Company does not have a contract (“out-of-network providers”). Among other things, these lawsuits allege that the Company paid too little to its health
plan members and/or providers for out-of-network services and/or otherwise allege that the Company failed to timely or appropriately pay or administer out-of-
network claims and benefits (including the Company’s post-payment audit and collection practices and reductions in payments to providers due to sequestration).
Other major health insurers are the subject of similar litigation or have settled similar litigation.
The Company also has received subpoenas and/or requests for documents and other information from, and been investigated by, state Attorneys General and other
state and/or federal regulators, legislators and agencies relating to, and the Company is involved in other litigation regarding, its out-of-network benefit payment
and administration practices. It is reasonably possible that others could initiate additional litigation or additional regulatory action against the Company with
respect to its out-of-network benefit payment and/or administration practices.
CMS Actions
CMS regularly audits the Company’s performance to determine its compliance with CMS’s regulations and its contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of
services it provides to Medicare beneficiaries. CMS uses various payment mechanisms to allocate and adjust premium payments to the Company’s and other
companies’ Medicare plans by considering the applicable health status of Medicare members as supported by information prepared, maintained and provided by
providers. The Company collects claim and encounter data from providers and generally relies on providers to appropriately code their submissions to the
Company and document their medical records, including the diagnosis data submitted to the Company with claims. CMS pays increased premiums to Medicare
Advantage plans and Medicare PDP plans for members who have certain medical conditions identified with specific diagnosis codes. Federal regulators review and
audit the providers’ medical records to determine whether those records support the related diagnosis codes that determine the members’ health status and the
resulting risk-adjusted premium payments to the Company. In that regard, CMS has instituted risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”) audits of various
Medicare Advantage plans, including certain of the Company’s plans, to validate coding practices and supporting medical record documentation maintained by
providers and the resulting risk adjusted premium payments to the plans. CMS may require the Company to refund premium payments if the Company’s risk
adjusted premiums are not properly supported by medical record data. The Office of the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(“HHS-OIG”) also is auditing the Company’s risk adjustment-related data and that of other companies. The Company expects CMS and the OIG to continue these
types of audits.
In 2012, CMS revised its audit methodology for RADV audits to determine refunds payable by Medicare Advantage plans for contract year 2011 and forward.
Under the revised methodology, among other things, CMS will extrapolate the error rate identified in the audit sample of approximately 200 members to all risk
adjusted premium payments made under the contract being audited. For contract years prior to 2011, CMS did not extrapolate sample error rates to the entire
contract. As a result, the revised methodology may increase the Company’s exposure to premium refunds to CMS based on incomplete medical records maintained
by providers. Since 2013, CMS has selected certain of the Company’s Medicare Advantage contracts for various contract years for RADV audit, and the number of
RADV audits continues to increase. The Company is currently unable to predict which of its Medicare Advantage contracts will be selected for future audit, the
amounts of any retroactive refunds of, or prospective adjustments to, Medicare Advantage premium payments made to the Company, the effect of any such refunds
or adjustments on the actuarial soundness of the Company’s Medicare Advantage bids, or whether any RADV audit findings would require the Company to change
its method of estimating future premium revenue in future bid submissions to CMS or compromise premium assumptions made in the Company’s bids for prior
contract years, the current contract year or future contract years. Any premium or fee refunds or adjustments resulting from regulatory audits, whether as a result of
RADV, Public Exchange-related or other audits by CMS, HHS-OIG or otherwise, including audits of the Company’s MLR rebates, methodology and/or reports,
could be material and could adversely affect the Company’s operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
Medicare and Medicaid CIDs
The Company has received CIDs from the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of the Company’s patient chart review processes in
connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D of the Medicare program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and
providing documents and information in response to these CIDs.
In May 2017, the Company received a CID from the SDNY requesting documents and information concerning possible false claims submitted to Medicare in
connection with reimbursements for prescription drugs under the Medicare Part D program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and
providing documents and information in response to this CID.
167

In April 2020, the Company received a CID from the Office of the Washington Attorney General, Medicaid Fraud Control Division, on behalf of the State of
Washington and all other states, as well as the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The investigation involves, among other things,
possible retention of overpayments and possible submission of false claims for Medicaid reimbursement relating to drugs prescribed by providers who were
excluded by the applicable federal and/or state Medicaid programs. The Company is cooperating with the government with respect to this investigation.
Stockholder Matters
Beginning in February 2019, multiple class action complaints, as well as a derivative complaint were filed by putative plaintiffs against the Company and certain
current and former officers and directors. The plaintiffs in these cases assert a variety of causes of action under federal securities laws that are premised on
allegations that the defendants made certain omissions and misrepresentations relating to the performance of the Company’s LTC business unit. Since filing,
several of the cases have been consolidated, and the first-filed federal case, City of Miami Fire Fighters’ and Police Officers’ Retirement Trust, et al. (formerly
known as Anarkat), was recently dismissed with prejudice. The Company and its current and former officers and directors are defending themselves against these
claims.
In August and September 2020, two ERISA class actions were filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Connecticut against CVS Health, Aetna, and
several current and former executives, directors and/or members of Aetna’s Compensation and Talent Management Committee: Radcliffe v. Aetna Inc., et al. and
Flaim v. Aetna Inc., et al. The plaintiffs in these cases assert a variety of causes of action premised on allegations that the defendants breached fiduciary duties and
engaged in prohibited transactions relating to participants in the Aetna 401(k) Plan’s investment in company stock between December 3, 2017 and February 20,
2019, claiming losses related to the performance of the Company’s LTC business unit. The district court consolidated the actions and the Company has moved to
dismiss the amended and consolidated class action complaint. The Company also received a related document request pursuant to ERISA § 104(b), to which the
Company has responded.
Other Legal and Regulatory Proceedings.
The Company is also a party to other legal proceedings and is subject to government investigations, inquiries and audits and has received and is cooperating with
the government in response to CIDs, subpoenas or similar process from various governmental agencies requesting information. These other legal proceedings and
government actions include claims of or relating to bad faith, medical or professional malpractice, claims processing, dispensing of medications, non-compliance
with state and federal regulatory regimes, marketing misconduct, failure to timely or appropriately pay or administer claims and benefits, provider network
structure (including the use of performance-based networks and termination of provider contracts), rescission of insurance coverage, improper disclosure or use of
personal information, anticompetitive practices, general contractual matters, product liability, intellectual property litigation and employment litigation. Some of
these other legal proceedings are or are purported to be class actions or derivative claims. The Company is defending itself against the claims brought in these
matters.
Awards to the Company and others of certain government contracts, particularly Medicaid contracts and other contracts with government customers in the
Company’s Health Care Benefits segment, frequently are subject to protests by unsuccessful bidders. These protests may result in awards to the Company being
reversed, delayed or modified. The loss or delay in implementation of any government contract could adversely affect the Company’s operating results. The
Company will continue to defend contract awards it receives.
There also continues to be a heightened level of review and/or audit by regulatory authorities and legislators of, and increased litigation regarding, the Company’s
and the rest of the health care and related benefits industry’s business and reporting practices, including premium rate increases, utilization management,
development and application of medical policies, complaint, grievance and appeal processing, information privacy, provider network structure (including provider
network adequacy, the use of performance-based networks and termination of provider contracts), provider directory accuracy, calculation of minimum medical
loss ratios and/or payment of related rebates, delegated arrangements, rescission of insurance coverage, limited benefit health products, student health products,
pharmacy benefit management practices (including manufacturers’ rebates, pricing, the use of narrow networks and the placement of drugs in formulary tiers),
sales practices, customer service practices, vendor oversight and claim payment practices (including payments to out-of-network providers).
As a leading national health care company, the Company regularly is the subject of government actions of the types described above. These government actions
may prevent or delay the Company from implementing planned premium rate increases and may result, and have resulted, in restrictions on the Company’s
businesses, changes to or clarifications of the Company’s business practices, retroactive adjustments to premiums, refunds or other payments to members,
beneficiaries, states or the
168

federal government, withholding of premium payments to the Company by government agencies, assessments of damages, civil or criminal fines or penalties, or
other sanctions, including the possible suspension or loss of licensure and/or suspension or exclusion from participation in government programs.
The Company can give no assurance that its businesses, financial condition, operating results and/or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected, or that the
Company will not be required to materially change its business practices, based on: (i) future enactment of new health care or other laws or regulations; (ii) the
interpretation or application of existing laws or regulations as they may relate to one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which
the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iii) pending or future federal or state government investigations of one or more of the Company’s
businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iv) pending or future government audits,
investigations or enforcement actions against the Company; (v) adverse developments in any pending qui tam lawsuit against the Company, whether sealed or
unsealed, or in any future qui tam lawsuit that may be filed against the Company; or (vi) adverse developments in pending or future legal proceedings against the
Company or affecting one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally.
17.
Segment Reporting
The Company has three operating segments, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Health Care Benefits, as well as a Corporate/Other segment. The Company’s
segments maintain separate financial information, and the CODM evaluates the segments’ operating results on a regular basis in deciding how to allocate resources
among the segments and in assessing segment performance. The CODM evaluates the performance of the Company’s segments based on adjusted operating
income which is defined as operating income (GAAP measure) excluding the impact of amortization of intangible assets and other items, if any, that neither relate
to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business performance. See the reconciliation of consolidated operating
income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income below for further context regarding the items excluded from operating income in determining adjusted
operating income. The Company uses adjusted operating income as its principal measure of segment performance as it enhances the Company’s ability to compare
past financial performance with current performance and analyze underlying business performance and trends. Non-GAAP financial measures the Company
discloses, such as consolidated adjusted operating income, should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures determined or calculated in
accordance with GAAP.
In 2020 and 2019, revenues from the federal government accounted for 14% and 13%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated total revenues, primarily
related to contracts with CMS for coverage of Medicare-eligible individuals within the Health Care Benefits segment. Revenues from the federal government
were less than 10% of the Company’s consolidated revenues in 2018. In 2018, approximately 9.8% of the Company’s consolidated revenues were from Aetna,
which was a Pharmacy Services segment client. On the Aetna Acquisition Date, Aetna became a wholly-owned subsidiary of CVS Health. Subsequent to the
Aetna Acquisition Date, transactions with Aetna continue to be reported within the Pharmacy Services segment, but are eliminated in the Company’s
consolidated financial statements.
169

The following is a reconciliation of financial measures of the Company’s segments to the consolidated totals:
In millions
Pharmacy  
Services 
Retail/ 
LTC
Health Care 
Benefits
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
2020:
Revenues from external customers
$
132,663 
$
60,208 $
74,926 $
111 
$
— 
$
267,908 
Intersegment revenues
9,275 
30,990 
58 
— 
(40,323)
— 
Net investment income
— 
— 
483 
315 
— 
798 
Total revenues
141,938 
91,198 
75,467 
426 
(40,323)
268,706 
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,688 
6,146 
6,188 
(1,306)
(708)
16,008 
Depreciation and amortization
612 
1,801 
1,832 
196 
— 
4,441 
2019:
Revenues from external customers
130,428 
56,258 
68,979 
100 
— 
255,765 
Intersegment revenues
11,063 
30,350 
26 
— 
(41,439)
— 
Net investment income
— 
— 
599 
412 
— 
1,011 
Total revenues
141,491 
86,608 
69,604 
512 
(41,439)
256,776 
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,129 
6,705 
5,202 
(1,000)
(697)
15,339 
Depreciation and amortization
766 
1,723 
1,721 
161 
— 
4,371 
2018:
Revenues from external customers
130,012 
54,999 
8,904 
4 
— 
193,919 
Intersegment revenues
4,724 
28,990 
— 
— 
(33,714)
— 
Net investment income
— 
— 
58 
602 
— 
660 
Total revenues
134,736 
83,989 
8,962 
606 
(33,714)
194,579 
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
4,955 
7,403 
528 
(856)
(769)
11,261 
Depreciation and amortization
710 
1,698 
172 
138 
— 
2,718 
(1) Total revenues of the Pharmacy Services segment include approximately $10.9 billion, $11.5 billion and $11.4 billion of retail co-payments for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. See Note
1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information about retail co-payments.
(1)
_____________________________________________
170

The following is a reconciliation of consolidated operating income to adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
In millions
2020
2019
2018
Operating income (GAAP measure)
$
13,911 $
11,987 $
4,021 
Amortization of intangible assets 
2,341 
2,436 
1,006 
Acquisition-related transaction and integration costs 
332 
480 
492 
(Gain) loss on divestiture of subsidiary 
(269)
205 
86 
Receipt of fully reserved ACA risk corridor receivable 
(307)
— 
— 
Store rationalization charges 
— 
231 
— 
Goodwill impairments 
— 
— 
6,149 
Impairment of long-lived assets 
— 
— 
43 
Interest income on financing for the Aetna Acquisition 
— 
— 
(536)
Adjusted operating income
$
16,008 $
15,339 $
11,261 
(1) The Company’s acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets as required under the acquisition method of accounting which consist primarily of trademarks,
customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology, provider networks and value of business acquired. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated
useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in the Company’s GAAP
consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within each segment. Although intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the amortization of intangible
assets does not directly relate to the underwriting of the Company’s insurance products, the services performed for the Company’s customers or the sale of the Company’s products or
services. Additionally, intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of the Company’s acquisition activity. Accordingly, the Company believes
excluding the amortization of intangible assets enhances the Company’s and investors’ ability to compare the Company’s past financial performance with its current performance and to
analyze underlying business performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within the
Company’s GAAP financial statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset
amortization is excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an
intangible asset becomes impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised.
(2) In 2020, 2019 and 2018, acquisition-related transaction and integration costs relate to the Aetna Acquisition. In 2018, acquisition-related integration costs also relate to the acquisition of
Omnicare. The acquisition-related transaction and integration costs are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Corporate/Other
segment and the Retail/LTC segment.
(3) In 2020, the gain on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax gain on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business, which the Company sold on July 31, 2020 for approximately
$850 million. The gain on divestiture is reflected as a reduction in operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment. In
2019, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019. The loss on divestiture primarily relates to the elimination of the
cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income. In 2018, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of the Company’s
RxCrossroads subsidiary for $725 million on January 2, 2018. The losses on divestiture of subsidiary are reflected in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in operating
expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(4) In 2020, the Company received $313 million owed to it under the ACA’s risk corridor program that was previously fully reserved for as payment was uncertain. After considering offsetting
items such as the ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements and premium taxes, the Company recognized pre-tax income of $307 million in the Company’s consolidated statement of
operations within the Health Care Benefits segment.
(5) In 2019, the store rationalization charges relate to the planned closure of 46 underperforming retail pharmacy stores in the second quarter of 2019 and the planned closure of 22
underperforming retail pharmacy stores in the first quarter of 2020. The store rationalization charges primarily relate to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges and are
reflected in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations in operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(6) In 2018, the goodwill impairments relate to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment.
(7) In 2018, impairment of long-lived assets primarily relates to the impairment of property and equipment within the Retail/LTC segment and is reflected in operating expenses in the
Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
(8) In 2018, the Company recorded interest income of $536 million on the proceeds of the $40 billion of unsecured senior notes it issued in March 2018 to partially fund the Aetna Acquisition.
All amounts are for the periods prior to the close of the Aetna Acquisition, which occurred on November 28, 2018, and were recorded within the Corporate/Other segment.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
_____________________________________________
171

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited CVS Health Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control-
Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion,
CVS Health Corporation (the Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on
the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the 2020 consolidated
financial statements of the Company and our report dated February 16, 2021, expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are
required  to  be  independent  with  respect  to  the  Company  in  accordance  with  the  U.S.  federal  securities  laws  and  the  applicable  rules  and  regulations  of  the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting  includes  those  policies  and  procedures  that  (1)  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any  evaluation  of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
Boston, Massachusetts
February 16, 2021
172

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of CVS Health Corporation (the Company) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the related
consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income (loss), shareholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2020, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February 16, 2021, expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance
with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We  conducted  our  audits  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  PCAOB.  Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to
be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the
accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
173

Impairment of goodwill of the Commercial Business reporting unit
Description of the
Matter
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s goodwill related to the Commercial Business reporting unit was $26.5 billion. As discussed in
Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, goodwill is not amortized, but rather is subject to an annual impairment review, or more
frequent reviews, if events and circumstances indicate an impairment exists.
Auditing management's annual goodwill impairment test related to the Commercial Business reporting unit was complex and highly
judgmental  due  to  the  significant  estimation  required  to  determine  the  fair  value  of  the  reporting  unit.  In  particular,  the  fair  value
estimate  was  sensitive  to  changes  in  significant  assumptions,  such  as  the  discount  rate,  projected  revenue  and  projected  operating
income that are forward-looking and affected by future economic and market conditions.
How We Addressed the
Matter in Our Audit
We  obtained  an  understanding,  evaluated  the  design  and  tested  the  operating  effectiveness  of  controls  over  the  Company’s  annual
goodwill impairment review process, including controls over management’s review of the significant assumptions described above. 
To test the estimated fair value of the Commercial Business reporting unit, we performed audit procedures that included, among others,
assessing methodologies and testing the significant assumptions discussed above and the underlying data used by the Company in its
analysis. We compared the significant assumptions to the reporting unit’s historical results and third-party industry data. We performed
sensitivity analyses of significant assumptions to evaluate the changes in the fair value of the reporting unit that would result from
changes  in  the  key  assumptions.  We  involved  valuation  specialists  to  assist  in  our  assessment  of  the  methodology  and  significant
assumptions (such as the discount rate), used by the Company. In addition, we tested management’s reconciliation of the fair value of
all reporting units to the market capitalization of the Company.
Valuation of health care costs payable
Description of the
Matter 
At December 31, 2020, the incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) liabilities represented $6.1 billion of $7.9 billion of health care costs
payable. As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company’s liability for health care costs payable includes estimated
payments for (1) services rendered to members but not yet reported and (2) claims that have been reported but not yet paid, each as of
the  financial  statement  date  (collectively,  “IBNR”).  The  estimated  IBNR  liability  is  developed  utilizing  actuarial  principles  and
assumptions that include historical and projected claim submission and processing patterns, historical and assumed medical cost trends,
historical utilization of medical services, claim inventory levels, changes in membership and product mix, seasonality and other relevant
factors  to  record  the  actuarial  best  estimate  of  health  care  costs  payable.  There  is  significant  uncertainty  inherent  in  determining
management’s actuarial best estimate of health care costs payable. In particular, the estimate is sensitive to the assumed completion
factors and the assumed health care cost trend rates. 
Auditing management’s actuarial best estimate of IBNR reserves for health care costs payable for its products and services involved a
high degree of subjectivity in evaluating management’s assumptions used in the valuation process.
How We Addressed the
Matter in Our Audit 
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls over the process for estimating
IBNR reserves. This included, among others, controls over the completeness and accuracy of data used in the actuarial projections, the
transfer  of  data  between  underlying  source  systems,  and  the  review  and  approval  processes  that  management  has  in  place  for  the
actuarial principles and assumptions used in estimating the health care costs payable.
To test IBNR reserves, our audit procedures included, among others, testing the completeness and accuracy of the underlying claim and
membership data used in the calculation of IBNR reserves. We involved actuarial specialists to assist with our audit procedures, which
included,  among  others,  evaluating  the  methodologies  applied  by  the  Company  in  determining  the  actuarially  determined  liability,
evaluating  management’s  actuarial  principles  and  assumptions  used  in  their  analysis  based  on  historical  claim  experience,  and
independently calculating a range of reserve estimates for comparison to management’s actuarial best estimate of the liability for health
care costs payable. Additionally, we performed a review of the prior period liabilities for incurred but not paid claims to subsequent
claims development.
174

/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2007.
Boston, Massachusetts
February 16, 2021
175

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures.
Evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, after evaluating the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15 (f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of December 31, 2020, have concluded that as
of such date the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were adequate and effective at a reasonable assurance level and designed to ensure that material
information relating to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries would be made known to such officers on a timely basis.
Management’s report on internal control over financial reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. The Company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of the
Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial
statements. In order to ensure the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective, management regularly assesses such control and did so most
recently for its financial reporting as of December 31, 2020.
Management conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria established in Internal
Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 Framework). This evaluation included
review of the documentation, evaluation of the design effectiveness and testing of the operating effectiveness of controls. The Company’s system of internal
control over financial reporting is enhanced by periodic reviews by the Company’s internal auditors, written policies and procedures and a written Code of Conduct
adopted by CVS Health’s Board of Directors, applicable to all employees of the Company. In addition, the Company has an internal Disclosure Committee,
comprised of management from each functional area within the Company, which performs a separate review of disclosure controls and procedures. There are
inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of internal control over financial reporting.
Based on management’s assessment, management concluded that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective and provides reasonable
assurance that assets are safeguarded and that the financial records are reliable for preparing financial statements as of December 31, 2020.
Ernst & Young LLP, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, is appointed by CVS Health’s Board of Directors and ratified by CVS Health’s
stockholders. They were engaged to render an opinion regarding the fair presentation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements as well as conducting an
audit of internal control over financial reporting. Their reports included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K are based upon audits conducted in accordance with the
standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Changes in internal control over financial reporting
There has been no change in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required by paragraph (d) of
Rule 13a-15 or Rule 15d-15 that occurred during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
176

Table of Contents
Item 9B. Other Information.
No events have occurred during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020 that would require disclosure under this item.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
Information concerning the Executive Officers of CVS Health Corporation is included in Part I of this 10-K pursuant to General Instruction G to Form 10-K.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Committees of the Board as of the Annual Meeting,” “Code of Conduct,” “Audit Committee Report,” and
“Biographies of our Incumbent Board Nominees” are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Non-Employee Director Compensation” and “Executive Compensation and Related Matters,” including
“Letter from the Management Planning and Development Committee,” “Compensation Committee Report,” “Compensation Discussion and Analysis” and
“Compensation of Named Executive Officers” are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Share Ownership of Directors and Certain Executive Officers” and “Share Ownership of Principal
Stockholders” are incorporated herein by reference. Those sections contain information concerning security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters.
The following table summarizes information about the registrant’s common stock that may be issued upon the exercise of options, warrants and rights under all of
the Company’s equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2020:
Number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights 
(a)
Weighted 
average exercise 
price of 
outstanding 
options, warrants 
and rights 
(b)
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
first column) 
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by stockholders 
33,944 
$
72.18 
37,856 
Equity compensation plans not approved by stockholders 
4,812 
43.27 
— 
Total
38,756 
$
71.18 
37,856 
(1) Shares in thousands.
(2) Consists of: (i) 21,796 shares of common stock underlying outstanding options, (ii) 779 shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock appreciation rights (“SARs”)
and (iii) 16,181 shares of common stock issuable on the vesting of outstanding restricted stock units, deferred stock units and performance stock units, assuming target level performance in
the case of performance stock units. The number of shares included with respect to outstanding SARs is the number of shares of CVS Health common stock that would have been issued had
the SARs been exercised based on the closing price per share of CVS Health common stock on December 31, 2020, as reported on the NYSE, which was $68.30.
(3) Consists of the CVS Health 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan.
(4) Consists of the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Aetna Stock Plan”). The Aetna Stock Plan expired on May 21, 2020, therefore there are no securities available for
future issuance under this plan.
The Aetna Stock Plan was last approved by Aetna’s shareholders at Aetna’s 2017 Annual Meeting on May 19, 2017. The Company elected to continue to grant
awards under the Aetna Stock Plan to employees of Aetna and its subsidiaries following the completion of the Aetna Acquisition. The Aetna Stock Plan was
designed to promote the Company’s interests and those of its stockholders and to further align the interests of stockholders and employees by tying awards to total
return to stockholders, enabling plan participants to acquire additional equity interests in the Company and providing compensation opportunities dependent upon
the Company’s performance. The Aetna Stock Plan was not submitted to the Company’s stockholders and expired on May 21, 2020. Under the Aetna Stock Plan,
eligible participants could be granted stock options to purchase shares of
(1) (2)
(1)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
177

Table of Contents
CVS Health common stock, SARs, time-vesting and/or performance-vesting incentive stock or incentive units and other stock-based awards.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Independence Determinations for Directors” and “Related Person Transaction Policy” are incorporated
herein by reference.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services.
The section of the Proxy Statement under the caption “Item 2: Ratification of Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm for 2021” is
incorporated herein by reference.
178

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
The following documents are filed as part of this 10-K:
1.
Financial Statements. See “Index to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules. All financial statement schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not required under the instructions, or the
information is included in the consolidated financial statements or related notes.
3.
Exhibits. The exhibits listed in the “Index to Exhibits” in this Item 15 are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this 10-K. Exhibits marked with an
asterisk (*) are management contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements. Exhibits other than those listed are omitted because they are not required to
be listed or are not applicable. Pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, the Registrant hereby agrees to furnish to the Securities and Exchange
Commission a copy of any omitted instrument that is not required to be listed.
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Exhibit
Description
2
Plan of acquisition, reorganization, arrangement, liquidation or succession
2.1
Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 20, 2015, among CVS Pharmacy, Inc., Tree Merger Sub, Inc. and Omnicare, Inc.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed May 21, 2015).
2.2
Master Transaction Agreement dated as of October 22, 2017, by and between Aetna Inc. and Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.3 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
2.3
Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of December 3, 2017, among CVS Health Corporation, Hudson Merger Sub Corp. and Aetna Inc.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 5, 2017).
3
Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws
3.1
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant dated June 4, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1C of Registrant’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed June 5, 2018).
3.2
By-Laws of the Registrant, as amended and restated July 8, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed July 10, 2020).
4
Instruments defining the rights of security holders, including indentures
4.1
Specimen common stock certificate (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registration Statement of the Registrant ((then known as
CVS Corporation) as successor to Melville Corporation) on Form 8-B filed November 4, 1996).
4.2
Senior Indenture dated August 15, 2006, between the Registrant and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15, 2006).
4.3
Form of the Registrant’s 2021 Floating Rate Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed March 12, 2018).
4.4
Form of the Registrant’s 2021 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.5
Form of the Registrant’s 2023 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.6
Form of the Registrant’s 2025 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.6 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.7
Form of the Registrant’s 2028 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.7 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.8
Form of the Registrant’s 2038 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.8 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.9
Form of the Registrant’s 2048 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.9 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
179

4.10
Form of the Registrant’s 2024 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15,
2019).
4.11
Form of the Registrant’s 2026 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15,
2019).
4.12
Form of the Registrant’s 2029 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15,
2019).
4.13
Form of the Registrant’s 2027 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.14
Form of the Registrant’s 2030 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.15
Form of the Registrant’s 2040 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.16
Form of the Registrant’s 2050 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.17
Form of the Registrant’s 2027 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August
21, 2020).
4.18
Form of the Registrant’s 2030 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August
21, 2020).
4.19
Form of the Registrant’s 2040 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August
21, 2020).
4.20
Form of the Registrant’s 2027 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
December 16, 2020).
4.21
Form of the Registrant’s 2031 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
December 16, 2020).
4.22
Material terms of outstanding securities that are registered under Section 12 of the 1934 Act as required by Item 202(a)-(d) and (f) of
Regulation S-K.
10
Material Contracts
10.1
Five Year Credit Agreement, dated as of May 18, 2017, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York
Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.2
Amendment No. 1 to Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of December 15, 2017, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 18,
2017, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 19, 2017).
10.3
Amendment No. 2 to Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 18, 2017, by
and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2018).
10.4
Amendment No. 3, dated as of May 16, 2019, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 18, 2017, by and among the Registrant, the
lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.5
Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York
Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended June 30, 2018).
10.6
Amendment No. 1, dated as of May 16, 2019, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, by and among the Registrant, the
lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.7
364-Day Credit Agreement dated as of May 13, 2020 by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto, Barclays Bank PLC and
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Co-Syndication Agents, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Co-
Documentation Agents, and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Registrant’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020).
10.8
Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 16, 2019 by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as
Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended
June 30, 2019).
180

10.9*
The Registrant’s Supplemental Retirement Plan I for Select Senior Management, as amended and restated as of December 31, 2008
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2009).
10.10*
Form of Enterprise Non-Competition, Non-Disclosure and Developments Agreement between the Registrant and certain of the Registrant’s
executive officers (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 of the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2013).
10.11*
The Registrant’s Deferred Stock Compensation Plan, as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to the Registrant's
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.12*
The Registrant’s 2007 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.2 to the Registrant’s Registration
Statement on Form S-8 filed May 19, 2020).
10.13*
Universal 409A Definition Document, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.28 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015).
10.14*
The Registrant’s Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to the Registrant's Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.15*
The Registrant’s Partnership Equity Program, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.16*
The Registrant’s Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to the Registrant’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.17*
The Registrant’s 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the Registrant’s Registration
Statement on Form S-8 filed May 19, 2020).
10.18*
The Registrant’s Executive Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.19*
The Registrant’s Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.20*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.29 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.21*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant - between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.30 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.22*
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.23*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Pre-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.32 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2014).
10.24*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Post-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2014).
10.25*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2018).
10.26*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement (LTIP) - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2018).
10.27*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended September 30, 2020).
10.28*
The Registrant’s Management Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to the Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.29*
The Registrant’s Severance Plan for Non-Store Employees amended as of November 28, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to
the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.30*
The Registrant’s Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Program, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.31*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.39 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
181

10.32*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant - between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.40 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.33*
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.41 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.34*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Pre-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2018).
10.35*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Post-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2013).
10.36*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.37*
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2008).
10.38*
Amendment dated as of December 21, 2012 to the Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Registrant and Larry Merlo
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012).
10.39*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.37 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.40*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38
to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.41*
Amendment dated January 22, 2015 to Nonqualified Stock Option Agreements between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed January 23, 2015).
10.42*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.43*
Change in Control Agreement effective as of July 19, 2010 between the Registrant and Eva Boratto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2019).
10.44*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated June 21, 2019 between the Registrant and Eva Boratto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.48 to
the registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.45*
Change in Control Agreement dated December 22, 2008 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012).
10.46*
Amendment dated as of December 31, 2012 to the Change in Control Agreement dated December 22, 2008 between the Registrant and
Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.34 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2012).
10.47*
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant dated April 1, 2016 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.44 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.48*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated May 20, 2016 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.45 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.49*
Change in Control Agreement dated October 1, 2012 between the Registrant and Thomas Moriarty (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2015).
10.50*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated July 8, 2019 between the Registrant and Thomas Moriarty (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.56
of the Registrant's Annual Report on form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.51*
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement dated November 5, 2020 between the Registrant and Karen S. Lynch.
182

10.52*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated November 6, 2020 between the Registrant and Karen S. Lynch.
10.53*
Descriptions of certain arrangements not embodied in formal documents as described under the heading “Non-Employee Director
Compensation” are incorporated herein by reference to the Proxy Statement (when filed).
21
Subsidiaries of the registrant
21.1
Subsidiaries of CVS Health Corporation.
23
Consents of experts and counsel
23.1
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP.
31
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certifications
31.1
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer.
31.2
Certification by the Chief Financial Officer.
32
Section 1350 Certifications
32.1
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer.
32.2
Certification by the Chief Financial Officer.
101
Interactive Data File
101
The following materials from the CVS Health Corporation Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020
formatted in Inline XBRL: (i) the Consolidated Statements of Operations, (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss),
(iii) the Consolidated Balance Sheets, (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, (v) the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’
Equity and (vi) the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File
because its XBRL tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document.
104
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File - The cover page from the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020,
formatted in Inline XBRL (included as Exhibit 101).
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary.
None.
183

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
Date:
February 16, 2021
By:
/s/ EVA C. BORATTO
Eva C. Boratto
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title(s)
Date
/s/ FERNANDO AGUIRRE
Director
February 16, 2021
Fernando Aguirre
/s/ C. DAVID BROWN II
Director
February 16, 2021
C. David Brown II
/s/ EVA C. BORATTO
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
February 16, 2021
Eva C. Boratto
Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ JAMES D. CLARK
Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief
February 16, 2021
James D. Clark
Accounting Officer (Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ ALECIA A. DECOUDREAUX
Director
February 16, 2021
Alecia A. DeCoudreaux
/s/ NANCY-ANN M. DEPARLE
Director
February 16, 2021
Nancy-Ann M. DeParle
/s/ DAVID W. DORMAN
Chair of the Board and Director
February 16, 2021
David W. Dorman
/s/ ROGER N. FARAH
Director
February 16, 2021
Roger N. Farah
/s/ ANNE M. FINUCANE
Director
February 16, 2021
Anne M. Finucane
/s/ EDWARD J. LUDWIG
Director
February 16, 2021
Edward J. Ludwig
/s/ KAREN S. LYNCH
President and Chief Executive Officer
February 16, 2021
Karen S. Lynch
(Principal Executive Officer) and Director
/s/ LARRY J. MERLO
Director
February 16, 2021
Larry J. Merlo
/s/ JEAN-PIERRE MILLON
Director
February 16, 2021
Jean-Pierre Millon
/s/ MARY L. SCHAPIRO
Director
February 16, 2021
Mary L. Schapiro
/s/ WILLIAM C. WELDON
Director
February 16, 2021
William C. Weldon
/s/ TONY L. WHITE
Director
February 16, 2021
Tony L. White

Exhibit 4.22
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
The following description (this “Description”) of the terms of the common stock of CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”) is a summary only and is
qualified by reference to the relevant provisions of Delaware law and the Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Charter”) and the By-Laws (the “By-Laws”) of
CVS Health. Copies of the Charter and the By-Laws are incorporated by reference as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10-K to which this Description is an
exhibit.
Authorized Capital Stock
Under the Charter as of February 16, 2021, the authorized capital stock of CVS Health consisted of (i) 3,200,000,000 shares of common stock, par value of
$0.01 per share (“common stock”), (ii) 120,619 shares of cumulative preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share (“preferred stock”), and (iii) 50,000,000 shares of
preference stock, par value $1.00 per share (“preference stock”).
Common Stock
The holders of shares of common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters voted on by CVS Health stockholders, including elections of
directors. Except as otherwise required by law, or by the provisions of the preferred stock or the preference stock, or provided in any resolution adopted by the
CVS Health board of directors (the “board”) with respect to any subsequently created class or series of shares of CVS Health, the holders of the shares of common
stock exclusively possess all voting power. The Charter precludes cumulative voting in the election of directors. The Charter provides for a majority vote standard
for uncontested elections of directors, and a plurality of votes standard for contested elections of directors. Subject to any rights of any outstanding series of
preferred stock or preference stock, (i) the holders of shares of common stock are entitled to such dividends as may be declared from time to time by the board
from funds available therefor, (ii) no dividends may be declared, paid, or set aside for payment on shares of common stock unless full cumulative dividends are
paid on any outstanding preference stock and any other preferred stock issued and outstanding at such time that is designated to have such dividend preference and
(iii) upon dissolution the holders of shares of common stock are entitled to receive pro rata all assets of CVS Health available for distribution to such holders,
subject to any liquidation preferences designated to any preferred stock or preference stock that may be issued and outstanding at such time of liquidation.
No Preemptive Rights
The Charter provides that no holder of any shares of CVS Health of any class or series may have any preemptive right to purchase or subscribe to any shares
of CVS Health or any security convertible into shares of CVS Health of any class or series.
Provisions Relating to Amendments to CVS Health’s Charter and By-Laws
Under Delaware law, stockholders have the right to adopt, amend or repeal the certificate of incorporation and by-laws of a corporation. However, Delaware
law requires that any amendment to the Charter also be approved by the board. Under Delaware law, unless a higher vote is required in a corporation’s certificate
of incorporation, amendments to the corporation’s certificate of incorporation will be adopted upon receiving at a properly convened meeting the affirmative vote
of a majority of the votes cast by all stockholders entitled to vote thereon, and if any class or series is entitled to vote thereon as a class, the affirmative vote of a
majority of the votes cast in each class vote.
In addition, the By-Laws may be amended by the board with respect to all matters not exclusively reserved by law to the stockholders. Amendments to
the By-Laws may be adopted and approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of stock of CVS Health entitled
to vote at any annual or special meeting, or by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors cast at any regular or special meeting, at which a quorum is
present.
1

Certain Statutory and Charter Provisions
Certain provisions of the Charter and By-Laws summarized in the following paragraphs may be deemed to have an antitakeover effect and may delay, defer
or prevent a tender offer or takeover attempt.
Potential Issuances of Preferred Stock and Preference Stock
As of February 16, 2021, the Charter authorized 120,619 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share and 50,000,000 shares of preference stock, par
value $1.00 per share. The Charter also authorizes the board to issue shares of preferred stock or preference stock, from time to time, in such class or classes, and
such series within any class, and with such designations, preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights, and qualifications, limitations or
restrictions thereof as the board may determine, including, for example, (i) the designation of the class or series; (ii) the number of shares of the class or series,
which number the board may thereafter (except where otherwise provided in the designation of any subsequently authorized class or series) increase or decrease
(but not below the number of shares thereof then outstanding); (iii) whether dividends, if any, will be cumulative or noncumulative and the dividend rate of the
class or series; (iv) the dates on which dividends, if any, will be payable; (v) the redemption rights and price or prices, if any, for shares of the class or series;
(vi) the terms and amounts of any sinking fund provided for the purchase or redemption of shares of the class or series; (vii) the amounts payable on shares of the
class or series in the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the affairs of CVS Health; (viii) whether the shares of the class
or series will be convertible into shares of any other class or series, or any other security, of CVS Health or any other corporation, and, if so, the specification of
such other class or series or such other security, the conversion price or prices or rate or rates, any adjustments thereof, the date or dates as of which such shares
will be convertible and all other terms and conditions upon which such conversion may be made; (ix) restrictions on the issuance of shares of the same class or
series or of any other class or series; and (x) the voting rights, if any, of the holders of such class or series. The authorized capital stock of CVS Health, including
preferred stock, preference stock and common stock, will be available for issuance without further action by CVS Health stockholders, unless such action is
required by applicable law or the rules of any stock exchange or automated quotation system on which CVS Health’s securities may be listed or traded. If the
approval of CVS Health stockholders is not so required, the board does not intend to seek stockholder approval.
Although the board has no intention at the present time of doing so, it could issue a class or series of preferred stock or preference stock that could,
depending on the terms of such class or series, impede completion of a merger, tender offer or other takeover attempt that the holders of some, or a majority, of
CVS Health shares might believe to be in their best interests or in which CVS Health stockholders might receive a premium for their shares over the then-current
market price of such shares.
Potential Issuances of Rights to Purchase Securities
CVS Health does not currently have a stockholder rights plan, although the board retains the right to adopt a new plan at a future date. The Charter grants
the board exclusive authority to create and issue rights entitling the holders thereof to purchase from CVS Health shares of capital stock or other securities and to
elect to repurchase, redeem, terminate or amend any such rights. The times at which and terms upon which such rights are to be issued, repurchased, redeemed,
terminated or amended are to be determined exclusively by the board and set forth in the contracts or instruments that evidence any such rights. The authority of
the board with respect to such rights includes determining, for example, (i) the purchase price of the capital stock or other securities or property to be purchased
upon exercise of such rights; (ii) provisions relating to the times at which and the circumstances under which such rights may be exercised or sold or otherwise
transferred, either together with or separately from any other shares or other securities of CVS Health; (iii) provisions which adjust the number or exercise price of
such rights or the amount or nature of the shares, other securities or other property receivable upon exercise of such rights in the event of a combination, split or
recapitalization of any shares of CVS Health, a change in ownership of CVS Health’s shares or other securities or a reorganization, merger, consolidation, sale of
assets or other occurrence relating to CVS Health or any shares of CVS Health, and provisions restricting the ability of CVS Health to enter into any such
transaction absent an assumption by the other party or parties thereto of the obligations of CVS Health under such rights; (iv) provisions which deny the holder of a
specified percentage of the outstanding securities of CVS Health the right to exercise such rights and/or cause such rights held by such holder to become void;
(v) provisions which
2

permit CVS Health to redeem or exchange such rights; and (vi) the appointment of the rights agent with respect to such rights. This provision is intended to
confirm the board’s exclusive authority to issue, repurchase, redeem, terminate or amend share purchase rights or other rights to purchase shares or securities of
CVS Health or any other corporation.
Stockholder Action by Written Consent
The Charter provides that stockholder action may be taken at an annual or special meeting of stockholders or by written consent in lieu of a meeting, but
only if such action is taken in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and By-Laws. Any person other than CVS Health seeking to have the CVS Health
stockholders authorize or take corporate action by written consent without a meeting is required to deliver a written notice signed by holders of record of at least
twenty-five percent (25%) of the voting power of the outstanding capital stock of CVS Health entitled to express consent on the relevant action and request that a
record date be fixed for such purpose.
Stockholder Vote on Fundamental or Extraordinary Corporate Transactions
Under Delaware law, a sale, lease or exchange of all or substantially all of CVS Health’s assets, an amendment to the Charter, a merger or consolidation of
CVS Health with another corporation or a dissolution of CVS Health generally requires the affirmative vote of the board and, with limited exceptions, the
affirmative vote of a majority of the aggregate voting power of the outstanding stock entitled to vote on the transaction.
With respect to transactions with related persons (persons who own at least 10% of the outstanding capital stock of CVS Health), the Charter provides that a
majority of outstanding shares (excluding those owned by the related person) voting as a single class is required to approve a business combination transaction with
a related person, unless (i) such transaction is approved by a majority of continuing directors (directors who are not the related person, or an affiliate or associate
thereof (or a representative or nominee of the related person or such affiliate or associate), that is involved in the relevant business combination and (a) who were
members of the board immediately prior to the time that such related person became a related person or (b) whose initial election as a director was recommended
by the affirmative vote of a least a majority of the continuing directors then in office, provided that, in either such case, such continuing director has continued in
office after becoming a continuing director) or (ii) certain fair price requirements are met.
State Anti-Takeover Provisions
CVS Health has not opted out of Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, which provides that, if a person acquires 15% or more of the
outstanding voting stock of a Delaware corporation, thereby becoming an “interested stockholder,” that person may not engage in certain “business combinations”
with the corporation, including mergers, purchases and sales of 10% or more of its assets, stock purchases and other transactions pursuant to which the percentage
of the corporation’s stock owned by the interested stockholder increases (other than on a pro rata basis) or pursuant to which the interested stockholder receives a
financial benefit from the corporation, for a period of three years after becoming an interested stockholder unless one of the following exceptions applies: (i) the
board approved the acquisition of stock pursuant to which the person became an interested stockholder or the transaction that resulted in the person becoming an
interested stockholder prior to the time that the person became an interested stockholder; (ii) upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the person
becoming an interested stockholder such person owned at least 85% of the outstanding voting stock of CVS Health, excluding, for purposes of determining the
voting stock outstanding, voting stock owned by directors who are also officers and certain employee stock plans; or (iii) the transaction is approved by the board
and by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the outstanding voting stock which is not owned by the interested stockholder. An “interested stockholder” also
includes the affiliates and associates of a 15% or more owner and any affiliate or associate of CVS Health who was the owner of 15% or more of the outstanding
voting stock within the three-year period prior to determine whether a person is an interested stockholder.
3

Exhibit 10.51
AMENDED AND RESTATED EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
AMENDED AND RESTATED EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT (this “Agreement”), dated this 5th day of November 2020, by and
between CVS Health Corporation, a Delaware corporation (the “Company” or “CVS Health”), and Karen S. Lynch (“Executive”) (certain
capitalized terms used herein being defined in Article 6).
WHEREAS, Executive is currently employed as Executive Vice President, CVS Health and President, Aetna, pursuant to an
employment agreement dated, as of December 10, 2014, which was amended on November 28, 2018 (the “Original Employment
Agreement”);
WHEREAS, the Company and Executive desire for Executive to transition from Executive’s position as Executive Vice President,
CVS Health and President, Aetna to the position of President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company; and
WHEREAS, in connection with such transition, the Company and Executive desire to amend and restate the Original Employment
Agreement in its entirety to reflect the prior amendment thereto and to set forth the revised terms of Executive’s employment as President and
Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and of the mutual covenants and agreements of the parties set forth in this
Agreement, and of other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto,
intending to be legally bound, agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1
POSITION; AT-WILL EMPLOYMENT
SECTION 1.01. Position.
(a)     Effective on the 1st day of February 2021 (the “Effective Date”), Executive shall commence her duties as President and Chief
Executive Officer of CVS Health and shall provide services to CVS Health and its subsidiaries in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement. Executive acknowledges that Executive’s employment under this Agreement will be with CVS Pharmacy, Inc., a Delaware
corporation and a subsidiary of CVS Health, and therefore references to the Company in this Agreement shall also refer to CVS Pharmacy,
Inc., unless the context indicates otherwise. Executive shall be appointed to the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation effective
February 1, 2021 and, thereafter, shall be subject to annual re-election by stockholders beginning with the 2021 Annual Meeting of
Stockholders.
(b)    In such position, Executive shall have such duties, responsibilities and authority, consistent with such position, as shall be
determined from time to time by the Board and shall report to the Board.
(c)    During Executive’s employment with the Company, Executive will devote substantially all of her business time to the
performance of her duties hereunder and will not engage in any other business, profession or occupation for compensation or otherwise which
would conflict with the rendition of such services either directly or indirectly, without the prior written consent of

the Board; provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude Executive, subject to the prior written consent of the Board, from serving
on any business, civic or charitable board, managing personal investments or participating in CEO leadership events, as long as such activities
do not materially interfere with the performance of Executive’s duties hereunder. If the Company concludes that it is desirable, upon the
Company’s request, Executive will resign from any board of directors on which she serves as soon as reasonably practicable considering her
fiduciary duty to such board’s company or civic or charitable organization, as the case may be.
SECTION 1.02. At-will Employment. Executive’s employment under this Agreement shall commence on the Effective Date and
shall end on the date Executive’s employment is terminated, as provided herein. For the avoidance of doubt, Executive’s employment with
the Company shall at all times be on an at-will basis and nothing in this Agreement shall provide Executive the right to employment for any
specified period following the Effective Date.
ARTICLE 2
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
SECTION 2.01. Base Salary. Starting on the Effective Date, the Company shall pay Executive an annual base salary (the “Base
Salary”) at the initial annual rate of $1,450,000 payable in equal monthly installments or otherwise in accordance with the payroll and
personnel practices of the Company from time to time. The Base Salary shall be reviewed annually by the Board or the Committee for
possible increase in the sole discretion of the Board or the Committee, as the case may be. Executive’s Base Salary, as in effect from time to
time, may not be reduced by the Company without Executive’s consent, except in the event of a ratable reduction affecting all senior officers
of the Company.
SECTION 2.02. Incentive Compensation. Subject in each case to Executive’s continued employment as contemplated hereby:
(a)    Executive shall be eligible to participate in the Company’s annual bonus plan for similarly situated executives (the “Annual
Bonus Plan”) with a target annual cash bonus opportunity of 200% of Base Salary (the “Annual Bonus”). Executive’s eligibility and target
annual cash bonus opportunity are subject to periodic review and adjustment by the Board or the Committee. The Annual Bonus shall be
determined in accordance with the terms of the Annual Bonus Plan, and payment of the Annual Bonus shall be made at the same time that
other senior-level executives of the Company receive their incentive awards, which is generally in March following the plan year.
(b)    Executive shall be eligible to receive annual equity awards at a level commensurate with Executive’s position beginning in
calendar year 2021. For 2021, the cash value of Executive’s target annual equity award is $11,000,000. The composition of annual equity
awards is currently 75% Company performance stock units (“PSUs”) and 25% stock options. As of the date hereof, PSUs have a three-year
cliff vesting period and a two-year post-vesting holding period for net shares of Company common stock delivered upon settlement, and stock
options vest in four equal installments on the first four anniversaries of the grant date and have a ten-year term. The Company’s annual equity
award program components, terms and weightings are reviewed annually by the Committee and are subject to change.
2

SECTION 2.03. Employee Benefits; Perquisites.
(a)
Executive shall be eligible for employee benefits that are offered to similarly situated executives of the Company.
(b)
Executive shall be entitled to use the Company aircraft in accordance with the Company’s aircraft policy, as approved by the
Committee and as in effect from time to time. Executive shall reimburse the Company for any costs of personal air travel that exceed
$250,000 per calendar year.
SECTION 2.04. Business Expenses.
(a)
Reasonable travel, entertainment and other business expenses incurred by Executive in the performance of her duties
hereunder shall be reimbursed by the Company in accordance with the Company’s policies as in effect from time to time.
(b)
The Company shall provide Executive with appropriate office facilities and support at the Company’s headquarters, which
shall be Executive’s principal job location.
ARTICLE 3
CERTAIN BENEFITS
SECTION 3.01. Certain Events. A “Qualifying Event” means any of the following events:
(a)
The involuntary termination of Executive’s employment by the Company, other than (y) for Cause, or (z) by reason of
Executive’s death or Disability; or
(b)    Executive’s voluntary termination of employment for Good Reason, provided that Executive shall have provided the Company
with notice of any event constituting Good Reason no later than 30 days following the occurrence of such event and such termination occurs
within 90 days after the occurrence of any event constituting Good Reason (that has not otherwise been cured by the Company prior to the
end of such 90-day period).
SECTION 3.02. Separation Payments. Except to the extent provided in Section 5.09 and Section 5.18, Executive shall be entitled to
the benefits set forth below (the “Separation Benefits”) upon a termination of employment:
(a)    Upon any termination of employment including by reason of death or Disability, Executive’s voluntary termination of
employment (with or without Good Reason) or upon involuntary termination of Executive’s employment by the Company, Executive shall be
entitled to:
(i)    Executive’s earned but unpaid Base Salary and other vested but unpaid cash entitlements (including any earned but
unpaid cash Annual Bonus for the performance year prior to the year in which Executive terminates employment) for the period through and
including the date of termination of Executive’s employment (other than entitlements referenced in Section 3.02(b) below) (the “Accrued
Compensation”); and
3

(ii)    Executive’s other vested benefits earned by Executive for the period through and including the date of Executive’s
termination of employment, which shall be paid in accordance with the terms of the applicable plans, programs or arrangements (the
“Accrued Benefits”).
(b)    Upon a Qualifying Event, the Company shall pay Executive in addition to the amounts set forth in Section 3.02(a) above:
(i)    Cash compensation through the second anniversary of such Qualifying Event (the “Payment Period”) in equal
installments during the Payment Period in accordance with the applicable Company payroll, in an aggregate amount equal to two times the
sum of (y) the highest Base Salary in effect during the six-month period immediately prior to the time of such termination of employment and
(z) the Executive’s target Annual Bonus opportunity for the year of termination of employment (such payment, the “Cash Severance
Payment”), on the condition that Executive has delivered to the Company a release substantially in the form as attached hereto as Exhibit A
(with such changes as may be required under applicable law) of any employment-related claims, provided that this release must be signed
within 30 days after the Executive’s separation from service and any payment that otherwise would be made within such 30-day period shall
by paid at the expiration of such 30-day period, subject to Executive’s execution of such release; provided, however, that if Executive
experiences a Qualifying Event within two years following a Change in Control, the Cash Severance Payment shall instead be an aggregate
amount equal to two-and-a-half times the sum of (y) the highest Base Salary in effect during the six-month period immediately prior to the
time of such termination of employment and (z) the Executive’s target Annual Bonus opportunity for the year of termination of employment.
(ii)    A “Pro-Rata Bonus Amount” for the year of Executive’s termination of employment calculated as Executive’s Annual
Bonus opportunity multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days in the year through the date of Executive’s
termination of employment and the denominator of which is 365. The Pro-Rata Bonus Amount shall be based on the greater of Executive’s
Annual Bonus opportunity at target and the actual funding percentage for the Annual Bonus Plan for such performance period, as determined
by the Committee in its sole discretion. Payment of this pro-rata bonus amount, if any, shall be made to Executive at the same time as annual
bonuses are paid to senior executives of the Company;
(iii)    With respect to equity awards made prior to the Effective Date, Executive shall be treated as eligible for ‘retirement’
under the vesting and exercise terms of any such equity award. For the avoidance of doubt, ‘retirement’ treatment for equity awards made
prior to the Effective Date shall mean: (1) with respect to restricted stock units (excluding the Closing Sign-On Equity Award), performance
stock units and any LTIP awards, pro-rated vesting as of Executive’s termination of employment date (with any performance criteria deemed
achieved based on actual performance as of the end of the applicable performance period) and settlement on the originally scheduled
settlement date; and (2) with respect to stock options and stock appreciation rights, immediate vesting in that portion of the stock option
and/or stock appreciation right that would have otherwise vested within one year following Executive’s termination of employment date and
the ability to exercise such stock option and/or stock appreciation right for five years following Executive’s termination of employment date;
provided, however, that Executive shall not be permitted to exercise any stock option or stock appreciation right beyond the original term of
such award. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section 3.02(b)(iii) shall not apply to the Closing Sign-On Equity Award or equity awards
granted following the Effective Date;
4

(iv)    With respect to Company equity awards granted following the Effective Date, Executive shall be treated as ‘retirement’
eligible under the vesting and exercise terms of the applicable award agreements relating to Company awards generally applicable to senior-
level executives of the Company; and
(v)    Continued participation in all medical, health and life insurance plans at the same benefit and cost sharing level at which
Executive and Executive’s eligible dependents were participating on the date of termination of Executive’s employment until the earlier of:
(1) the 18- month anniversary of Executive’s termination of employment date; or (2) the date, or dates, Executive receives equivalent
coverage and benefits under the plans and programs of a subsequent employer (such coverage and benefits to be determined on a coverage-
bycoverage, or benefit-by- benefit, basis); provided, however, that (A) if Executive is precluded from continuing Executive’s participation in
any employee benefit plan or program as provided in this clause (v), Executive shall receive cash payments equal on an aftertax basis to the
cost to Executive of obtaining the benefits provided under the plan or program in which Executive is unable to participate for the period
specified in this clause (v), (B) such cost shall be deemed to be the lowest reasonable cost that would be incurred by Executive in obtaining
such benefit on an individual basis, and (C) payment of such amounts shall be made quarterly in advance. For the avoidance of doubt,
Executive acknowledges and agrees that Executive shall be responsible for Executive’s portion of any premiums due in connection with
Executive’s continued participation in any medical, health and life insurance plans pursuant to this Section 3.02(b)(v).
To the extent that Executive is a “Specified Employee” within the meaning of Section 409A of the Code at the time of her separation from
service, to the extent required by Section 409A and the regulations issued thereunder, the payments to which Executive would otherwise be
entitled during the first six months following her separation of service shall be deferred and accumulated for a period of six months and paid
in a lump sum on the first day of the seventh month with the seventh month’s payment, with interest on such deferred compensation at the
rate paid pursuant to the stable value fund of the Company’s 401(k) plan or, if such fund no longer exists, the fund with the investment
criteria most clearly comparable to that of such fund.
(c)    For the avoidance of doubt and consistent with the applicable award agreements, equity awards made by Aetna before the
Closing Effective Date, the Closing Sign-On Equity Award, 2018-2020 LTIP and any supplemental LTIP with respect to the 2018-2020
performance period shall be treated as follows: (1) upon an involuntary termination of Executive’s employment by reason of death, unvested
awards shall become immediately vested (with any performance criteria deemed achieved based on target performance as of Executive’s
death); and (2) upon an involuntary termination of Executive’s employment by reason of Disability, pro-rated vesting as of Executive’s
termination of employment date (with any performance criteria deemed achieved based on actual performance as of the end of the applicable
performance period); provided that in each case stock options shall remain exercisable for one year following Executive’s termination of
employment date, except that Executive shall not be permitted to exercise any stock option beyond the original term of such award.
(d)    If Executive experiences a Qualifying Event within two years following a Change in Control, any outstanding equity awards
held by Executive at such time shall be treated in accordance with the terms of the applicable award agreement governing such equity awards.
5

ARTICLE 4
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNMENTS
SECTION 4.01. Successors. The Company will require any successor (whether by reason of a change in control, direct or indirect,
by purchase, merger, consolidation, or otherwise) to all or substantially all of the business and/or assets of the Company to expressly assume
and agree to perform the obligations under this Agreement in the same manner and to the same extent that the Company would be required to
perform it if no such succession had taken place. The Company’s rights hereunder shall not otherwise be assignable without Executive’s
consent.
SECTION 4.02. Assignment by Executive. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by Executive’s personal
or legal representatives, executors, administrators, successors, heirs, distributees, devisees, and legatees. If Executive should die or become
disabled while any amount is owed but unpaid to Executive hereunder, all such amounts, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be paid to
Executive’s devisee, legatee, legal guardian or other designee, or if there is no such designee, to Executive’s estate. Executive’s rights
hereunder shall not otherwise be assignable.
ARTICLE 5
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 5.01. Notices. Any notice required to be delivered hereunder shall be in writing and shall be addressed
if to the Company, to:
CVS Health Corporation
One CVS Drive
MC 1160
Woonsocket, RI 02895
Attn: General Counsel
if to Executive, to Executive’s last known address as reflected on the books and records of the Company or such other address as such party
may hereafter specify for the purpose by written notice to the other party hereto. With a copy to Thomas A. Hickey, Esq., Gunster, Yoakley &
Stuart, P.A., 777 South Flagler Drive, Suite 500 East, West Palm Beach, FL 33401.
Any such notice shall be deemed received on the date of receipt by the recipient thereof if received prior to 5:00 p.m. in the place of receipt
and such day is a business day in the place of receipt. Otherwise, any such notice shall be deemed not to have been received until the next
succeeding business day in the place of receipt.
SECTION 5.02. Legal Fees and Expenses. The Company shall pay all legal fees, costs of litigation, arbitration (i.e., American
Arbitration Association and arbitrator fees), prejudgment interest, and other expenses which are reasonably incurred by Executive as a result
of any conflict between the parties pertaining to this Agreement or in connection with the termination of Executive’s employment if
Executive is the prevailing party as determined by the arbitrator. In addition, the
6

Company shall pay Executive’s reasonable legal fees and expenses associated with entering this Agreement.
SECTION 5.03. Arbitration. Except as provided in any agreement referenced in Section 5.15, any dispute or controversy arising
under or in connection with this Agreement shall be settled by arbitration, conducted before a panel of three arbitrators sitting in a location
selected by Executive within 50 miles from the location of Executive’s principal place of employment with the Company, in accordance with
the rules of the American Arbitration Association then in effect. The decision of the arbitrators in that proceeding, shall be binding on the
Company and Executive. Judgment may be entered on the award of the arbitrator in any court having jurisdiction. Notwithstanding the
foregoing of this Section 5.03, each of the parties agrees that, prior to submitting a dispute under this Agreement to arbitration, the parties
agree to submit, for a period of sixty (60) days, to voluntary mediation before a jointly selected neutral third party mediator under the
Employment Mediation Rules of the American Arbitration Association to take place in Woonsocket, RI (however, such mediation or
obligation to mediate shall not suspend or otherwise delay any termination of employment or other action of the Company or affect the
Company’s other rights under this Agreement). Except as provided in Section 5.02, each party shall pay its own expenses of such mediation
and/or arbitration and all common expenses of such mediation and/or arbitration shall be borne equally by Executive and the Company.
SECTION 5.04. Unfunded Agreement. The obligations of the Company under this Agreement represent an unsecured, unfunded
promise to pay benefits to Executive and/or Executive’s beneficiaries, and shall not entitle Executive or such beneficiaries to a preferential
claim to any asset of the Company.
SECTION 5.05. Non-Exclusivity of Benefits. Unless specifically provided herein, neither the provisions of this Agreement nor the
benefits provided hereunder shall reduce any amounts otherwise payable, or in any way diminish Executive’s rights as an employee of the
Company, whether existing now or hereafter, under any compensation and/or benefit plans (qualified or nonqualified), programs, policies, or
practices provided by the Company, for which Executive may qualify; provided, however, that the Separation Benefits shall be in lieu of any
severance benefits under any such plans, programs, policies or practices. Vested benefits or other amounts which Executive is otherwise
entitled to receive under any plan, policy, practice, or program of the Company (i.e., including, but not limited to, vested benefits under any
qualified or nonqualified retirement plan), at or subsequent to the date of termination of Executive’s employment shall be payable in
accordance with such plan, policy, practice, or program except as expressly modified by this Agreement.
SECTION 5.06. Employment Status. Nothing herein contained shall interfere with the Company’s right to terminate Executive’s
employment with the Company at any time, with or without Cause, subject to the Company’s obligation to provide Separation Benefits and
other benefits provided hereunder, if any. Executive shall also have the right to terminate her employment with the Company at any time
without liability, subject only to her obligations under the employee covenants or obligations contained in any equity or other awards granted
to Executive or any other obligation agreed to by Executive before or after the Effective Date.
SECTION 5.07. Mitigation. In no event shall Executive be obligated to seek other employment or take any other action by way of
mitigation of the amounts payable to Executive under any of the provisions of this Agreement nor shall the amount of any payment or benefit
hereunder be
7

reduced by any compensation earned by Executive as a result of employment by another employer, including, but not limited to, Executive’s
eligibility for any retiree health benefits.
SECTION 5.08. Entire Agreement. This Agreement represents the entire agreement between Executive and the Company and its
affiliates with respect to Executive’s employment and/or severance rights, and, as of the Effective Date, supersedes all prior discussions,
negotiations, and agreements concerning such rights (including the Original Employment Agreement, as amended).
SECTION 5.09. Tax Withholding. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the Company shall withhold from
any amounts payable under this Agreement all federal, state, city, or other taxes as are legally required to be withheld.
SECTION 5.10. Waiver of Rights. The waiver by either party of a breach of any provision of this Agreement shall not operate or be
construed as a continuing waiver or as a consent to or waiver of any subsequent breach hereof.
SECTION 5.11. Severability. In the event any provision of the Agreement shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, the
illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts of the Agreement, and the Agreement shall be construed and enforced as if the
illegal or invalid provision had not been included.
SECTION 5.12. Governing Law. This Agreement shall be governed by, construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the
State of Rhode Island without reference to principles of conflicts of laws.
SECTION 5.13. Counterparts. This Agreement may be signed in several counterparts, each of which shall be an original, with the
same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were on the same instrument.
SECTION 5.14. Indemnification. During Executive’s employment with the Company and for so long thereafter as Executive may
have any liability as a result of her service: (a) the Company shall indemnify Executive (and Executive’s legal representatives or other
successors) to the fullest extent permitted by the Certificate of Incorporation and By-Laws of the Company, as in effect at such time or on the
Effective Date; and (b) Executive shall be entitled to the protection of any insurance policies that the Company may elect to maintain
generally for the benefit of its directors and officers (and to the extent the Company maintains such an insurance policy or policies, Executive
shall be covered by such policy or policies, in accordance with its or their terms, to the maximum extent of the coverage available for any
officer or director of the Company), against all costs, charges and expenses whatsoever incurred or sustained by Executive or Executive’s
legal representatives at the time such costs, charges and expenses are incurred or sustained, in connection with any action, suit or proceeding
to which Executive (or Executive’s legal representatives or other successors) may be made a party by reason of Executive’s serving or having
served as a director, officer or employee of the Company, or any subsidiary or Executive’s serving or having served any other enterprise as a
director, officer, employee or fiduciary at the request of the Company. For purposes of this Section 5.14, it is understood and agreed that the
Company’s Certificate of Incorporation provide, and shall continue to provide the maximum indemnification permitted by the Company’s
State of Incorporation.
8

SECTION 5.15. Restrictive Covenant Agreement. Concurrently with the execution of this Agreement, Executive shall execute the
Company’s Restrictive Covenant Agreement (the “Restrictive Covenant Agreement”), attached hereto as Exhibit B, which shall become
effective upon the Effective Date and shall supersede Executive’s current Restrictive Covenant Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2018,
which shall remain in full force and effect until such time. Executive acknowledges that the Company may modify such Restrictive Covenant
Agreement in the future in connection with the granting of equity awards and Executive agrees to execute a modified agreement to the extent
the modification is applicable to senior officers of the Company and not in anticipation of a Change in Control. Upon request by the
Company, Executive agrees to execute a new Restrictive Covenant Agreement, with substantially similar post-employment non-competition
and non-solicitation periods and limitations as those set forth in the Restrictive Covenant Agreement then applicable to Executive, upon
Executive’s termination of employment in exchange for a one-time cash payment equal to $10,000, which shall be paid within 30 days of
Executive’s execution of such Restrictive Covenant Agreement.
SECTION 5.16. Stock Ownership Requirements. Executive acknowledges and understands that the Company has adopted certain
stock ownership guidelines for executives and that the Company expects Executive to own shares of stock in the Company consistent with
Executive’s position in accordance with such stock ownership guidelines, as approved by the Committee and as in effect from time to time.
SECTION 5.17. Section 409A. If any provision of this Agreement (or any award of compensation or benefits provided under this
Agreement) would cause Executive to incur any additional tax or interest under Section 409A of the Code, the Company shall reform such
provision to comply with Section 409A and agrees to maintain, to the maximum extent practicable without violating Section 409A of the
Code, the original intent and economic benefit to Executive of the applicable provision. The Company shall not accelerate the payment of any
deferred compensation in violation of Section 409A of the Code and to the extent required under Section 409A, the Company shall delay the
payment of any deferred compensation for six months following Executive’s termination of employment. When used in connection with any
payments subject to Section 409A required to be made hereunder, the phrase “termination of employment” and correlative terms shall mean
separation from service as defined in Section 409A. Unless such payments are otherwise exempt from Section 409A, any reimbursements or
in-kind benefits provided under Sections 2.03, 2.04, 3.02 or 5.02 of this Agreement shall be administered in accordance with Section 409A,
such that: (a) the amount of expenses eligible for reimbursement, or in-kind benefits provided, during one year shall not affect the expenses
eligible for reimbursement or the in-kind benefits provided in any other year; (b) reimbursement of eligible expenses shall be made on or
before December 31 of the year following the year in which the expense was incurred; and (c) Executive’s right to reimbursement or in-kind
benefits shall not be subject to liquidation or to exchange for another benefit. For purposes of Section 409A, Executive’s right to receive any
installment payments pursuant to this Agreement shall be treated as a right to receive a series of separate and distinct payments.
SECTION 5.18. Section 280G. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, in the event the Separation Benefits
described in this Agreement either alone or together with any other payments and benefits which Executive has the right receive from the
Company or any affiliated company (together with the Separation Benefits, the “Total Benefits”) would subject Executive to an excise tax
under Section 4999 of the Code (the “Excise Tax”), then the Company shall reduce the Separation Benefits (the “Benefit Reduction”) by the
amount necessary to result in 
9

Executive not being subject to the Excise Tax, if such reduction would result in Executive’s “Net After-Tax Amount” attributable to the Total
Benefits being greater than it would be if no Benefit Reduction was effected. For this purpose “Net After-Tax Amount” shall mean the net
amount of the Total Benefits that Executive is entitled to receive under this Agreement or any other agreement, plan or arrangement of the
Company or otherwise after giving effect to all federal, state and local taxes that would be applicable to such payments, including, but not
limited to, the Excise Tax. The determination of whether any such Benefit Reduction shall be effected shall be made by a nationally
recognized public accounting firm selected by the Company that is reasonably acceptable to Executive and is not the audit firm of the
potential acquirer in any transaction that would constitute a Change in Control (the “Accounting Firm”) and such determination shall be
binding on both Executive and the Company. In the event it is determined that a Benefit Reduction is required, the parties shall cooperate in
all material respects to mitigate the amount of any such reduction. To the extent that any Benefit Reduction is required following mitigation,
then such reduction shall be done first by reducing cash severance; then any accelerated vesting of any equity awards shall be reduced or
eliminated or waived, in reverse order of date of grant; and finally any other benefits to which Executive is or may be entitled shall be
reduced or eliminated, all as determined by the Accounting Firm.
SECTION 5.19. No provision of this Agreement may be altered, modified, or amended unless such alteration, modification or
amendment is agreed to in writing and signed by each of the parties hereto.
ARTICLE 6
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 6.01. Definitions. For purposes of this Agreement, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below.
“Accounting Firm” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 5.18.
“Accrued Benefits” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 3.02.
“Accrued Compensation” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 3.02.
“Aetna” means Aetna Inc., a Pennsylvania corporation.
“Agreement” has the meaning accorded such term in the introductory paragraph of
this Agreement.
“Annual Bonus” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 2.02(a).
“Annual Bonus Plan” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 2.02(a).
“Base Salary” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 2.01.
“Beneficial Owner” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act (including any successor to
such rule).
“Benefit Reduction” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 5.18.
10

“Board” means the Board of Directors of the Company.
“Cash Severance Payment” has the meaning accorded such term in Section
3.02(b)(i).
“Cause” means the occurrence of any one or more of the following:
(a)    Executive’s willful and material breach of Sections 2, 3, 4 or 7 of the Restrictive Covenant Agreement;
(b)    Executive is convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude; or
(c)    Executive engages in conduct that constitutes willful gross neglect or willful gross misconduct in carrying out Executive’s duties
under this Agreement, resulting, in either case, in material harm to the financial condition or reputation of the Company.
For purposes of this Agreement, an act or failure to act on Executive’s part shall be considered “willful” if it was done or omitted to
be done by Executive not in good faith and shall not include any act or failure to act resulting from any incapacity of Executive. For purposes
of this definition, wherever the term “Cause” is used in plans or other agreements governing Executive’s rights, the term used in such plans or
other agreements shall be no less favorable to Executive than the term Cause herein.
A termination for Cause shall not take effect unless the provisions of this paragraph are complied with. Executive shall be given
written notice by the Company of its intention to terminate Executive for Cause, such notice (i) to state in detail the particular act or acts or
failure or failures to act that constitute the grounds on which the proposed termination for Cause is based; and (ii) to be given within 90 days
of the Company’s learning of such act or acts or failure or failures to act. Executive shall have 20 days after the date that such written notice
has been given to Executive in which to cure such conduct, to the extent such cure is possible. If Executive fails to cure such conduct,
Executive shall then be entitled to a hearing before the Committee at which Executive is entitled to appear. Such hearing shall be held within
25 days of such notice to Executive, provided Executive requests such hearing within 10 days of the written notice from the Company of the
intention to terminate Executive for Cause. If, within five days following such hearing, Executive is furnished written notice by the Board
confirming that, in its judgment, grounds for Cause on the basis of the original notice exist, Executive shall thereupon be terminated for
Cause.
“Change in Control” means the occurrence of:
(a)
any Person (other than (i) the Company, (ii) any trustee or other fiduciary holding securities under any employee benefit plan
of the Company, (iii) any company owned, directly or indirectly, by the stockholders of the Company immediately after the occurrence with
respect to which the evaluation is being made in substantially the same proportions as their ownership of the common stock of the Company
immediately prior to such occurrence or (iv) any surviving or resulting entity from a merger or consolidation referred to in clause (c) below
that does not constitute a Change in Control under clause (c) below) becomes the Beneficial Owner (except that a Person shall be deemed to
be the Beneficial Owner of all shares that any such Person has the right to acquire pursuant to any agreement or arrangement or upon exercise
of conversion rights, warrants or options or otherwise, without regard to the 60 day period referred to in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act),
11

directly or indirectly, of securities of the Company or of any subsidiary owning directly or indirectly all or substantially all of the
consolidated assets of the Company (a “Significant Subsidiary”), representing 30% or more of the combined voting power of the Company’s
or such Significant Subsidiary’s then outstanding securities;
(b)
during any period of 12 consecutive months, individuals who at the beginning of such period constitute the Board, and any
new director whose election by the Board or nomination for election by the Company’s stockholders was approved by a vote of at least a
majority of the directors then still in office who either were directors at the beginning of the 12 month period or whose election or nomination
for election was previously so approved, cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board;
(c)
the consummation of a merger or consolidation of the Company or any Significant Subsidiary with any other entity, other
than a merger or consolidation which would result in the voting securities of the Company or a Significant Subsidiary outstanding
immediately prior thereto continuing to represent (either by remaining outstanding or by being converted into voting securities of the
surviving or resulting entity) more than 50% of the combined voting power of the surviving or resulting entity outstanding immediately after
such merger or consolidation; or
(d)
the consummation of a transaction (or series of transactions within a 12 month period) which constitutes the sale or
disposition of all or substantially all of the consolidated assets of the Company but in no event assets having a gross fair market value of less
than 40% of the total gross fair market value of all of the consolidated assets of the Company (other than such a sale or disposition
immediately after which such assets will be owned directly or indirectly by the stockholders of the Company in substantially the same
proportions as their ownership of the common stock of the Company immediately prior to such sale or disposition).
For purposes of this definition of Change in Control, the term “Person” shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3(a)(9)
of the Exchange Act and used in Sections 13(d) and 14(d) thereof, including “group” as defined in Section 13(d) thereof.
“Closing Effective Date” means November 28, 2018.
“Closing Sign-On Equity Award” means the sign-on equity award granted to Executive on the Closing Effective Date.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
“Committee” shall mean the Management Planning and Development Committee of the Board.
“Company” means CVS Health Corporation, a Delaware corporation.
“Disability” means Long-Term Disability, as such term is defined in the Disability Plan.
“Disability Plan” means the long-term disability plan (or any successor disability and/or survivorship plan adopted by the Company)
in which Executive participates, as in effect immediately prior to the relevant event (subject to changes in coverage levels applicable to all
employees generally covered by such Disability Plan).
12

“Effective Date” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 1.01.
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time, or any successor act thereto.
“Excise Tax” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 5.18.
“Executive” has the meaning accorded such term in the introductory paragraph of this Agreement.
“Good Reason” means, without Executive’s express written consent, the occurrence of any one or more of the following: (a) a
reduction by the Company of Executive’s Base Salary or Annual Bonus from the level in effect immediately prior thereto, except in the event
of a ratable reduction affecting all senior officers of the Company; (b) an assignment of any duties to Executive that is materially inconsistent
with Executive’s duties and responsibilities or a material diminution of Executive’s duties and responsibilities, in each case as such duties and
responsibilities were in effect immediately following the Effective Date; (c) any failure of a successor of the Company to assume and agree to
perform the Company’s entire obligations under this Agreement, as required by Section 4.01 hereof, provided that such successor has
received at least ten (10) days written notice from the Company or Executive of the requirements of such Section 4.01; (d) Executive
reporting to any person other than the Board; (e) removal of Executive as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company (other than
in connection with a termination of Executive’s employment for Cause); (f) any action or inaction by the Company that constitutes a material
breach of the terms of this Agreement; or (g) the Company’s failure to nominate and recommend Executive for re-election to the Board.
“LTIP” means the Company’s long-term incentive program.
“Original Employment Agreement” has the meaning accorded such term in the recitals to this Agreement.
“Payment Period” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 3.02.
“Pro-Rata Bonus Amount” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 3.02.
“PSUs” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 2.02(c).
“Qualifying Event” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 3.01.
“Restrictive Covenant Agreement” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 5.15.
“Separation Benefits” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 3.02.
“Total Benefits” has the meaning accorded such term in Section 5.18.
[Signature page follows]
13

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company and Executive have executed this Agreement on this 5th day of November 2020.
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
By:
/s/ Lisa Bisaccia
Name:
Lisa Bisaccia
Title:
Chief Human Resources Officer
Acknowledged and Accepted:
CVS PHARMACY, INC.
By:
/s/ Lisa Bisaccia
Name:
Lisa Bisaccia
Title:
Chief Human Resources Officer
EXECUTIVE
/s/ Karen S. Lynch
Karen S. Lynch
Exhibit A: Form of Release Agreement
Exhibit B: Restrictive Covenant Agreement

Exhibit 10.52
CVS Health Corporation
Restrictive Covenant Agreement
I, Karen Lynch, enter into this Restrictive Covenant Agreement (“Agreement”) with CVS Health Corporation, on its own behalf and
on behalf of its subsidiaries and affiliates (“CVS” or “Corporation”), which is effective as of February 1, 2021 (“Effective Date”) and shall
supersede my current Restrictive Covenant Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2018 (“Current Restrictive Covenant Agreement”), which
shall remain in full force and effect until such time. In consideration of the mutual promises in this Agreement, the parties agree as follows:
1.    Consideration for Agreement. In connection with my duties and responsibilities at CVS Health Corporation or one of its subsidiaries or
affiliates, including but not limited to CVS Pharmacy, Inc., Aetna, Inc., Caremark, LLC and Coram, LLC (collectively, the “Corporation”),
the Corporation will provide me with Confidential Information and/or access to the Corporation’s customers and clients and the opportunity
to develop and maintain relationships and goodwill with them. In addition, the Corporation has awarded me additional financial
compensation, pursuant to my Amended and Restated Employment Agreement, dated as of November 5, 2020 (“Employment Agreement”),
which is contingent on the execution of this Agreement and compliance with its terms.
2.    Non-Competition. During my employment by the Corporation and during the Non-Competition Period following the termination of my
employment for any reason, I will not, directly or indirectly, engage in Competition or provide Consulting or Audit Services within the
Restricted Area.
a.    Competition. Engaging in “Competition” means providing services to a Competitor of the Corporation (whether as an
employee, independent contractor, consultant, principal, agent, partner, officer, director, investor, or shareholder, except as a shareholder of
less than one percent of a publicly traded company) that: (i) are the same or similar in function or purpose to the services I provided to the
Corporation at any time during the last two years of my employment by the Corporation; or (ii) will likely result in the disclosure of
Confidential Information to a Competitor or the use of Confidential Information on behalf of a Competitor. If a representative of the
Corporation, during my employment or the Non-Competition Period, requests that I identify the company or business to which I will be or am
providing services, or with which I will be or am employed, and requests that I provide information about the services that I am or will be
providing to such entity, I shall provide the Corporation with a written statement detailing the identity of the entity and the nature of the
services that I am or will be providing to such entity with sufficient detail to allow the Corporation to independently assess whether I am or
will be in violation of this Agreement. Such statement shall be delivered to the Corporation’s Chief Human Resources Officer or her
authorized delegate via personal delivery or overnight delivery within five calendar days of my receipt of such request.
b.    Competitor. A “Competitor” for purposes of this Agreement shall mean any person, corporation or other entity that competes
with one or more of the business offerings of the Corporation As of the Effective Date, the Corporation’s business offerings include: (i)
pharmacy benefits management (“PBM”), including: (a) the administration of pharmacy benefits for businesses, government agencies and
health plans; (b) mail order pharmacy; (c) specialty pharmacy; (d) the procurement of prescription drugs at a negotiated rate for dispensing;
and (e) Medicare Part D
Page | 1
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

services; (ii) retail, which includes the sale of prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, beauty products and cosmetics, digital and
traditional photo finishing services, digital and other online offerings, seasonal and other general merchandise, greeting cards, convenience
foods and other product lines and services which are sold by the Corporation’s retail division (“Retail”); (iii) retail health clinics
(“MinuteClinic”); (iv) the provision of pharmaceutical products and ancillary services, including specialty pharmaceutical products and
support services and the provision of related pharmacy consulting, data management services and medical supplies to long-term care
facilities, other healthcare service providers and recipients of services from such facilities (“Long- Term Care”); (v) the provision of
prescription infusion drugs and related services (“Infusion”); (vi) the provision of insurance (“Insurance”) including: (a) health insurance
products and services; (b) managed health care products and services; (c) dental, vision, workers compensation and employee assistance
program products and services; (d) wellness products and services to employers, government agencies, health plans, other businesses or third
party payers; (e) other voluntary products that are excepted benefits under HIPAA; (vii) the creation and provision of population health
management products and services (“Health Management”); (viii) the administration of (ii) – (vii) (“Administration”); and (ix) any other
business in which Corporation is engaged or imminently will be engaged.
For the purpose of assessing whether I am engaging in “Competition” under Section 2(a)(i) above, a person, corporation or other entity shall
not be considered a Retail Competitor if such entity derives annual gross revenues from its business in an amount which is less than 2% of the
Corporation’s gross revenues from Retail, during its most recently completed fiscal year. For avoidance of doubt, this exclusion does not
apply to a determination of whether I am engaging in “Competition” as set forth in Section 2(a)(ii) above.
The parties acknowledge that both the Corporation’s products and services and the entities which compete with the Corporation’s products
and services evolve and an entity will be considered a Competitor if it provides products or services competitive with the products and
services provided by the Corporation within the last two years of my employment.
I agree to this enterprise-wide definition of Competition which may prevent me from providing services to any of the Corporation’s
PBM, Retail, Insurance, Health Management, MinuteClinic, Long-Term Care, Administration and/or Infusion Competitors or any
combination thereof during the Non-Competition period.
c.    Consulting or Audit Services. “Consulting or Audit Services” shall mean any activity which involves providing audit review
or other consulting or advisory services with respect to any relationship or prospective relationship between the Corporation and any third
party that is likely to result in the use or disclosure of Confidential Information.
d.    Non-Competition Period. The “Non-Competition Period” shall be the period of 24 months following the termination of my
employment with the Corporation for any reason.
e.    Restricted Area. “Restricted Area” refers to those states within the United States in which the Corporation conducts its
business, as well as the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. To the extent I worked on international projects in Asia, Europe, Brazil or other
countries where the Corporation may conduct business, the Restricted Area includes those countries and those countries where the
Corporation is actively planning to conduct business.
Page | 2
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

3.    Non-Solicitation. During the Non-Solicitation Period, which shall be during my employment by the Corporation and for 24 months
following the termination of my employment with the Corporation for any reason, I will not, unless a duly authorized officer of the
Corporation gives me written authorization to do so:
a.    interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with its Business Partners by soliciting or communicating (regardless of who
initiates the communication) with a Business Partner to: (i) induce or encourage the Business Partner to stop doing business or reduce its
business with the Corporation, or (ii) buy a product or service that competes with a product or service offered by the Corporation’s business.
“Business Partner” means: a customer (person or entity), prospective customer (person or entity), healthcare provider, supplier, agency,
manufacturer, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care facility, and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer with whom the Corporation has a
business relationship and with which I had business-related contact or dealings, or about which I received Confidential Information, in the
two years prior to the termination of my employment with the Corporation. A Business Partner does not include a customer, supplier,
manufacturer, broker, hospital, hospital system, long-term care facility and/or pharmaceutical manufacturer which has fully and finally ceased
doing any business with the Corporation independent of any conduct or communications by me or breach of this Agreement and such full
cessation of business has been in effect for at least 1 year prior to my separation from employment with the Corporation. Nothing in this
Paragraph 3(a) shall prevent me from working as a staff pharmacist or in another retail position wherein I would be providing or selling
prescriptions or other products directly to consumers.
b.    work on a Corporation account on behalf of a Business Partner or serve as the representative of a Business Partner for the
Corporation.
c.    interfere with the Corporation’s relationship with any employee or contractor of the Corporation by: (i) soliciting or
communicating with the employee or contractor to induce or encourage him or her to leave the Corporation’s employ or engagement
(regardless of who first initiates the communication); (ii) helping another person or entity evaluate such employee or contractor as an
employment or contractor candidate; or (iii) otherwise helping any person or entity hire an employee or contractor away from the
Corporation.
4.    Non-Disclosure of Confidential Information.
a.    Subject to Sections 7 and 8 below, I will not at any time, whether during or after the termination of my employment, disclose to
any person or entity any of the Corporation’s Confidential Information, except as may be appropriately required in the ordinary course of
performing my duties as an employee of the Corporation. The Corporation’s Confidential Information includes but is not limited to the
following non-public information: trade secrets; computer code generated or developed by the Corporation; software or programs and related
documentation; strategic compilations and analysis; strategic processes; business or financial methods, practices and plans; non-public costs
and prices; operating margins; marketing, merchandising and selling techniques and information; customer lists; provider lists; details of
customer agreements; pricing arrangements with pharmaceutical manufacturers, distributors or suppliers including but not limited to any
discounts and/or rebates; pharmacy reimbursement rates; premium information; payment rates; contractual forms; expansion strategies; real
estate strategies; operating strategies; sources of supply; patient records; business plans; other financial, commercial, business or technical
information related to the Corporation and confidential information of third
Page | 3
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

parties which is given to the Corporation pursuant to an obligation or agreement to keep such information confidential (collectively,
“Confidential Information”). I shall not use or attempt to use any Confidential Information on behalf of any person or entity other than the
Corporation, or in any manner which may injure or cause loss or may be calculated to injure or cause loss, whether directly or indirectly, to
the Corporation. If, at any time over the last two years of my employment at CVS, my position included access to Confidential Information,
as described above, specifically related to the Corporation’s procurement of prescription drugs, I understand and agree my employment with a
pharmaceutical manufacturer, distributor or supplier (“Pharmaceutical Entity”)would place a substantial risk of use and/or disclosure of
Confidential Information with which I have been or will be entrusted during my employment with the Corporation. In light of this risk of
disclosure, I acknowledge and agree that the Corporation will be entitled to immediate injunctive relief to prevent me from disclosing any
such Confidential Information in the course of my employment with any such Pharmaceutical Entity. I agree that the disclosure of such
Confidential Information, to Corporation’s PBM Competitors with which one may negotiate in the course of employment with such
Pharmaceutical Entity, would cause immediate and irreparable harm to the Corporation. For employees residing in Connecticut, these
restrictions on use or disclosure of Confidential Information will only apply for three (3) years after the end of my employment where
information that does not qualify as a trade secret is concerned; however, the restrictions will continue apply to trade secret information for as
long as the information at issue remains qualified as a trade secret.
b.    During my employment, I shall not make, use, or permit to be used, any materials of any nature relating to any matter within the
scope of the business of the Corporation or concerning any of its dealings or affairs other than for the benefit of the Corporation. I shall not,
after the termination of my employment, use or permit to be used any such materials and shall return same in accordance with Section 5
below.
5.    Ownership and Return of the Corporation’s Property. On or before my final date of employment with the Corporation, I shall return
to the Corporation all property of the Corporation in my possession, custody or control, including but not limited to the originals and copies
of any information provided to or acquired by me in connection with the performance of my duties for the Corporation, such as files,
correspondence, communications, memoranda, e-mails, slides, records, and all other documents, no matter how produced or reproduced, all
computer equipment, communication devices (including but not limited to any mobile phone or other portable digital assistant or device),
computer programs and/or files, and all office keys and access cards. I agree that all the items described in this Section are the sole property
of the Corporation.
6.    Rights to Inventions, Works.
a.    Assignment of Inventions. All inventions, original works of authorship, developments, concepts, improvements, designs,
discoveries, ideas, trademarks or trade secrets, whether patentable or otherwise protectable under similar law, made, conceived or developed
by me, whether alone or jointly with others, from the date of my initial employment by the Corporation and continuing until the end of any
period during which I am employed by the Corporation, relating or pertaining in any way to my employment with or the business of the
Corporation (collectively referred to as “Inventions”) shall be promptly disclosed in writing to the Corporation. I hereby assign to the
Corporation, or its designee, all of my rights, title and interest to such Inventions. All original works of authorship which are made by me
(solely or jointly with others) within the scope of and during the period of my employment with the Corporation and which are protectable by
copyright are “works made for hire,” as that term is defined in the United States Copyright Act and
Page | 4
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

as such are the sole property of the Corporation. The decision whether to commercialize or market any Invention developed by me solely or
jointly with others is within the Corporation’s sole discretion and for the Corporation’s sole benefit and no royalty will be due to me as a
result of the Corporation’s efforts to commercialize or market any such Invention.
b.    Inventions Retained and Licensed. I have attached hereto as Exhibit A, a list describing all inventions, original works of
authorship, developments, improvements, and trade secrets which were made by me prior to my employment with the Corporation (“Prior
Inventions”), which belong to me and are not assigned to the Corporation hereunder. If no such list is attached, I represent that there are no
such Prior Inventions. I will not incorporate, or permit to be incorporated, any Prior Invention owned by me or in which I have an interest into
a Corporation product, process or machine without the Corporation’s prior written consent. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, if, in the
course of my employment with the Corporation, I incorporate into a Corporation product, process or machine a Prior Invention owned by me
or in which I have an interest, the Corporation is hereby granted and shall have a nonexclusive, royalty-free, irrevocable, perpetual,
worldwide license to make, have made, modify, use and sell such Prior Invention as part of or in connection with such product, process or
machine.
c.    Patent and Copyright Registrations. I will assist the Corporation, or its designee, at the Corporation’s expense, in every proper
way to secure the Corporation’s rights in the Inventions and any copyrights, patents, mask work rights or other intellectual property rights
relating thereto, including, but not limited to, the disclosure to the Corporation of all pertinent information and data with respect thereto, the
execution of all applications, specifications, oaths, assignments and all other instruments which the Corporation shall deem necessary in order
to apply for and obtain such rights and in order to assign and convey to the Corporation, its successors, assigns, and nominees the sole and
exclusive rights, title and interest in and to such Inventions, and any copyrights, patents, mask work rights or other intellectual property rights
relating thereto. My obligation to execute or cause to be executed, when it is in my power to do so, any such instrument or papers shall
continue after my employment ends for any reason and/or after the termination of this Agreement. If the Corporation is unable because of my
mental or physical incapacity or for any other reason to secure my signature to apply for or to pursue any application for any United States or
foreign patents or copyright registrations covering Inventions or original works of authorship assigned to the Corporation as above, then I
hereby irrevocably designate and appoint the Corporation and its duly authorized officers and agents as my agent and attorney in fact, to act
for and in my behalf and stead to execute and file any such applications and to do all other lawfully permitted acts to further the prosecution
and issuance of letters patent or copyright registrations thereon with the same legal force and effect as if executed by me.
7.    Cooperation.
a.    In the event I receive a subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order to testify or produce Confidential
Information or any other information or property of the Corporation, I shall promptly: (a) notify the Corporation of the item, document, or
information sought by such subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order; (b) furnish the Corporation with a copy
of said subpoena, deposition notice, interview request, or other process or order; and (c) provide reasonable cooperation with respect to any
procedure that the Corporation may initiate to protect Confidential Information or other interests. If the Corporation objects to the subpoena,
deposition notice, interview request, process, or order, I shall cooperate to ensure that there shall be no disclosure until the court or other
applicable entity has ruled upon the objection, and
Page | 5
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

then only in accordance with the ruling so made. If no such objection is made despite a reasonable opportunity to do so, I shall be entitled to
comply with the subpoena, deposition, notice, interview request, or other process or order provided that I have fulfilled the above obligations.
b.    I will cooperate fully with the Corporation, its affiliates, and their legal counsel in connection with any action, proceeding, or
dispute arising out of matters with which I was directly or indirectly involved while serving as an employee of the Corporation, its
predecessors, subsidiaries or affiliates. This cooperation shall include, but shall not be limited to, meeting with, and providing information to,
the Corporation and its legal counsel, maintaining the confidentiality of any past or future privileged communications with the Corporation’s
legal counsel (outside and in-house), and making myself available to testify truthfully by affidavit, in depositions, or in any other forum on
behalf of the Corporation. The Corporation agrees to reimburse me for any reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket costs associated with my
cooperation.
8.    Limitation on Restrictions. Nothing in this Agreement is intended to or shall interfere with my right to file charges or participate in a
proceeding with any appropriate federal, state or local government agency, including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(“OSHA”), National Labor Relations Board (“NLRB”) or the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), or to exercise rights under
Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act (“NLRA”), or interfere with my right to file a charge or complaint with or participate or
cooperate in an investigation or proceeding with the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”) or comparable state or local
agencies; such agencies have authority to carry out their statutory duties by investigating a charge, issuing a determination, filing a lawsuit, or
taking any other action authorized by law. I retain the right to participate in any such action and retain the right to communicate with, NLRB,
SEC, EEOC, OSHA and comparable state or local agencies and such communication shall not be limited by any provision in this Agreement.
Nothing in this Agreement limits my right to receive an award for information provided to a government agency such as the SEC and OSHA.
In addition, nothing in this Agreement is intended to interfere with or restrain the immunity provided under 18 U.S.C. § 1833(b) for
confidential disclosures of trade secrets to government officials, or lawyers, solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected
violation of law; or in a sealed filing in court or other proceeding.
9.    Injunctive Relief. Any breach of this Agreement by me will cause irreparable damage to the Corporation and, in the event of such
breach, the Corporation shall have, in addition to any and all remedies of law, the right to an injunction, specific performance or other
equitable relief to prevent the violation of my obligations hereunder, and without providing a bond to the extent permitted by the applicable
rules of civil procedure.
10.    No Right of Continued Employment. This Agreement does not create an obligation on the Corporation or any other person or entity to
continue my employment.
11.    No Conflicting Agreements. I represent that the performance of my job duties with the Corporation and my compliance with all of the
terms of this Agreement does not and will not breach any agreement to keep in confidence proprietary information acquired by me in
confidence or in trust prior to my employment by the Corporation.
12.    Entire Agreement/No Reliance/No Modifications. Except as provided in this Section 12 and Section 13, this Agreement and any
compensation, benefit or equity plan or agreement referred to herein or under which equity was granted, including my Employment
Agreement, to the extent
Page | 6
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

those other agreements apply to me, set forth the entire agreement between the parties hereto and fully supersede any and all prior and/or
supplemental understandings, whether written or oral, between the parties concerning the subject matter of this Agreement; provided,
however, that my Current Restrictive Covenant Agreement shall continue to remain in full force and effect until the Effective Date. I agree
and acknowledge that I have not relied on any representations, promises or agreements of any kind in connection with my decision to accept
the terms of this Agreement, except for the representations, promises and agreements herein. This Agreement shall not have any effect on any
prior existing agreements between Corporation and me regarding the arbitration of workplace legal disputes and any such agreements remain
in full force and effect. Any modification to this Agreement must be made in writing and signed by me and the Corporation’s Chief Human
Resources Officer or her authorized representative.
13.    Supplementation. The Restrictive Covenants set forth in this Agreement shall supplement and do not supersede the restrictions agreed
to by me in any other agreement or contract I have entered into with the Corporation (including Aetna, Inc.).
14.    No Waiver. Any waiver by the Corporation of a breach of any provision of this Agreement, or of any other similar agreement with any
other current or former employee of the Corporation, shall not operate or be construed as a waiver of any subsequent breach of such provision
or any other provision hereof.
15.    Severability. The parties hereby agree that each provision herein shall be treated as a separate and independent clause, and the
unenforceability of any one clause shall in no way impair the enforceability of any of the other clauses herein. Moreover, if one or more of
the provisions of this Agreement are for any reason held to be excessively broad as to scope, activity, duration, subject or otherwise so as to
be unenforceable at law, the parties consent to such provision or provisions being modified or limited by the appropriate judicial body (where
allowed by applicable law), so as to be enforceable to the maximum extent compatible with the applicable law.
16.    Survival of Employee’s Obligations. My obligations under this Agreement shall survive the termination of my employment regardless
of the manner of such termination and shall be binding upon my heirs, personal representatives, executors, administrators and legal
representatives.
17.    Eligibility for Severance Pay. If my employment with the Corporation terminates under circumstances in which I am eligible for
severance under my Employment Agreement, the Corporation will offer me severance in accordance with my Employment Agreement and
the length of the Non-Competition Period will match the length of the severance period. I acknowledge that my Employment Agreement sets
forth pre-requisites I must meet in order to receive severance, including but not limited to execution and non-revocation of the form of release
agreement attached as Exhibit A to my Employment Agreement. In the event that the Corporation fails to comply with its obligations to offer
me severance according to my Employment Agreement, then Section 2 of this Agreement shall be of no further effect. I agree that if I decline
the Corporation’s offer of severance, I shall continue to be subject to the restrictions in Section 2.
18.    Corporation’s Right to Assign Agreement. The Corporation has the right to assign this Agreement to its successors and assigns
without the need for further agreement or consent by me, and all covenants and agreements hereunder shall inure to the benefit of and be
enforceable by said successors or assigns.
Page | 7
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

19.    Non-Assignment. I shall not assign my rights and obligations under this Agreement, in whole or in part, whether by operation of law or
otherwise, without the prior written consent of the Corporation, and any such assignment contrary to the terms hereof shall be null and void
and of no force or effect.
20.    Governing Law; Venue; Headings. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of
Rhode Island. I agree that any claim or dispute I may have against the corporation must be resolved by a court located in the state of Rhode
Island. The headings of the sections contained in this Agreement are for convenience only and shall not be deemed to control or affect the
meaning or construction of any provision of this Agreement.
21.    Tolling. In the event I violate one of the time-limited restrictions in this Agreement, I agree that the time period for such violated
restriction shall be extended by one day for each day I have violated the restriction, up to a maximum extension equal to the length of the
original period of the restricted covenant.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed this Agreement as a sealed instrument as of the date set forth below.
/s/ Karen S. Lynch
/s/ Lisa Bisaccia
Lisa Bisaccia
Chief Human Resources Officer
CVS Health Corporation
Employee ID
Date:
11-6-2020
Page | 8
2020 Karen Lynch RCA

Exhibit 21.1
Subsidiaries of CVS Health Corporation
Listed below are subsidiaries under CVS Health Corporation at December 31, 2020 with their jurisdictions of organization shown in parentheses. Subsidiaries
excluded from the list below are not insurance companies and would not, in the aggregate, constitute a “significant subsidiary” of CVS Health Corporation, as that
term is defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.
•
CVS Foreign, Inc. (New York)
◦
CVS Caremark Indemnity Ltd. (Bermuda)
◦
CVS International, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (Rhode Island)
•
Aetna Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Health of California Inc. (California)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Florida)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Georgia)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Maine)
◦
Aetna Health of Michigan Inc. (Michigan)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (New York)
▪
Aetna Better Health Inc. (New York)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Texas)
◦
Aetna Better Health of California Inc. (California)
◦
Aetna Health of Ohio Inc. (Ohio)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Texas Inc. (Texas)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Washington, Inc. (Washington)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Georgia)
◦
Aetna HealthAssurance Pennsylvania, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Dental of California Inc. (California)
◦
Aetna Dental Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Dental Inc. (Texas)
◦
Aetna Rx Home Delivery, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Health Management, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Ireland Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Cofinity, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
@Credentials Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Illinois Inc. (Illinois)
◦
Aetna Better Health Premier Plan MMAI Inc. (Illinois)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Kansas Inc. (Kansas)
◦
Aetna Better Health, Inc. (Louisiana)
◦
Aetna Florida Inc. (Florida)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Ohio)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Oklahoma Inc. (Oklahoma)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Nevada Inc. (Nevada)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Better Health of North Carolina Inc. (North Carolina)
◦
Aetna Network Services LLC (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Risk Assurance Company of Connecticut Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Student Health Agency Inc. (Massachusetts)
1

◦
Delaware Physicians Care, Incorporated (Delaware)
◦
Schaller Anderson Medical Administrators, Incorporated (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Medicaid Administrators LLC (Arizona)
◦
iTriage, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Medical Examinations of New York, P.C. (New York)
◦
bswift LLC (Illinois)
◦
Prodigy Health Group, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Niagara Re, Inc. (New York)
▪
Performax, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Scrip World, LLC (Utah)
▪
Precision Benefit Services, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
American Health Holding, Inc. (Ohio)
▪
Meritain Health, Inc. (New York)
•
Administrative Enterprises, Inc. (Arizona)
•
U.S Healthcare Holdings, LLC (Ohio)
•
Prime Net, Inc. (Ohio)
•
Professional Risk Management, Inc. (Ohio)
◦
ADMINCO, Inc. (Arizona)
◦
Aetna ACO Holdings Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Pharmacy Management Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Coventry Transplant Network, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Health of Iowa Inc. (Iowa)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Nebraska, Inc. (Nebraska)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Louisiana)
◦
HealthAssurance Pennsylvania, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Coventry Prescription Management Services Inc. (Nevada)
◦
Coventry Health and Life Insurance Company (Missouri)
▪
Aetna Better Health of Kentucky Insurance Company (Kentucky)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Virginia, Inc. (Virginia)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Missouri, Inc. (Missouri)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Missouri LLC (Missouri)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Illinois, Inc. (Illinois)
◦
Coventry Health Care of West Virginia, Inc. (West Virginia)
◦
Coventry HealthCare Management Corporation (Delaware)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Kansas, Inc. (Kansas)
◦
Coventry Health Care National Accounts, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Michigan Inc. (Michigan)
◦
Aetna Health of Utah Inc. (Utah)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Tennessee Inc. (Tennessee)
◦
Coventry Health Care National Network, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Coventry Consumer Advantage, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
MHNet Specialty Services, LLC (Maryland)
▪
Mental Health Network of New York IPA, Inc. (New York)
▪
Mental Health Associates, Inc. (Louisiana)
▪
MHNet of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
Group Dental Service, Inc. (Maryland)
▪
Group Dental Service of Maryland, Inc. (Maryland)
◦
Florida Health Plan Administrators, LLC (Florida)
▪
Aetna Better Health of Florida Inc. (Florida)
▪
Carefree Insurance Services, Inc. (Florida)
▪
Coventry Health Plan of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
First Health Group Corp. (Delaware)
▪
First Health Life & Health Insurance Company (Texas)
▪
Claims Administration Corp. (Maryland)
◦
Continental Life Insurance Company of Brentwood, Tennessee (Tennessee)
2

◦
American Continental Insurance Company (Tennessee)
◦
Aetna Life Insurance Company (Connecticut)
◦
AHP Holdings, Inc. (Connecticut)
▪
Aetna Insurance Company of Connecticut (Connecticut)
▪
AE Fourteen, Incorporated (Connecticut)
▪
Aetna Life Assignment Company (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna ACO Holdings Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Innovation Health Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
•
Innovation Health Insurance Company (Virginia)
◦
Innovation Health Plan, Inc. (Virginia)
▪
Texas Health + Aetna Health Insurance Holding Company LLC (Texas)
•
Texas Health + Aetna Health Insurance Company (Texas)
◦
Texas Health + Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Texas)
◦
Banner Health and Aetna Health Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Banner Health and Aetna Health Insurance Company (Arizona)
◦
Banner Health and Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Arizona)
◦
Sutter Health and Aetna Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Sutter Health and Aetna Administrative Services LLC (Delaware)
▪
Sutter Health and Aetna Insurance Company (California)
◦
Allina Health and Aetna Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Allina Health and Aetna Insurance Company (Minnesota)
◦
PE Holdings, LLC (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Resources LLC (Delaware)
◦
Canal Place, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Ventures, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Phoenix Data Solutions LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Financial Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Asset Advisors, LLC (Delaware)
◦
U.S. Healthcare Properties, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Capital Management, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Aetna Partners Diversified Fund, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Workers’ Comp Access, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Behavioral Health, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Managed Care Coordinators, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Horizon Behavioral Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Employee Assistance Services, LLC (Kentucky)
▪
Health and Human Resource Center, Inc. (California)
▪
Resources for Living, LLC (Texas)
▪
The Vasquez Group Inc. (Illinois)
▪
Work and Family Benefits, Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Card Solutions, LLC (Connecticut)
◦
PayFlex Holdings, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
PayFlex Systems USA, Inc. (Nebraska)
◦
Aetna Health and Life Insurance Company (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance Company (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance Company of New York (New York)
◦
AUSHC Holdings, Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
PHPSNE Parent Corporation (Delaware)
◦
Active Health Management, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Health Data & Management Solutions, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Integrated Informatics, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Health Re, Inc. (Vermont)
◦
ASI Wings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Health Clinical Trial Services LLC (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Corporate Services LLC (Delaware)
3

◦
Echo Merger Sub, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna International Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Life & Casualty (Bermuda) Ltd. (Bermuda)
◦
Aetna International Ex Pat LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Global Holdings Limited (England & Wales)
▪
Aetna Insurance (Hong Kong) Limited (Hong Kong)
▪
Virtual Home Healthcare LLC (Dubai)
▪
Minor Health Enterprise Co, Ltd. (Thailand)
▪
Health Care Management Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Aetna Services (Thailand) Limited (Thailand)
•
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
▪
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
▪
Aetna Holdings (Thailand) Limited (Thailand)
•
Health Care Management Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Minor Health Enterprise Co, Ltd. (Thailand)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
◦
Aetna Global Benefits (Bermuda) Limited (Bermuda)
▪
Goodhealth Worldwide (Global) Limited (Bermuda)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits (Europe) Limited (England & Wales)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits (Asia Pacific) Limited (Hong Kong)
•
PT Aetna Management Consulting (Indonesia)
▪
Goodhealth Worldwide (Asia) Limited (Hong Kong)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits Limited (DIFC, UAE)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits (Middle East) LLC (UAE)
▪
Pt. Aetna Global Benefits Indonesia (Indonesia)
▪
Spinnaker Topco Limited (Bermuda)
•
Spinnaker Bidco Limited (England and Wales)
◦
Aetna Holdco (UK) Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (UK) Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Insurance Company Limited (England and Wales)
◦
Aetna Insurance (Singapore) Pte. Ltd. (Singapore)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance Company of Europe DAC (Ireland)
◦
Aetna (Shanghai) Enterprise Services Co. Ltd. (China)
▪
Aetna (Beijing) Enterprise Management Services Co., Ltd. (China)
◦
Aetna Global Benefits (Singapore) PTE. LTD. (Singapore)
▪
Indian Health Organisation Private Limited (India)
◦
PT Aetna Management Consulting (Indonesia)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (continued)
•
Alabama CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Alabama)
•
Alaska CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Alaska)
•
American Drug Stores Delaware, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Arkansas CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Arkansas)
•
CareCenter Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Caremark Rx, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
ACS ACQCO CORP. (Delaware)
◦
Advanced Care Scripts, Inc. (Florida)
◦
CaremarkPCS, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS Health, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark IPA, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
Accordant Health Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
AdvancePCS SpecialtyRx, LLC (Delaware)
◦
AdvanceRx.com, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark PhC, L.L.C. (Delaware)
4

◦
Caremark Ulysses Holding Corp. (New York)
◦
MemberHealth LLC (Delaware)
◦
UAC Holding, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Arizona Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Arizona)
◦
Caremark Arizona Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Caremark California Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Florida Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Florida)
◦
Caremark Florida Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Florida)
◦
Caremark Hawaii Mail Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Hawaii)
◦
Caremark Hawaii Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Hawaii)
◦
Caremark Illinois Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Illinois)
◦
CVS Caremark Advanced Technology Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Illinois Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Irving Resource Center, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Kansas Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Kansas)
◦
Caremark Logistics, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Caremark Louisiana Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Louisiana)
◦
Caremark Maryland Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Maryland)
◦
Caremark Massachusetts Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Massachusetts)
◦
Caremark Michigan Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Michigan)
◦
Caremark Minnesota Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
Caremark New Jersey Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (New Jersey)
◦
Caremark North Carolina Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (North Carolina)
◦
Caremark Ohio Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
Caremark Pennsylvania Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
Caremark Redlands Pharmacy, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Repack, LLC (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Tennessee Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Tennessee)
◦
Caremark Texas Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Texas Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Washington Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Washington)
◦
Central Rx Services, LLC (Nevada)
◦
CVS Caremark TN SUTA, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Generation Health, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
NovoLogix, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS Alabama Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Alabama)
◦
CVS Caremark Part D Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Eckerd Corporation of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
Express Pharmacy Services of PA, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Ocean Acquisition Sub, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Coram LLC (Delaware)
◦
T2 Medical, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Alabama (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Florida (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Greater D.C. (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Greater New York (New York)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Indiana (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Mississippi (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Nevada (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Northern California (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Southern California (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Southern Florida (Delaware)
▪
Coram Specialty Infusion Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
▪
Coram Rx, LLC (Delaware)
5

▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of North Texas (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Utah (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Massachusetts (Delaware)
▪
Coram Alternate Site Services, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Management, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Part D Holding Company, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Accendo Insurance Company (Utah)
◦
Silverscript Insurance Company (Tennessee)
•
Connecticut CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Connecticut)
•
Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. (Delaware)*
◦
CVS Cabot Holdings Inc. (Delaware)*
◦
CVS Shaw Holdings Inc. (Delaware)*
◦
Omnicare, LLC (Delaware)*
▪
Evergreen Pharmaceutical of California, LLC (California)
▪
JHC Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Pharmacy, LLC (Alaska)
◦
Geneva Woods Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Retail Pharmacy LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods LTC Pharmacy, LLC
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Wyoming, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Washington, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Alaska, LLC (Delaware)
▪
AMC - Tennessee, LLC (Delaware)
▪
CHP Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Home Pharmacy Services, LLC (Missouri)
▪
CP Acquisition, LLC (Oklahoma)
▪
Managed Healthcare, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Medical Arts Health Care, LLC (Georgia)
▪
NIV Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
OCR Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Shore Pharmaceutical Providers, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of Nevada, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacies of the Great Plains Holding, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of Nebraska LLC (Delaware)
▪
Pharmacy Associates of Glenn Falls, LLC (New York)
▪
Sterling Healthcare Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Superior Care Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
▪
TCPI Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
UC Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Weber Medical Systems LLC (Delaware)
▪
Williamson Drug Company, LLC (Virginia)
▪
Med World Acquisition Corp. (Delaware)
▪
MHHP Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
______________________
*Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. – CVS Pharmacy, Inc. 75%/Aetna Life Insurance Company 25%
* CVS Cabot Holdings, Inc. – Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. 99.72%/Aetna Inc. 0.28%
*CVS Shaw Holdings, Inc. – Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. 99.72%/Aetna Inc. 0.28%
*Omnicare, LLC – Aetna Inc. 0.28%/CVS Cabot Holdings, Inc. 49.86%/CVS Shaw Holdings, Inc. 49.86%
 
6

◦
Omnicare, LLC (continued)
▪
NeighborCare Pharmacy Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
APS Acquisition LLC (Delaware)
▪
ASCO HealthCare, LLC (Maryland)
▪
Badger Acquisition LLC (Delaware)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Minnesota LLC (Delaware)
•
Merwin Long Term Care, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Ohio LLC (Delaware)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Kentucky LLC (Delaware)
▪
Best Care LTC Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Care Pharmaceutical Services, LP (Delaware)
▪
CCRx Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Continuing Care Rx, LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
CCRx of North Carolina LLC (Delaware)
▪
Compscript, LLC (Florida)
◦
Campo’s Medical Pharmacy, LLC (Louisiana)
▪
D & R Pharmaceutical Services LLC (Kentucky)
▪
Enloe Drugs, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Evergreen Pharmaceutical, LLC (Washington)
▪
Home Care Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Interlock Pharmacy Systems, LLC (Missouri)
▪
Langsam Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
LCPS Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare Pharmacy of Tennessee LLC (Delaware)
▪
Lobos Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Lo-Med Prescription Services, LLC (Ohio)
◦
ZS Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Main Street Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Maryland)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Illinois, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Iowa, LLC (Ohio)
◦
Martin Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Kansas, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Kentucky, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Montana, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of New Mexico, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of South Carolina, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Tennessee, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Ohio, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Wisconsin, LLC (Ohio)
▪
North Shore Pharmacy Services LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Indiana Partnership Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of New York, LLC (Delaware)
◦
NeighborCare of Indiana, LLC (Indiana)
•
Grandview Pharmacy, LLC (Indiana)
◦
NeighborCare of Virginia, LLC (Virginia)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacies of Pennsylvania West LLC (Pennsylvania)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacy and Supply Services LLC (South Dakota)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacy of the Midwest, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Property Management, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Pharmacy Consultants, LLC (South Carolina)
▪
PRN Pharmaceutical Services, LP (Delaware)
▪
Roeschen’s Healthcare LLC (Wisconsin)
◦
PP Acquisition Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Specialized Pharmacy Services, LLC (Michigan)
7

▪
Value Health Care Services LLC (Delaware)
▪
VAPS Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Westhaven Services Co, LLC (Ohio)
▪
Three Forks Apothecary, LLC (Kentucky)
▪
UNI-Care Health Services of Maine, LLC (New Hampshire)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (continued)
◦
CVS 2948 Henderson, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
CVS AL Distribution, L.L.C. (Alabama)
◦
CVS Albany, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
CVS AOC Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CVS AOC Corporation (California)
◦
CVS Care Concierge, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Health Clinical Trial Services LLC (Connecticut)
◦
CVS Health Solutions LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Indiana, L.L.C. (Indiana)
◦
CVS International, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CCI Foreign, S.à R.L. (R.C.S. Luxembourg)
▪
Beauty Holdings, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Pamplona Saúde e Beleza LTDA (Brazil)
◦
CVS Kidney Care, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Health Services LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Advanced Technologies LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Home Dialysis LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Kidney Care Home Dialysis of Austin LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Kidney Care Home Dialysis of Los Angeles LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Kidney Care Home Dialysis of Philadelphia LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Manchester NH, L.L.C. (New Hampshire)
◦
CVS Media Exchange LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Michigan, L.L.C. (Michigan)
◦
CVS Orlando FL Distribution, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
CVS PA Distribution, L.L.C. (Pennsylvania)
◦
CVS Pharmacy Overseas Online, LLC
◦
CVS PR Center, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Puerto Rico CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
Caremark Puerto Rico, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
Caremark Puerto Rico Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
CVS RS Arizona, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Arizona CVS Stores, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS 3268 Gilbert, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS 3745 Peoria, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS Gilbert 3272, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS Rx Services, Inc. (New York)
◦
Busse CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Goodyear CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Sheffield Avenue CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
South Wabash CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Thomas Phoenix CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Washington Lamb CVS, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
CVS SC Distribution, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
CVS State Capital, L.L.C. (Maine)
◦
CVS TN Distribution, L.L.C. (Tennessee)
◦
CVS Transportation, L.L.C. (Indiana)
8

◦
CVS Vero FL Distribution, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
D.A.W., LLC (Massachusetts)
◦
Delaware CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Digital eHealth, LLC (Rhode Island)
◦
District of Columbia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (District of Columbia)
◦
Enterprise Patient Safety Organization, LLC (Rhode Island)
◦
E.T.B., Inc. (Texas)
◦
Garfield Beach CVS, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Georgia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Georgia)
◦
German Dobson CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Grand St. Paul CVS, L.L.C. (Minnesota)
◦
Highland Park CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Holiday CVS, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
Hook-SupeRx, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Idaho CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Idaho)
◦
Iowa CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Iowa)
◦
Kansas CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Kansas)
◦
Kentucky CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Kentucky)
◦
Longs Drug Stores California, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Louisiana CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Louisiana)
◦
Maryland CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Maryland)
◦
Melville Realty Company, Inc. (New York)
◦
CVS Bellmore Avenue, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
MinuteClinic, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Alabama, L.L.C. (Alabama)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Arkansas, LLC (Arkansas)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Arizona, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Colorado LLC (Colorado)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Florida, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Georgia, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Hawaii, L.L.C. (Hawaii)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Illinois, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Kentucky, L.L.C. (Kentucky)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Louisiana, L.L.C. (Louisiana)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Maine, L.L.C. (Maine)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Maryland, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Massachusetts, LLC (Massachusetts)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Nebraska, L.L.C. (Nebraska)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of New Hampshire, L.L.C. (New Hampshire)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of New Mexico, L.L.C. (New Mexico)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Ohio, LLC (Ohio)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Oklahoma, LLC (Oklahoma)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Oregon, LLC (Oregon)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Pennsylvania, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Rhode Island, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of South Carolina, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Texas, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Utah, L.L.C. (Utah)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Virginia, LLC (Virginia)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Washington, LLC (Oregon)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Wisconsin, L.L.C. (Wisconsin)
◦
MinuteClinic Online Diagnostic Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Physician Practice of Texas (Texas)
◦
MinuteClinic Telehealth Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Mississippi CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Mississippi)
9

◦
Missouri CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Missouri)
◦
Montana CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Montana)
◦
Nebraska CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Nebraska)
◦
New Jersey CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (New Jersey)
◦
North Carolina CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (North Carolina)
◦
Ohio CVS Stores, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
Oklahoma CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Oklahoma)
◦
Oregon CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Oregon)
◦
Pennsylvania CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Pennsylvania)
◦
ProCare Pharmacy Direct, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
ProCare Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Rhode Island)
◦
Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Rhode Island CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Rhode Island)
◦
South Carolina CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
Tennessee CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Tennessee)
◦
Utah CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Utah)
◦
Vermont CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Vermont)
◦
Virginia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Virginia)
◦
Warm Springs Road CVS, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
Washington CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Washington)
◦
Wellpartner, LLC (Delaware)
◦
West Virginia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (West Virginia)
◦
Wisconsin CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Wisconsin)
◦
Woodward Detroit CVS, L.L.C. (Michigan)
◦
Zinc Health Ventures, LLC
◦
Zinc Health Services, LLC
10

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the following Registration Statements:
(1) Registration Statement (Form S-3ASR No. 333-238506) of CVS Health Corporation, and
(2) Registration  Statements  (Form  S-8  Nos.  333-238507,  333-230035,  333-228622,  333-167746,  333-217853,  333-208805,  333-141481,  333-139470,  333-
63664, 333-91253, 333-49407, 333-34927, and 333-28043) of CVS Health Corporation;
of our reports dated February 16, 2021, with respect to the consolidated financial statements of CVS Health Corporation and the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting of CVS Health Corporation included in this Annual Report (Form 10-K) of CVS Health Corporation for the year ended December 31,
2020.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
Boston, Massachusetts
February 16, 2021

Exhibit 31.1
Certification
I, Karen S. Lynch, President and Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of CVS Health Corporation;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.     The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
(a)    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date:
February 16, 2021
By:
/S/     KAREN S. LYNCH
Karen S. Lynch
President and Chief Executive Officer

Exhibit 31.2
Certification
I, Eva C. Boratto, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CVS Health Corporation, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of CVS Health Corporation;
2.     Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.     Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.     The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
(a)    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 16, 2021
By:
/S/     EVA C. BORATTO
Eva C. Boratto
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the Annual Report of CVS Health Corporation (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the
period ended December 31, 2020 (the “Report”) solely for the purpose of complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
I, Karen S. Lynch, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company, certify that, to the best of my knowledge:
1. the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act; and
2. the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: February 16, 2021
/S/    KAREN S. LYNCH
Karen S. Lynch
President and Chief Executive Officer

Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATION
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the Annual Report of CVS Health Corporation (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the
period ended December 31, 2020 (the “Report”) solely for the purpose of complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
I, Eva C. Boratto, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company, certify that, to the best of my knowledge:
1. the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act; and
2. the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: February 16, 2021
/S/    EVA C. BORATTO
Eva C. Boratto
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
