UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
        (Mark One)
☑ 
 ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021
or
☐ 
 TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from _________ to_________
Commission file number: 001-01011
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
05-0494040
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
One CVS Drive,
Woonsocket,
Rhode Island
02895
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(401) 765-1500
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share
CVS
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
☒
Yes
☐
No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
☐
Yes
☒
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90 days.
☒
Yes
☐
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405
of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
such files).
☒
Yes
☐
No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or
an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging
growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised
financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over
financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report.
☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).
☐
Yes
☒
No
The aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates was approximately $109,651,334,285 as of June 30, 2021, based on the closing price of the
common stock on the New York Stock Exchange. For purposes of this calculation, only executive officers and directors are deemed to be affiliates of the registrant.
As of February 2, 2022, the registrant had 1,312,510,426 shares of common stock outstanding.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The following materials are incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K:
Information contained in the definitive proxy statement for CVS Health Corporation’s 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 (the “Proxy Statement”), is incorporated by reference in Parts III and IV to the extent
described therein.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
Item 1:
Business
2
Item 1A:
Risk Factors
35
Item 1B:
Unresolved Staff Comments
63
Item 2:
Properties
63
Item 3:
Legal Proceedings
63
Item 4:
Mine Safety Disclosures
63
Information about our Executive Officers
64
Part II
Item 5:
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
65
Item 6:
Reserved
66
Item 7:
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
67
Item 7A:
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
99
Item 8:
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
102
Item 9:
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
176
Item 9A:
Controls and Procedures
176
Item 9B:
Other Information
177
Part III
Item 10:
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
177
Item 11:
Executive Compensation
177
Item 12:
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
177
Item 13:
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
178
Item 14:
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
178
Part IV
Item 15:
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
179
Item 16:
Form 10-K Summary
183
Signatures
184

Unless the context otherwise requires, references to the terms “we,” “our” or “us” used throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “10-K”) refer to CVS
Health Corporation (a Delaware corporation), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, “CVS Health” or the “Company”). References to competitors and other
companies throughout this 10-K, including the information incorporated herein by reference, are for illustrative or comparison purposes only and are not
identifying that these companies are the only competitors or closest competitors of the Company or any of the Company’s businesses, products, or services.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Reform Act”) provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements, so long as (1) those statements
are identified as forward-looking, and (2) the statements are accompanied by meaningful cautionary statements that identify important factors that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those discussed in the statement. We are taking advantage of these safe harbor provisions.
Certain information contained in this 10-K is forward-looking within the meaning of the Reform Act or SEC rules. This information includes, but is not limited to:
“Outlook for 2022” of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) included in Item 7, “Quantitative and
Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” included in Item 7A, “Government Regulation” included in Item 1, and “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A. In
addition, throughout this 10-K and our other reports and communications, we use the following words or variations or negatives of these words and similar
expressions when we intend to identify forward-looking statements:
· Anticipates
· Believes
· Can
· Continue
· Could
· Estimates
· Evaluate
· Expects
· Explore
· Forecast
· Guidance
· Intends
· Likely
· May
· Might
· Outlook
· Plans
· Potential
· Predict
· Probable
· Projects
· Seeks
· Should
· View
· Will
All statements addressing the future operating performance of CVS Health or any segment or any subsidiary and/or future events or developments, including
statements relating to the projected impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) and its emerging new variants on the Company’s businesses, investment
portfolio, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition, statements relating to corporate strategy, statements relating to future revenue, operating
income or adjusted operating income, earnings per share or adjusted earnings per share, Health Care Benefits segment business, sales results and/or trends,
medical cost trends, medical membership, Medicare Part D membership, medical benefit ratios and/or operations, Pharmacy Services segment business, sales
results and/or trends and/or operations, Retail/LTC segment business, sales results and/or trends and/or operations, incremental investment spending, interest
expense, effective tax rate, weighted-average share count, cash flow from operations, net capital expenditures, cash available for debt repayment, integration
synergies, net synergies, integration costs, enterprise modernization, transformation, leverage ratio, cash available for enhancing shareholder value, inventory
reduction, turn rate and/or loss rate, debt ratings, the Company’s ability to attract or retain customers and clients, store development and/or relocations, new
product development, and the impact of industry and regulatory developments, as well as statements expressing optimism or pessimism about future operating
results or events, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Reform Act.
Forward-looking statements rely on a number of estimates, assumptions and projections concerning future events, and are subject to a number of significant risks
and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements. Many of these risks and uncertainties and other
factors are outside our control. Certain of these risks and uncertainties and other factors are described under “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K;
these are not the only risks and uncertainties we face. There can be no assurance that the Company has identified all the risks that may affect it. Additional risks
and uncertainties not presently known to the Company or that the Company currently believes to be immaterial also may adversely affect the Company’s
businesses. If any of those risks or uncertainties develops into actual events, those events or circumstances could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s
businesses, operating results, cash flows, financial condition and/or stock price, among other effects.
You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date of this 10-K, and we disclaim any
intention or obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, uncertainties or otherwise.
1

Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1. Business.
Overview
CVS Health Corporation, together with its subsidiaries (collectively, “CVS Health,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”), is a leading diversified health solutions
company, making healthier happen now. In an increasingly connected and digital world, we are meeting people wherever they are and changing health care to meet
their needs. The Company has more than 9,900 retail locations, nearly 1,200 walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 110
million plan members with expanding specialty pharmacy solutions and a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving more than one million patients per year.
The Company also serves an estimated 35 million people through traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services,
including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its
innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall health care costs.
The Company has four reportable segments: Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Corporate/Other.
Business Strategy
The Company seeks to improve access, lower costs and enhance health outcomes by engaging with consumers when, where and how they desire. This means
delivering solutions that are personalized, seamless, connected and increasingly digital. CVS Health is also shifting from transaction-based primary care to
addressing holistic health – physical, emotional, social, economic – which will lead to higher quality of care and lower medical costs. The Company is a leader in
key segments of health care today through foundational businesses and is seeking to create new sources of value by expanding into next generation primary care
delivery and health services, with a goal of improving satisfaction levels for both providers and consumers. The Company believes its consumer-centric strategy
will drive sustainable long-term growth and deliver value for all stakeholders.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic and its emerging new variants continue to impact the U.S. and other countries around the world. Our strong local presence and scale in
communities across the country has enabled us to play an indispensable role in the national response to COVID-19, as well as provide seamless support for our
customers wherever they need us: in our CVS locations, in their homes, and virtually.
The Company offered COVID-19 diagnostic testing at more than 4,800 CVS Pharmacy  locations, at community-based testing sites in underserved areas and
through its Return Ready
solution as of December 31, 2021. During 2021, the Company also began selling over-the-counter (“OTC”) test kits in its retail
locations and online. The Company began administering COVID-19 vaccinations in long-term care facilities and in certain of its retail pharmacies during
December 2020 and February 2021, respectively, and began the administration of COVID-19 boosters and pediatric vaccines during the fourth quarter of 2021. The
Company offered COVID-19 vaccinations at more than 9,800 CVS Pharmacy locations as of December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the
Company administered more than 32 million COVID-19 tests and more than 59 million COVID-19 vaccines. The Company expects to continue to play a
significant role in COVID-19 testing and vaccine administration in the future, while maintaining a strong commitment to testing and vaccine equity by optimizing
site locations and targeting outreach initiatives to reach vulnerable populations.
The impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as
well as information regarding certain expected impacts of COVID-19 on the Company, is discussed throughout this 10-K.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment operates as one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers, serving an estimated 35 million people as of
December 31, 2021. The Health Care Benefits segment has the information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals,
make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed
health insurance products and related services, including medical, pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare
Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care management services and health information
®
SM 
2

technology (“HIT”) products and services. The Health Care Benefits segment also provided workers’ compensation administrative services through its Coventry
Health Care Workers’ Compensation business (“Workers’ Compensation business”) prior to the sale of this business on July 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits
segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly workers, health plans, health care providers (“providers”),
governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates.
Health Care Benefits Products and Services
The Company refers to insurance products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services
contract products (where the plan sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk of medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” Health Care Benefits products and
services consist of the following:
•
Commercial Medical: The Health Care Benefits segment offers point-of-service (“POS”), preferred provider organization (“PPO”), health maintenance
organization (“HMO”) and indemnity benefit (“Indemnity”) plans. Commercial medical products also include health savings accounts (“HSAs”) and
consumer-directed health plans that combine traditional POS or PPO and/or dental coverage, subject to a deductible, with an accumulating benefit account
(which may be funded by the plan sponsor and/or the member in the case of HSAs). With the launch of Aetna Virtual Primary Care
 in 2021, eligible
members now have access to health services remotely, paired with access to in-person visits with providers in the Company’s network, including at
MinuteClinic  and CVS HealthHUB  locations. Principal products and services are targeted specifically to large multi-site national, mid-sized and small
employers, individual insureds and expatriates. The Company offers medical stop loss insurance coverage for certain employers who elect to self-insure their
health benefits. Under medical stop loss insurance products, the Company assumes risk for costs associated with large individual claims and/or aggregate loss
experience within an employer’s plan above a pre-set annual threshold. The segment also has a portfolio of additional health products and services that
complement its medical products such as dental plans, behavioral health and employee assistance products, provider network access and vision products.
•
Government Medical: In select geographies, the Health Care Benefits segment offers Medicare Advantage plans, Medicare Supplement plans and prescription
drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries; participates in Medicaid and subsidized Children’s Health Insurance Programs (“CHIP”); and participates in
demonstration projects for members who are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid (“Duals”). These Government Medical products are further described
below:
•
Medicare Advantage: Through annual contracts with the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”), the Company offers HMO and
PPO products for eligible individuals in certain geographic areas through the Medicare Advantage program. Members typically receive enhanced
benefits over traditional fee-for-service Medicare coverage (“Original Medicare”), including reduced cost-sharing for preventive care, vision and
other services. The Company offered network-based HMO and/or PPO plans in 46 states and Washington, D.C. in 2021. For certain qualifying
employer groups, the Company offers Medicare PPO products nationally. When combined with the Company’s PDP product, these national PPO
plans form an integrated national Insured Medicare product for employers that provides medical and pharmacy benefits.
•
Medicare PDP: The Company is a national provider of drug benefits under the Medicare Part D prescription drug program. All Medicare eligible
individuals are eligible to participate in this voluntary prescription drug plan. Members typically receive coverage for certain prescription drugs,
usually subject to a deductible, co-insurance and/or co-payment. The Company offered PDP plans in all 50 states and Washington, D.C. in 2021. On
November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of the standalone PDPs of Aetna, Inc. (“Aetna”) to WellCare Health Plans, Inc. effective
December 31, 2018. The Company provided administrative services to, and retained the financial results of, the divested plans through 2019.
Subsequent to 2019, the Company no longer retains the financial results of the divested plans.
•
Medicare Supplement: For certain Medicare eligible members, the Company offers supplemental coverage for certain health care costs not covered
by Original Medicare. The products included in the Medicare Supplement portfolio help to cover some of the gaps in Original Medicare, and include
coverage for Medicare deductibles and coinsurance amounts. The Company offered a wide selection of Medicare Supplement products in 49 states
and Washington, D.C. in 2021.
•
Medicaid and CHIP: The Company offers health care management services to individuals eligible for Medicaid and CHIP under multi-year contracts
with government agencies in various states that are subject to annual appropriations. CHIP are state-subsidized insurance programs that provide
benefits for families with uninsured children. The Company offered these services on an Insured or ASC basis in 16 states in 2021.
•
Duals: The Company provides health coverage to beneficiaries who are dually eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid coverage. These members
must meet certain income and resource requirements in order to qualify for
TM
®
®
3

this coverage. The Company coordinates 100% of the care for these members and may provide them with additional services in order to manage their
health care costs.
The Company also has a portfolio of transformative products and services aimed at creating a holistic and integrated approach to individual health and wellness.
These products and services complement the Commercial Medical and Government Medical products and aim to provide innovative solutions, create integrated
experience offerings and enable enhanced care delivery to customers.
Health Care Benefits Provider Networks
The Company contracts with physicians, hospitals and other providers for services they provide to the Company’s members. The Company uses a variety of
techniques designed to help encourage appropriate utilization of medical services (“utilization”) and maintain affordability of quality coverage. In addition to
contracts with providers for negotiated rates of reimbursement, these techniques include creating risk sharing arrangements that align economic incentives with
providers, the development and implementation of guidelines for the appropriate utilization and the provision of data to providers to enable them to improve health
care quality. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s underlying nationwide provider network had approximately 1.5 million participating providers. Other
providers in the Company’s provider networks also include laboratory, imaging, urgent care and other freestanding health facilities.
Health Care Benefits Quality Assessment
CMS uses a 5-star rating system to monitor Medicare health care and drug plans and ensure that they meet CMS’s quality standards. CMS uses this rating system
to provide Medicare beneficiaries with a tool that they can use to compare the overall quality of care and level of customer service of companies that provide
Medicare health care and drug plans. The rating system considers a variety of measures adopted by CMS, including quality of preventative services, chronic illness
management and overall customer satisfaction. See “Health Care Benefits Pricing” below in this Item 1 for further discussion of star ratings. The Company seeks
Health Plan accreditation for Aetna HMO plans from the National Committee for Quality Assurance (“NCQA”), a private, not-for-profit organization that
evaluates, accredits and certifies a wide range of health care organizations. Health care plans seeking accreditation must pass a rigorous, comprehensive review and
must annually report on their performance.
Aetna Life Insurance Company (“ALIC”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, has received nationwide NCQA PPO Health Plan accreditation. As of
December 31, 2021, all of the Company’s Commercial HMO and all of ALIC’s PPO members who were eligible participated in HMOs or PPOs that are accredited
by the NCQA.
The Company’s provider selection and credentialing/re-credentialing policies and procedures are consistent with NCQA and URAC, a health care accrediting
organization that establishes quality standards for the health care industry, as well as state and federal, requirements. In addition, the Company is certified under the
NCQA Credentials Verification Organization (“CVO”) certification program for all certification options and has URAC CVO accreditation.
Quality assessment programs for contracted providers who participate in the Company’s networks begin with the initial review of health care practitioners.
Practitioners’ licenses and education are verified, and their work history is collected by the Company or in some cases by the practitioner’s affiliated group or
organization. The Company generally requires participating hospitals to be certified by CMS or accredited by The Joint Commission, the American Osteopathic
Association, or Det Norske Veritas Healthcare.
The Company also offers quality and outcome measurement programs, quality improvement programs, and health care data analysis systems to providers and
purchasers of health care services.
Health Care Benefits Information Systems
The Health Care Benefits segment currently operates and supports an end-to-end suite of information technology platforms to support member engagement,
enrollment, health benefit administration, care management, service operations, financial reporting and analytics. The multiple platforms are supported by an
integration layer to facilitate the transfer of real-time data. There is continued focus and investment in enterprise data platforms, cloud capabilities, digital products
to offer innovative solutions and a seamless experience to the Company’s members through mobile and web channels. The Company is making concerted
investments in emerging technology capabilities such as voice, artificial intelligence and robotics to further automate, reduce cost and improve the experience for
all of its constituents. The Health Care Benefits segment is utilizing the
4

full breadth of the Company’s assets to build enterprise technology that will help guide our members through their health care journey, provide them a high level of
service, enable healthier outcomes and encourage them to take next best actions to lead healthier lives.
Health Care Benefits Customers
Medical membership is dispersed throughout the United States, and the Company also serves medical members in certain countries outside the United States. The
Company offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, many of which are available
nationwide. Depending on the product, the Company markets to a range of customers including employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and
hourly workers, health plans, providers, governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. For additional information on medical
membership, see “Health Care Benefits Segment” in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (the “MD&A”)
included in Item 7 of this 10-K.
The Company markets both Commercial Insured and ASC products and services primarily to employers that sponsor the Company’s products for the benefit of
their employees and their employees’ dependents. Frequently, larger employers offer employees a choice among coverage options, from which the employee
makes his or her selection during a designated annual open enrollment period. Typically, employers pay all of the monthly premiums to the Company and, through
payroll deductions, obtain reimbursement from employees for a percentage of the premiums that is determined by each employer. Some Health Care Benefits
products are sold directly to employees of employer groups on a fully employee-funded basis. In some cases, the Company bills the covered individual directly. In
addition, effective January 2022, the Company entered the individual public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) in eight states through which it sells
Insured plans directly to individual consumers.
The Company offers Insured Medicare coverage on an individual basis as well as through employer groups to their retirees. Medicaid and CHIP members are
enrolled on an individual basis. The Company also offers Insured health care coverage to members who are dually-eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.
Health Care Benefits products are sold through: the Company’s sales personnel; independent brokers, agents and consultants who assist in the production and
servicing of business; as well as private health insurance exchanges (“Private Exchanges”) and Public Exchanges (together with Private Exchanges, “Insurance
Exchanges”). For large employers or other entities that sponsor the Company’s products (“plan sponsors”), independent consultants and brokers are frequently
involved in employer health plan selection decisions and sales. In some instances, the Company may pay commissions, fees and other amounts to brokers, agents,
consultants and sales representatives who place business with the Company. In certain cases, the customer pays the broker for services rendered, and the Company
may facilitate that arrangement by collecting the funds from the customer and transmitting them to the broker. The Company supports marketing and sales efforts
with an advertising program that may include television, radio, billboards, print media and social media, supplemented by market research and direct marketing
efforts.
The U.S. federal government is a significant customer of the Health Care Benefits segment through contracts with CMS for coverage of Medicare-eligible
individuals and federal employee-related benefit programs. Other than the contracts with CMS, the Health Care Benefits segment is not dependent upon a single
customer or a few customers the loss of which would have a significant effect on the earnings of the segment. The loss of business from any one, or a few,
independent brokers or agents would not have a material adverse effect on the earnings of the Health Care Benefits segment. In 2021, 2020 and 2019, Health
Care Benefits segment revenues from the federal government accounted for 14%, 13% and 13%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated total revenues.
Contracts with CMS for coverage of Medicare-eligible individuals in the Health Care Benefits segment accounted for approximately 79%, 78% and 76%,
respectively, of the Company’s consolidated revenues from the federal government in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Health Care Benefits Pricing
For Commercial Insured plans, contracts containing the pricing and other terms of the relationship are generally established in advance of the policy period and
typically have a duration of one year. Fees under ASC plans are generally fixed for a period of one year.
Generally, a fixed premium rate is determined at the beginning of the policy period for Commercial Insured plans. The Company typically cannot recover
unanticipated increases in health care and other benefit costs in the current policy period; however, it may consider prior experience for a product in the aggregate
or for a specific customer, among other factors, in
5

determining premium rates for future policy periods. Where required by state laws, premium rates are filed and approved by state regulators prior to contract
inception. Future operating results could be adversely affected if the premium rates requested are not approved or are adjusted downward or their approval is
delayed by state or federal regulators.
The Company has Medicare Advantage and PDP contracts with CMS to provide HMO, PPO and prescription drug coverage to Medicare beneficiaries in certain
geographic areas. Under these annual contracts, CMS pays the Company a fixed per member (or “capitation”) payment and/or a portion of the premium, both of
which are based on membership and adjusted for demographic and health risk factors. CMS also considers inflation, changes in utilization patterns and average
per capita fee-for-service Medicare costs in the calculation of the fixed capitation payment or premium. PDP contracts also provide a risk-sharing arrangement
with CMS to limit the Company’s exposure to unfavorable expenses or benefit from favorable expenses. Amounts payable to the Company under the Medicare
arrangements are subject to annual revision by CMS, and the Company elects to participate in each Medicare service area or region on an annual basis. Premiums
paid to the Company for Medicare products are subject to federal government reviews and audits, which can result, and have resulted, in retroactive and
prospective premium adjustments and refunds to the government and/or members. In addition to payments received from CMS, some Medicare Advantage
products and all PDP products require a supplemental premium to be paid by the member or sponsoring employer. In some cases these supplemental premiums
are adjusted based on the member’s income and asset levels. Compared to Commercial Medical products, Medicare contracts generate higher per member per
month revenues and higher health care and other benefit costs.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) ties a portion of each
Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement to the plan’s “star ratings.” Plans must have a star rating of four or higher (out of five) to qualify for bonus payments.
CMS released the Company’s 2022 star ratings in October 2021. The Company’s 2022 star ratings will be used to determine which of the Company’s Medicare
Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2023. Based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2021, 87% of
the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2022 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars, compared to 83% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage
members being in plans with 2021 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2020.
Rates for Medicare Supplement products are regulated at the state level and vary by state and plan.
Under Insured Medicaid contracts, state government agencies pay the Company fixed monthly rates per member that vary by state, line of business and
demographics; and the Company arranges, pays for and manages the health care services provided to Medicaid beneficiaries. These rates are subject to change by
each state, and, in some instances, provide for adjustment for health risk factors. CMS requires these rates to be actuarially sound. The Company also receives
fees from customers where it provides services under ASC Medicaid contracts. ASC Medicaid contracts generally are for periods of more than one year, and
certain of them contain performance incentives and limited financial risk sharing with respect to certain medical, financial and operational metrics. Under these
arrangements, performance is evaluated annually, with associated financial incentive opportunities, and financial risk share obligations are typically limited to a
percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company. Payments to the Company under Medicaid contracts are subject to the annual appropriation process in
the applicable state.
Under Duals contracts, the rate setting process is generally established by CMS in partnership with the state government agency participating in the
demonstration project. Both CMS and the state government agency may seek premium and other refunds under certain circumstances, including if the Company
fails to comply with CMS regulations or other contractual requirements.
The Company offers HMO and consumer-directed medical and dental plans to federal employees under the Federal Employees Health Benefits (“FEHB”) Program
and the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program. Premium rates and fees for those plans are subject to federal government review and audit,
which can result, and have resulted, in retroactive and prospective premium and fee adjustments and refunds to the government and/or members.
Beginning in 2014, the ACA imposed significant new industry-wide fees, assessments and taxes, including an annual levy known as the health insurer fee (the
“HIF”). The HIF applied for 2020 and was temporarily suspended for 2019. In December 2019, the HIF was repealed for calendar years after 2020. For additional
information on the ACA fees, assessments and taxes, see Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K. The Company’s goal is to
collect premiums and fees where possible, or solve for, all of the ACA-related fees, assessments and taxes.
6

Health Care Benefits Seasonality
The Health Care Benefits segment’s quarterly operating income progression is also impacted by (i) the seasonality of benefit costs which generally increase during
the year as Insured members progress through their annual deductibles and out-of-pocket expense limits and (ii) the seasonality of operating expenses, which are
generally the highest during the fourth quarter due primarily to spending to support readiness for the start of the upcoming plan year and marketing associated with
Medicare annual enrollment.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the customary quarterly operating income progression was impacted by COVID-19. While overall medical costs in the
first quarter were generally consistent with historical baseline levels in the aggregate, the segment experienced increased COVID-19 testing and treatment costs and
lower Medicare risk-adjusted revenue. During the second quarter, COVID-19 testing and treatment costs persisted, however at levels significantly lower than those
observed during the first quarter. Beginning in the third quarter, medical costs once again increased primarily driven by the spread of the emerging new variants of
COVID-19, which resulted in increased testing and treatment costs that continued throughout the fourth quarter.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the customary quarterly operating income progression was also impacted by COVID-19. Beginning in mid-March, the
health care system experienced a significant reduction in utilization that is discretionary and the cancellation of elective medical procedures. Utilization remained
below historical levels through April, began to recover in May and June and reached more normal levels in the third and fourth quarters, with select geographies
impacted by COVID-19 waves. The impact of the deferral of non-essential care was partially offset by COVID-19 testing and treatment costs, as well as planned
COVID-19 related investments.
Health Care Benefits Competition
The health care benefits industry is highly competitive, primarily due to a large number of for-profit and not-for-profit competitors, competitors’ marketing and
pricing and a proliferation of competing products, including new products that are continually being introduced into the marketplace. New entrants into the
marketplace, as well as consolidation within the industry, have contributed to and are expected to intensify the competitive environment. In addition, the rapid pace
of change as the industry evolves towards a consumer-focused retail marketplace, including Insurance Exchanges, and the increased use of technology to interact
with members, providers and customers, increase the risks the Company currently faces from new entrants and disruptive actions by existing competitors compared
to prior periods.
The Company believes that the significant factors that distinguish competing health plans include the perceived overall quality (including accreditation status),
quality of service, comprehensiveness of coverage, cost (including premium rates, provider discounts and member out-of-pocket costs), product design, financial
stability and ratings, breadth and quality of provider networks, ability to offer different provider network options, providers available in such networks, and
quality of member support and care management programs. The Company believes that it is competitive on each of these factors. The Company’s ability to
increase the number of persons covered by its health plans or to increase Health Care Benefits segment revenues is affected by its ability to differentiate itself
from its competitors on these factors. Competition may also affect the availability of services from providers, including primary care physicians, specialists and
hospitals.
Insured products compete with local and regional health care benefits plans, health care benefits and other plans sponsored by other large commercial health care
benefit insurance companies, health system owned health plans, new entrants into the marketplace and numerous for-profit and not-for-profit organizations
operating under licenses from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. The largest competitor in Medicare products is Original Medicare. Additional Health
Care Benefits segment competitors include other types of medical and dental provider organizations, various specialty service providers (including pharmacy
benefit management (“PBM”) services providers), health care consultants, financial services companies, integrated health care delivery organizations (networks
of providers who also coordinate administrative services for and assume insurance risk of their members), third party administrators (“TPAs”), HIT companies
and, for certain plans, programs sponsored by the federal or state governments. Emerging competitors include start up health care benefits plans, technology
companies, provider-owned health plans, new joint ventures (including not-for-profit joint ventures among firms from multiple industries), technology firms,
financial services firms that are distributing competing products on their proprietary Private Exchanges, and consulting firms that are distributing competing
products on their proprietary Private Exchanges, as well as non-traditional distributors such as retail companies. The Company’s ability to increase the number of
persons enrolled in Insured Commercial Medical products also is affected by the desire and ability of employers to self-fund their health coverage.
7

The Health Care Benefits segment’s ASC plans compete primarily with other large commercial health care benefit companies, numerous for-profit and not-for-
profit organizations operating under licenses from the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association and TPAs.
The Health Care Benefits segment’s international products compete with local, global and U.S.-based health plans and commercial health care benefit insurance
companies, many of whom are licensed in more geographies and have a longer operating history, better brand recognition and greater marketplace presence in
one or more geographies.
The provider solutions and HIT marketplaces and products are evolving rapidly. The Company competes for provider solutions and HIT business with other large
health plans and commercial health care benefit insurance companies as well as information technology companies and companies that specialize in provider
solutions and HIT. Many information technology product competitors have longer operating histories, better brand recognition, greater marketplace presence and
more experience in developing innovative products.
In addition to competitive pressures affecting the Company’s ability to obtain new customers or retain existing customers, the Health Care Benefits segment’s
medical membership has been and may continue to be adversely affected by adverse and/or uncertain economic conditions and reductions in workforce by existing
customers due to adverse and/or uncertain general economic conditions, especially in the United States and industries where such membership is concentrated.
Health Care Benefits Reinsurance
The Company currently has several reinsurance agreements with non-affiliated insurers that relate to Health Care Benefits insurance policies. The Company
entered into these contracts to reduce the risk of catastrophic losses which in turn reduces capital and surplus requirements. The Company frequently evaluates
reinsurance opportunities and refines its reinsurance and risk management strategies on a regular basis.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of PBM solutions, including plan design offerings and administration, formulary management, retail
pharmacy network management services and mail order pharmacy. In addition, through the Pharmacy Services segment, the Company provides specialty pharmacy
and infusion services, clinical services, disease management services, medical spend management and pharmacy and/or other administrative services for providers
and federal 340B drug pricing program covered entities (“Covered Entities”). The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients are primarily employers, insurance
companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care (“Managed Medicaid”) plans, plans offered on Insurance Exchanges
and other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States and Covered Entities. The Pharmacy Services segment includes retail specialty pharmacy
stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s PBM filled or managed 2.2 billion prescriptions on a 30-day equivalent basis.
PBM Services
The Company dispenses prescription drugs directly through its mail order dispensing and specialty mail order pharmacies and through pharmacies in its retail
network. All prescriptions processed by the Company are analyzed, processed and documented by the Company’s proprietary prescription management systems.
These systems provide essential features and functionality to allow plan members to utilize their prescription drug benefits. These systems also streamline the
process by which prescriptions are processed by staff and network pharmacists by enhancing review of various items through automation, including plan eligibility,
early refills, duplicate dispensing, appropriateness of dosage, drug interactions or allergies, over-utilization and potential fraud.
Plan Design Offerings and Administration
The Company assists its PBM clients in designing pharmacy benefit plans that help improve health outcomes while minimizing the costs to the client. The
Company also assists PBM clients in monitoring the effectiveness of their plans through frequent, informal communications, the use of proprietary software, as
well as through formal annual, quarterly and sometimes monthly performance reviews. The Company administers pharmacy benefit plans for clients who contract
with it to facilitate prescription drug coverage and claims processing for their eligible plan members. The Company also provides administrative services for
Covered Entities.
8

The Company makes recommendations to help PBM clients design benefit plans that promote the use of lower cost, clinically appropriate drugs and helps its PBM
clients control costs by recommending plan designs that encourage the use of generic equivalents of brand name drugs when such equivalents are available. Clients
also have the option, through plan design, to further lower their pharmacy benefit plan costs by setting different member payment levels for different products on
their drug lists or “formularies,” which helps guide members to choose lower cost alternatives through appropriate financial incentives.
Formulary Management
The Company utilizes an independent panel of doctors, pharmacists and other medical experts, referred to as the CVS Caremark National Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committee, to review and approve the selection of drugs that meet the Company’s standards of safety and efficacy for inclusion on one of the
Company’s template formularies. The Company’s formularies provide recommended products in numerous drug classes to help ensure member access to clinically
appropriate drugs with alternatives within a class under the client’s pharmacy benefit plan, while helping to drive the lowest net cost for clients that select one of
the Company’s formularies. To help improve clinical outcomes for members and clients, the Company conducts ongoing, independent reviews of all drugs,
including those appearing on the formularies and generic equivalent products. Many of the Company’s clients choose to adopt a template formulary offering as part
of their plan design. PBM clients are given capabilities to offer real time benefits information for a member’s specific plan design, provided digitally at the point of
prescribing, at the CVS pharmacy and directly to members.
Retail Pharmacy Network Management Services
The Company maintains a national network of approximately 66,000 retail pharmacies, consisting of approximately 40,000 chain pharmacies (which includes CVS
Pharmacy locations) and approximately 26,000 independent pharmacies, in the United States, including Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam and the U.S.
Virgin Islands. When a customer fills a prescription in a retail pharmacy, the pharmacy sends prescription data electronically to the Company from the point-of-
sale. This data interfaces with the Company’s proprietary prescription management systems, which verify relevant plan member data and eligibility, while also
performing a drug utilization review to help evaluate clinical appropriateness and safety and confirming that the pharmacy will receive payment for the
prescription. The Company also offers a performance program for non-Medicare customers, which can be implemented with either the Company’s broad, national
network or with any managed network (as allowed by applicable laws and regulations). Under the program, high performing pharmacies are eligible to receive an
incremental positive performance payment. The program aligns with key Healthcare Effectiveness Data Information Set measures utilized by CMS and is funded
by client fees. 
Mail Order Pharmacy Services
The Pharmacy Services segment operates mail order dispensing pharmacies in the United States. Plan members or their prescribers submit prescriptions or refill
requests, primarily for maintenance medications, to these pharmacies, and staff pharmacists review these prescriptions and refill requests with the assistance of the
Company’s prescription management systems. This review may involve communications with the prescriber and, with the prescriber’s approval when required, can
result in generic substitution, therapeutic interchange or other actions designed to help reduce cost and/or improve quality of treatment. The Company’s mail order
dispensing pharmacies have been awarded Mail Service Pharmacy accreditation from URAC.
Specialty Pharmacy and Infusion Services
The Pharmacy Services segment operates specialty mail order pharmacies, retail specialty pharmacy stores and branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services
in the United States. The specialty mail order pharmacies are used for delivery of advanced medications to individuals with chronic or genetic diseases and
disorders. The Company’s specialty mail order pharmacies have been awarded Specialty Pharmacy accreditation from URAC. Substantially all of the Company’s
specialty mail order pharmacies also have been accredited by The Joint Commission and the Accreditation Commission for Health Care (“ACHC”), which are
independent, not-for-profit organizations that accredit and certify health care programs and organizations in the United States. The ACHC accreditation includes an
additional accreditation by the Pharmacy Compounding Accreditation Board, which certifies compliance with the highest level of pharmacy compounding
standards.
Clinical Services
The Company offers multiple clinical programs and services to help clients manage overall pharmacy and health care costs in a clinically appropriate manner.
These programs are primarily designed to promote better health outcomes and to help target inappropriate medication utilization and non-adherence to medication,
each of which may result in adverse medical events that negatively affect member health and client pharmacy and medical spend. These programs include
utilization management (“UM”), medication management, quality assurance, adherence and counseling programs to complement the client’s plan design and
clinical strategies. To help address prescription opioid abuse and misuse, the Company introduced an industry-leading UM approach that limits to seven days the
supply of opioids dispensed for certain acute prescriptions for patients who
9

are new to therapy, limits the daily dosage of opioids dispensed based on the strength of the opioid and requires the use of immediate-release formulations of
opioids before extended-release opioids are dispensed. The Company’s Pharmacy Advisor  program facilitates pharmacist counseling, both face-to-face and over
the telephone, to help participating plan members with certain chronic diseases, such as diabetes and cardiovascular conditions, to identify gaps in care, adhere to
their prescribed medications and manage their health conditions. The Company also has digital connectivity that helps to lower drug costs for patients by providing
expanded visibility to lower cost alternatives through enhanced analytics and data sharing.
Disease Management Programs
The Company’s clinical programs and services utilize advanced protocols and offer clients convenience in working with providers and other third parties. The
Company’s care management program covers diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy and multiple sclerosis and is accredited by the
NCQA. The Company’s UM program covers similar diseases and is accredited by the NCQA and URAC.
Medical Benefit Management
The Company’s NovoLogix online preauthorization tool helps identify and capture cost savings opportunities for specialty drugs billed under the medical benefit
by identifying outliers to appropriate dosages and costs, and helps to ensure clinically appropriate use of specialty drugs.
Group Purchasing Organization Services
The Company operates a group purchasing organization that negotiates pricing for the purchase of pharmaceuticals and rebates with pharmaceutical manufacturers
on behalf of its participants. The Company also provides various administrative, management and reporting services to pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Pharmacy Services Information Systems
The Pharmacy Services segment’s claim adjudication platform incorporates architecture that centralizes the data generated from filling mail order prescriptions,
adjudicating retail pharmacy claims and delivering other solutions to PBM clients. The Health Engagement Engine  technology and proprietary clinical algorithms
help connect the various parts of the enterprise and serve an essential role in cost management and health improvement, leveraging cloud-native technologies and
practices. This capability transforms pharmacy data into actionable interventions at key points of care, including in retail, mail and specialty pharmacies as well as
in customer care call center operations, leveraging our enterprise data platform to improve the quality of care. The technology leverages assisted artificial
intelligence to deliver insights to the business and bring automation to otherwise manual tasks. Specialty services also connects with our claim adjudication
platform and various health plan adjudication platforms with a centralized architecture servicing many clients and members. Operating services, such as Specialty
Expedite , provide an interconnected onboarding solution for specialty medications and branding solutions ranging from fulfillment to total patient management.
These services are managed through our new innovative specialty workflow and web platform.
Pharmacy Services Clients
The Company’s Pharmacy Services clients are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, Medicare Part D
plans, Managed Medicaid plans and plans offered on Insurance Exchanges and other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States and Covered
Entities. Pharmaceuticals are provided to eligible members in benefit plans maintained by clients and utilize the Company’s information systems, among other
things, to help perform safety checks, drug interaction screening and identify opportunities for generic substitution. Substantially all of the Pharmacy Services
segment’s revenues are generated from dispensing and managing prescription drugs to eligible members in benefit plans maintained by clients.
Pharmacy Services Seasonality
The majority of Pharmacy Services segment revenues are not seasonal in nature.
Pharmacy Services Competition
The Company believes the primary competitive factors in the pharmacy services industry include: (i) the ability to negotiate favorable discounts from drug
manufacturers as well as to negotiate favorable discounts from, and access to, retail pharmacy networks; (ii) the ability to identify and apply effective cost
management programs utilizing clinical strategies, including the development and utilization of preferred formularies; (iii) the ability to market PBM products and
services; (iv) the commitment
®
® 
®
®
10

to provide flexible, clinically-oriented services to clients and be responsive to clients’ needs; (v) the quality, scope and costs of products and services offered to
clients and their members; and (vi) operational excellence in delivering services. The Pharmacy Services segment has a significant number of competitors offering
PBM services, including large, national PBM companies (e.g., Prime Therapeutics and MedImpact), PBMs owned by large national health plans (e.g., the Express
Scripts business of Cigna Corporation and the OptumRx business of UnitedHealth) and smaller standalone PBMs.
Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of health and wellness products and general merchandise, provides health care services
through its MinuteClinic walk-in medical clinics, provides medical diagnostic testing, administers vaccinations for illnesses such as influenza, COVID-19 and
shingles and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations, which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other
ancillary services to long-term care facilities and other care settings. As of December 31, 2021, the Retail/LTC segment operated more than 9,900 retail locations,
nearly 1,200 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and on-site pharmacies. During the year ended December 31,
2021, the Retail/LTC segment filled 1.6 billion prescriptions on a 30-day equivalent basis. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company dispensed
approximately 26.4% of the total retail pharmacy prescriptions in the United States.
Retail/LTC Products and Services
A typical retail store sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of high-quality, nationally advertised brand name and proprietary brand merchandise.
Pharmacy locations may also contract with Covered Entities under the federal 340B drug pricing program. Front store categories include over-the-counter drugs,
consumer health products, beauty products and personal care products. LTC operations include distribution of prescription drugs and related consulting and
ancillary services. The Company purchases merchandise from numerous manufacturers and distributors. The Company believes that competitive sources are
readily available for substantially all of the products carried in its retail stores and the loss of any one supplier would not likely have a material effect on the
Retail/LTC segment. The Company’s MinuteClinic locations offer a variety of health care services.
Retail/LTC revenues by major product group are as follows:
Percentage of Revenues
2021
2020
2019
Pharmacy 
76.0 %
76.9 %
76.7 %
Front store and other 
24.0 %
23.1 %
23.3 %
100.0 %
100.0 %
100.0 %
(1)
Pharmacy includes LTC sales and sales in pharmacies within Target Corporation (“Target”) and other retail stores.
(2)
“Other” represents less than 12% of the “Front store and other” revenue category in all periods presented.
Pharmacy
Pharmacy revenues represented approximately three-fourths of Retail/LTC segment revenues in each of 2021, 2020 and 2019. The Company believes that retail
pharmacy operations will continue to represent a critical part of the Company’s business due to industry demographics, e.g., an aging American population
consuming a greater number of prescription drugs, prescription drugs being used more often as the first line of defense for managing illness, the introduction of
new pharmaceutical products, the need for vaccinations, including the COVID-19 vaccination, and Medicare Part D growth. The Company believes the retail
pharmacy business benefits from investment in both people and technology, as well as innovative collaborations with health plans, PBMs and providers. Given the
nature of prescriptions, consumers want their prescriptions filled accurately by professional pharmacists using the latest tools and technology, and ready when
promised. Consumers also need medication management programs and better information to help them get the most out of their health care dollars. To assist
consumers with these needs, the Company has introduced integrated pharmacy health care services that provide an earlier, easier and more effective approach to
engaging consumers in behaviors that can help lower costs, improve health and save lives.
Front Store
Front store revenues reflect the Company’s strategy of innovating with new and unique products and services, using innovative personalized marketing and
adjusting the mix of merchandise to match customers’ needs and preferences. A key component of the front store strategy is the ExtraCare  card program, which is
one of the largest and most successful retail loyalty programs in the United States. The ExtraCare program allows the Company to balance marketing efforts so it
can reward its best
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
®
11

customers by providing them with automatic sale prices, customized coupons, ExtraBucks  rewards and other benefits. The Company also offers a subscription-
based membership program, CarePass , under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course of the subscription period, as well as a
promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. The Company continues to launch and enhance new and exclusive brands to create
unmatched offerings in beauty products and deliver other unique product offerings, including a full range of high-quality CVS Health  and other proprietary brand
products that are only available through CVS stores. The Company currently carries approximately 6,000 CVS Health and proprietary items, which accounted for
approximately 22% of front store revenues during 2021.
MinuteClinic
As of December 31, 2021, the Company operated nearly 1,200 MinuteClinic locations in the United States. The clinics are staffed by nurse practitioners and
physician assistants who utilize nationally established guidelines to deliver a variety of health care services. Payors value these clinics because they provide
convenient, high-quality, cost-effective care, in many cases offering an attractive alternative to more expensive sites of care. MinuteClinic is collaborating with the
Health Care Benefits and Pharmacy Services segments to help meet the needs of the Company’s health plan members and CVS Caremark’s client plan members by
offering programs that can improve member health and lower costs. MinuteClinic also maintains relationships with leading hospitals, clinics and physicians in the
communities we serve to support and enhance quality, access and continuity of care.
On-site Pharmacies
The Company also operates a limited number of pharmacies located at client sites, which provide certain health plan members and customers with a convenient
alternative for filling their prescriptions and receiving vaccinations, including the COVID-19 vaccination.
Medical Diagnostic Testing
The Company offers medical diagnostic testing primarily through its COVID-19 testing sites located at CVS Pharmacy locations, in its MinuteClinic locations, at
community-based testing sites in underserved areas and through its Return Ready solution.
Long-term Care Pharmacy Operations
The Retail/LTC segment provides LTC pharmacy services through the Omnicare  business. Omnicare’s customers consist of skilled nursing facilities, assisted
living facilities, independent living communities, hospitals, correctional facilities, and other health care service providers. The Company provides pharmacy
consulting, including monthly patient drug therapy evaluations, to assist in compliance with state and federal regulations and provide proprietary clinical and health
management programs. It also provides pharmaceutical case management services for retirees, employees and dependents who have drug benefits under corporate-
sponsored health care programs.
Community Location Development
CVS Health’s community health destinations are an integral part of its ability to meet the needs of consumers and maintain its leadership position in the changing
health care landscape. When paired with its rapidly expanding digital presence, the Company’s physical presence in thousands of communities across the country
represents a competitive advantage by allowing it to develop deep and trusted relationships through everyday engagement in consumer health. The Company’s
community health destinations have played, and will continue to play, a key role in the Company’s continued growth and success. During 2021, the Company
opened approximately 55 new community locations, relocated approximately 15 locations, converted approximately 300 locations into CVS HealthHUB locations
and closed approximately 80 locations.
The Company’s continuous assessment of its national footprint is an essential component of competing effectively in the current health care environment. On an
ongoing basis, the Company evaluates changes in population, consumer buying patterns and future health needs to assess the ability of its existing stores and
locations to meet the needs of its consumers and the business. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company completed a strategic review of its retail business
and announced its plans to reduce store density in certain locations through the closure of approximately 900 stores between 2022 and 2024.
As part of the Company’s strategic review of its retail business, CVS Health will also create new store formats to drive higher engagement with consumers. Three
distinct models will serve as community health destinations: (a) sites dedicated to offering primary care services; (b) an enhanced version of CVS HealthHUB
locations with products and services designed for everyday health and wellness needs; and (c) traditional CVS Pharmacy stores that provide prescription services
and health, wellness, personal care and other convenient retail offerings.
®
®
®
 
®
12

Retail/LTC Information Systems
The Company has continued to invest in information systems to enable it to deliver exceptional customer service, enhance safety and quality, and expand patient
care services while lowering operating costs. The proprietary WeCARE Workflow tool supports pharmacy teams by prioritizing work to meet customer
expectations, facilitating prescriber outreach, and seamlessly integrating clinical programs. This solution delivers improved efficiency and enhances customer
experience, as well as provides a framework to accommodate the evolution of pharmacy practice and the expansion of clinical programs. Our Health Engagement
Engine technology and data science clinical algorithms enable the Company to help identify opportunities for pharmacists to deliver face-to-face counseling
regarding patient health and safety matters, including medication adherence issues, gaps in care and management of certain chronic health conditions. The
Company’s digital strategy is to empower the consumer to navigate their pharmacy experience and manage their condition through integrated online and mobile
solutions that offer utility and convenience. The Company’s LTC digital technology suite, Omniview , improves the efficiency of customers’ operations with tools
that include executive dashboards, pre-admission pricing, electronic ordering of prescription refills, proof-of-delivery tracking, access to patient profiles, receipt
and management of facility bills, and real-time validation of Medicare Part D coverage, among other capabilities.
Through the collaboration of its digital and technical teams, the Company has established critical tools which enable patients to schedule COVID-19 diagnostic
testing and vaccination appointments through CVS.com and MinuteClinic.com. Key elements of the offerings include landing pages which highlight services and
answer common questions, screening capabilities to determine patient eligibility, service location locator and appointment selection tools to efficiently identify the
requested service on a specified date, time, and location and registration pages to collect required patient information, accelerating the administration of the test or
vaccine once at the store. Once scheduled, the tools provide the user with instructions and notifications including SMS text message and email reminders, and,
following administration, also provide digital results for tests and records for vaccinations, enabling patients to view and save their medical records for convenient
access at a later point.
Retail/LTC Customers
The success of the Retail/LTC segment’s businesses is dependent upon the Company’s ability to establish and maintain contractual relationships with pharmacy
benefit managers and other payors on acceptable terms. Substantially all of the Retail/LTC segment’s pharmacy revenues are derived from pharmacy benefit
managers, managed care organizations (“MCOs”), government funded health care programs, commercial employers and other third-party payors. No single
Retail/LTC payor accounted for 10% or more of the Company’s consolidated total revenues in 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Retail/LTC Seasonality
The majority of Retail/LTC segment revenues, particularly pharmacy revenues, generally are not seasonal in nature. However, front store revenues tend to be
higher during the December holiday season. In addition, both pharmacy and front store revenues are affected by the timing and severity of the cough, cold and flu
season. Uncharacteristic or extreme weather conditions also can adversely affect consumer shopping patterns and Retail/LTC revenues, expenses and operating
results.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the customary quarterly operating income progression continued to be impacted by COVID-19. During the first quarter,
the Company experienced reduced customer traffic in its retail pharmacies, which reflected the impact of a weak cough, cold and flu season, while it administered
the highest quarterly volume of COVID-19 diagnostic tests. During the second quarter, the segment generated earnings from COVID-19 vaccinations and saw
improved customer traffic as vaccinated customers began more actively shopping in CVS locations. During the third and fourth quarters, emerging new variants
drove the continued administration of COVID-19 vaccinations (including booster shots), which reached their highest levels of the year during the fourth quarter,
and diagnostic testing. During the third and fourth quarters, the segment also generated earnings from the sale of OTC test kits in the front store.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the customary quarterly operating income progression was also impacted by COVID-19. During March 2020, the
Company experienced greater use of 90-day prescriptions, early refills of maintenance medications and increased front store volume as consumers prepared for the
COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequent to March 2020, the Company experienced reduced customer traffic in its retail pharmacies and MinuteClinic locations due to
shelter-in-place orders as well as reduced new therapy prescriptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in the third quarter, the Company saw an
increase in diagnostic testing related to the COVID-19 pandemic and in December 2020, the Company began administering COVID-19 vaccinations in long-term
care facilities.
®
13

Retail/LTC Competition
The retail pharmacy business is highly competitive. The Company believes that it competes principally on the basis of: (i) store location and convenience,
(ii) customer service and satisfaction, (iii) product selection and variety, and (iv) price. In the areas it serves, the Company competes with other drugstore chains
(e.g., Walgreens and Rite Aid), supermarkets, discount retailers (e.g., Walmart), independent pharmacies, restrictive pharmacy networks, internet companies (e.g.,
Amazon), membership clubs, retail health clinics, urgent care and primary care offices, as well as mail order dispensing pharmacies.
LTC pharmacy services are highly regional or local in nature, and within a given geographic area of operation, highly competitive. The Company’s largest LTC
pharmacy competitor nationally is PharMerica. The Company also competes with numerous local and regional institutional pharmacies, pharmacies owned by
long-term care facilities and local retail pharmacies. Some states have enacted “freedom of choice” or “any willing provider” requirements as part of their state
Medicaid programs or in separate legislation, which may increase the competition that the Company faces in providing services to long-term care facility residents
in these states.
Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which primarily consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
14

Generic Sourcing Venture
The Company and Cardinal Health, Inc. (“Cardinal”) each have a 50% ownership in Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (“Red Oak”), a generic pharmaceutical sourcing
entity. Under this arrangement, the Company and Cardinal contributed their sourcing and supply chain expertise to Red Oak and agreed to source and negotiate
generic pharmaceutical supply contracts for both companies through Red Oak. Red Oak does not own or hold inventory on behalf of either company.
Working Capital Practices
The Company funds the growth of its businesses through a combination of cash flow from operations, commercial paper and other short-term borrowings, proceeds
from sale-leaseback transactions and long-term borrowings. For additional information on the Company’s working capital practices, see “Liquidity and Capital
Resources” in the MD&A included in Item 7 of this 10-K. Employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly workers, health plans, providers,
governmental units, government-sponsored plans (with the exception of Medicare Part D services, which are described below), labor groups and expatriates, which
represent the vast majority of Health Care Benefits segment revenues, typically settle in less than 30 days. As a provider of Medicare Part D services, the Company
contracts annually with CMS. Utilization of services each plan year results in the accumulation of either a receivable from or a payable to CMS. The timing of
settlement of the receivable or payable with CMS takes several quarters, which impacts working capital from year to year. The majority of the Retail/LTC segment
non-pharmacy revenues are paid in cash, or with debit or credit cards. Managed care organizations, pharmacy benefit managers, government funded health care
programs, commercial employers and other third party insurance programs, which represent the vast majority of the Company’s consolidated pharmacy revenues,
typically settle in less than 30 days. The remainder of the Company’s consolidated pharmacy revenues are paid in cash, or with debit or credit cards.
Human Capital
Overview
At CVS Health, we share a single, clear purpose: bringing our heart to every moment of your health. We devote significant time and attention to the attraction,
development and retention of talent to deliver high levels of service to our customers. Our commitment to them includes a competitive rewards package and
programs that support our diverse range of colleagues in rewarding and fulfilling careers. As of December 31, 2021, we employed approximately 300,000
colleagues primarily in the United States including in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, approximately 72% of whom were full-time.
We believe engaged colleagues produce stronger business results and are more likely to build a career with the Company. Each year we conduct an internal
engagement survey that provides colleagues with an opportunity to share their opinions and experiences with respect to their role, their team and the enterprise to
help our Board and our management identify areas where we can improve colleague experience. The survey covers a broad range of topics including development
and opportunities, diversity management, recognition, performance, well-being, compliance and continuous improvement. In 2021, greater than 80% of our
colleagues participated in the engagement survey, of which greater than 75% responded that they were actively engaged.
The Board and our chief executive officer (“CEO”) provide oversight of our human capital strategy, which consists of the following categories: total rewards;
diversity, equity and inclusion; colleague development; and health and safety.
Total Rewards
We recognize how vital our colleagues are to our success and strive to offer comprehensive and competitive wages and benefits to meet the varying needs of our
colleagues and their families. The benefits and programs include annual bonuses, 401(k) plans, stock awards, an employee stock purchase plan, health care and
insurance benefits, paid time off, flexible work schedules, family leave, dependent care resources, colleague assistance programs and tuition assistance, among
many others, depending on eligibility.
In recognition of the critical role that the attraction and retention of talent plays in the success of our business, during 2021, we also announced a significant
investment in our employees through an increase in the Company’s minimum hourly wage to $15.00 an hour effective July 2022, with incremental increases to the
Company’s competitive hourly rates beginning in August 2021. The new wage structure also incorporates additional increases beyond the $15.00 minimum, with
higher starting hourly rates for roles such as pharmacy technicians and call center representatives. In addition, during 2021 we awarded incremental
15

bonuses to select colleague groups in recognition of their ongoing contributions throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the most significant of which included
bonuses to our pharmacist and distribution center colleagues.
Diversity, Equity & Inclusion
We believe that a diverse workforce creates a healthier, stronger and more sustainable company. We aim to attract, develop, retain and support a diverse workforce
that reflects the many customers, patients, members and communities we serve. Our Diversity Management Leadership Council, a cross-functional group of senior
leaders appointed by our CEO, works with our Strategic Diversity Management leadership team to intentionally embed diversity across all facets of our business.
For our efforts, we have been recognized as a DiversityInc Top 50 Company, a LatinaStyle Top 50 Company for Latinas and earned a 100 percent score on both
the Human Rights Campaign Corporate Equality Index as well as the Disability Equality Index, meaning the company is recognized as a “Best Place to Work for
Disability Inclusion.” The Company discloses information on our diversity, equity and inclusion strategy and programs in our annual Corporate Social
Responsibility (“CSR”) Report.
As a foundation of diversity and inclusion, we continuously focus on increasing underrepresented populations across our business. In 2021, 71% of our total
colleague population and 55% of our colleagues at the manager level and above self-reported as female. In addition, in 2021 our colleagues reported their
race/ethnicity as: White (49%), Black/African American (17%), Hispanic/Latino (15%), Asian (11%) and Other (8%). The appendix to our CSR Report, our
Strategic Diversity Management Report and our EEO-1 Employer Information Report include additional information on the diversity of our workforce.
Our diversity management strategy emphasizes workplace representation, inclusion and belonging, talent acquisition and management and a diverse marketplace.
We incorporated a diversity metric into our 2021 annual cash incentive program for our most senior leaders who have the greatest ability to influence the overall
hiring, development and promotion of our colleagues. We also continued the deployment of conscious inclusion training for colleagues designed to enhance
awareness of biases and support inclusive behaviors. Our CSR Report includes additional information with respect to our conscious inclusion training. We support
16 Colleague Resource Groups (“CRGs”) that include more than 26,000 colleagues across the enterprise. These groups represent a wide range of professional,
cultural, ethical and personal affinities and interests, as well as formal mentoring programs. Our CRGs provide our colleagues with an opportunity to connect and
network with one another through a particular affinity, culture or interest. Each of our CRGs is sponsored by a senior leader.
Colleague Development
The Company offers a number of resources and programs that attract, engage, develop, advance and retain colleagues. Training and development provides
colleagues the support they need to perform well in their current role while planning and preparing for future roles. We offer an online orientation program that
pairs new hires with seasoned colleagues and the training continues throughout a colleague’s career through in-person, virtual and self-paced learning at all levels.
We also provide mentoring, tools and workshops for colleagues to manage their career development. We offer a variety of management and leadership programs
that develop incumbent diverse and other high potential colleagues. Our broad training practices include updated, tech-enabled tools and keep our colleagues
informed of new developments in our industry that are relevant to their roles. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our colleagues invested more than
13 million hours in learning and development courses.
Our colleague development program also promotes the importance of compliance across our business. Our colleagues demonstrate this commitment through our
annual Code of Conduct training, which 100% of active colleagues completed in 2021. In 2021, we launched more than 70 different training courses as part of our
annual Enterprise Compliance Training Program.
Health & Safety
We have a strong commitment to providing a safe working environment. We have implemented an environmental health and safety management system to support
adherence and monitoring of programs designed to make our various business operations compliant with applicable occupational safety and health regulations and
requirements. Our Environmental Health and Safety Department oversees the implementation and adherence to programs like Powered Industrial Truck training,
materials handling and storage, selection of personal protective equipment and workplace violence prevention.
We utilize Safety Service Plans to analyze data and concentrate on key areas of risk to reduce the chance of workplace incidents. We focus on identifying causes
and improving performance when workplace incidents occur. We also engage leaders
16

in promoting a culture of safety. With safety task forces in place at each distribution center, we empower leaders and safety business partners to identify policies,
procedures and processes that could improve their own operations.
From the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took a comprehensive approach to managing occupational health and safety challenges presented by the pandemic,
including implementing facial covering requirements for our workplaces and providing face masks to colleagues, providing sick leave, implementing symptom
screening measures and implementing additional protocols in accordance with applicable Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) requirements
and guidance and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) guidelines for workplaces. We have emphasized the importance of taking immediate steps
toward full vaccination.
Environmental, Social and Governance (“ESG”) Strategy
Overview
CVS Health believes the health of our people, communities and planet are linked to the health of our business. Our ESG strategy is designed to use our assets to
transform the health care experience and invest in community health at the local level, while working to reduce the environmental impact of our operations. Our
ESG strategy includes a set of goals we hope to achieve in 2030 or earlier. We believe these goals are achievable without materially adversely affecting our
businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or prospects. Our ESG strategy consists of four pillars: Healthy People, Healthy Business, Healthy Community and
Healthy Planet.
Healthy People
Through physical and virtual interactions, we provide convenient, personalized and integrated access to health care support and services. We continue to implement
and expand initiatives that build on our innovative health care model, with the ultimate aim to transform the health care experience for every person we reach to
improve health outcomes. These include helping to improve chronic disease prevention and management, helping to reduce and prevent prescription drug misuse,
and improving the social determinants of health, which include education, transportation and behavioral health. Through our ESG strategy we are focused on our
interaction with individuals across all our touchpoints to increase the likelihood that these initiatives will succeed.
Healthy Business
As we work to transform health care, we are committed to operating a healthy business for all our stakeholders, including our patients, customers, stockholders,
clients, partners, communities and colleagues. Throughout our large operational footprint and including our supply chain, we are committed to acting responsibly
with respect for human rights, privacy, information security, public policy, marketing and advertising. We focus on diversity, equity and inclusion as well as
colleague development, health and safety. Through our ESG strategy we will be investing in colleague mentoring, sponsorship, development and advancement;
workforce initiatives that provide employment services and training to the underserved; and providing access to health care while addressing health disparities.
Healthy Community
By working with community-focused organizations and through innovative programs that can be tailored to and executed across different communities, we are
driving positive health outcomes and reducing overall health care costs. Through our recently announced Health Zones initiative, CVS Health and our nonprofit
partners are working together to create a model that reduces health disparities, promotes and enhances equity and ensures at-risk communities can thrive. Through
our ESG strategy we are building healthier communities through social impact investments, such as supporting health care professionals, reducing food insecurity,
engaging our customers in community health, and coordinating care for the underserved.
Healthy Planet
Our work to improve the planet is aligned with our commitment to the communities we serve and to help protect our businesses from the negative impacts of
climate change. All of our businesses, including our community locations, corporate offices and operation centers, distribution centers, and specialty pharmacy and
PBM mail pharmacy locations, can be impacted by climate change-related extreme weather events and we are doing our part to reduce our environmental impacts.
We are focused on identifying resource efficiencies across our operations and supply chain. We are proud to be recognized as a leader in addressing climate-related
issues and are working closely with key stakeholders to make and deliver meaningful progress. Key
17

priorities include the advancement of our greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions-reduction targets, reduction in our energy consumption, the advancement of
sustainability in transportation, logistics and our physical locations, which includes retrofitting community and corporate locations with LED lighting, exploring
investments in renewable energy, reducing water use, focusing on smarter consumption through a “digital first” approach and the reduction of our use of paper and
plastic. In October 2021, CVS Health’s science-based net zero GHG emissions targets were validated by the Science Based Targets initiatives (“SBTi”). We
continue to make meaningful progress to reduce our environmental impact.
Intellectual Property
The Company has registered and/or applied to register a variety of trademarks and service marks used throughout its businesses, as well as domain names, and
relies on a combination of copyright, patent, trademark and trade secret laws, in addition to contractual restrictions, to establish and protect the Company’s
proprietary rights. The Company regards its intellectual property as having significant value in the Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC
segments. The Company is not aware of any facts that could materially impact the continuing use of any of its intellectual property.
Government Regulation
Overview
The Company’s operations are subject to comprehensive federal, state and local laws and regulations and comparable multiple levels of international regulation in
the jurisdictions in which it does business. There also continues to be a heightened level of review and/or audit by federal, state and international regulators of the
health and related benefits industry’s business and reporting practices. In addition, many of the Company’s PBM clients and the Company’s payors in the
Retail/LTC segment, including insurers, Medicare plans, Managed Medicaid plans and MCOs, are themselves subject to extensive regulations that affect the design
and implementation of prescription drug benefit plans that they sponsor. Similarly, the Company’s LTC clients, such as skilled nursing facilities, are subject to
government regulations, including many of the same government regulations to which the Company is subject.
The laws and rules governing the Company’s businesses and interpretations of those laws and rules continue to expand and become more restrictive each year and
are subject to frequent change. The application of these complex legal and regulatory requirements to the detailed operation of the Company’s businesses creates
areas of uncertainty. Further, there are numerous proposed health care, financial services and other laws and regulations at the federal, state and international levels,
some of which could adversely affect the Company’s businesses if they are enacted. The Company cannot predict whether pending or future federal or state
legislation or court proceedings will change aspects of how it operates in the specific markets in which it competes or the health care industry generally, but if
changes occur, the impact of any such changes could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or stock price.
Possible regulatory or legislative changes include the federal or one or more state governments fundamentally restructuring the Commercial, Medicare or Medicaid
marketplace; reducing payments to the Company in connection with Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible or special needs programs; increasing its involvement in
drug reimbursement, pricing, purchasing, and/or importation; or changing the laws governing PBMs.
The Company has internal control policies and procedures and conducts training and compliance programs for its employees to help prevent, detect and correct
prohibited practices. However, if the Company’s employees or agents fail to comply with applicable laws governing its international or other operations, it may
face investigations, prosecutions and other legal proceedings and actions which could result in civil penalties, administrative remedies and criminal sanctions. Any
failure or alleged failure to comply with applicable laws and regulations summarized below, or any adverse applications or interpretations of, or changes in, the
laws and regulations affecting the Company and/or its businesses, could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results, financial condition,
cash flows and/or stock price. See Item 3 of this 10-K, “Legal Proceedings,” for further information.
The Company can give no assurance that its businesses, financial condition, operating results and/or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected, or that the
Company will not be required to materially change its business practices, based on: (i) future enactment of new health care or other laws or regulations; (ii) the
interpretation or application of existing laws or regulations, including the laws and regulations described in this Government Regulation section, as they may relate
to one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iii) pending
or future federal or state governmental investigations of one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes
and/or the health care industry generally; (iv) pending or future government audits, investigations or enforcement actions against the Company; or (v) adverse
developments
18

Table of Contents
in pending or future legal proceedings against or affecting the Company, including qui tam lawsuits, or affecting one or more of the industries in which the
Company competes and/or the health care industry generally.
Laws and Regulations Related to COVID-19
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act (the “Families First Act”) and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) were
enacted in March 2020. Each of the Families First Act and the CARES Act requires the Company to provide coverage for COVID-19 related medical services, in
many cases without member cost-sharing, in its Insured Health Care Benefits products.
The CARES Act also provides relief funding to providers to reimburse them for health care related expenses incurred in preventing, preparing for and/or
responding to COVID-19 (provided no other source is obligated to reimburse those expenses) or lost health care related revenues that are attributable to COVID-
19. Under the CARES Act, the Company receives reimbursement for uninsured patients in connection with COVID-19 testing and vaccination as well as
monoclonal antibody treatment. Aside from such reimbursement, the Company has not requested any funding under the CARES Act. However, in the second
quarter of 2020, the Company received $43 million from the CARES Act provider relief fund, all of which was returned to the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (“HHS”) during the second quarter of 2020.
The CARES Act also allows for the deferral of the payment of the employer share of Social Security taxes effective March 27, 2020 by permitting them to remit
the associated payments in two equal installments on or about December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2022. The Company elected to defer approximately
$670 million of its Social Security tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company paid the first of two equal installments in December
2021 and will remit the second installment on or about December 31, 2022, as required under the CARES Act.
Congress enacted the American Rescue Plan Act in March 2021. Among other changes, as a result of this legislation, Public Exchange plan premium subsidies
increased for low-income individuals and became available to people with incomes higher than 400% of the federal poverty limit. These changes are currently in
effect through the remainder of 2022, and Congress may extend, or potentially make permanent, these policies in subsequent legislation, which could cause
continued shifts in enrollment into Public Exchange plans.
In addition to the Families First Act, the CARES Act, and the American Rescue Plan Act, the Company continues to experience new legislation, regulation,
directives, orders and other requirements from federal, state, county and municipal authorities related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These governmental actions
have included, but are not limited to, requirements to waive member cost-sharing associated with COVID-19 testing and treatment, provide coverage for additional
COVID-19-related services, expand the use of telemedicine, extend grace periods for payments of premiums or limit coverage termination based on non-payment
of premiums or fees, modify health benefits coverage eligibility rules to help maintain employee eligibility, and facilitate, accelerate or advance payments to
providers, and other requirements related to the public health emergency. These requirements may impact different areas of our business differently and for
different lengths of time, and present financial implications with respect to implementing and unwinding our compliance with these new requirements.
The Company has operations that fall within the scope of COVID-19 vaccine requirements for federal contractors, certain health care workers, and the
requirements of certain jurisdictions such as New York City. Several of these are subject to judicial challenges. We are continuing to closely monitor and update
our practices in response to developments or changes in the COVID-19 vaccination policies established by various federal agencies as well as the several state- and
municipal-specific COVID-19 vaccine mandates that provide expanded exemptions, modifications, requirements or restrictions regarding employee vaccinations.
We have a process for employees to request a reasonable accommodation if they are unable to get vaccinated due to a medical condition, sincerely held religious
belief, or any other legally recognized exemption. Employees must apply and be approved for a reasonable accommodation in order to be exempt from the
vaccination requirement.
Additionally, in December 2021, the Biden administration reiterated CARES Act guidance noting commercial health insurers are not required to cover workplace
or surveillance testing and announced several new directives and actions to combat COVID-19, including the expansion of free at-home testing to be covered by
commercial health insurers for the remainder of the public health emergency. On January 10, 2022, the HHS announced that commercial health insurers must cover
the costs of up to eight rapid OTC COVID-19 test kits per individual per 30-day period. This requirement will likely impact multiple business operations, including
increasing benefit costs in our commercial health insurance business and increasing revenues in our retail business. The requirement may also result in a decrease
in more expensive tests and treatments, which could partially mitigate the increase in benefit costs in our commercial health insurance business. These impacts will
be highly dependent on the overall supply of testing products.
19

Table of Contents
The impact of this governmental activity on the U.S. economy, consumer, customer and health care provider behavior and health care utilization patterns is beyond
our knowledge and control. As a result, the financial and/or operational impact these COVID-19 related governmental actions and inactions will have on our
businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the collective impact could be material and adverse.
Laws and Regulations Related to Multiple Segments of the Company’s Business
Laws Related to Reimbursement by Government Programs - The Company is subject to various federal and state laws concerning its submission of claims and
other information to Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state government-sponsored health care programs. Potential sanctions for violating these laws
include recoupment or reduction of government reimbursement amounts, civil penalties, treble damages, and exclusion from participation in government health
care programs. Such laws include the federal False Claims Act (the “False Claims Act”), the federal anti-kickback statute (the “AKS”), state false claims acts and
anti-kickback statutes in most states, the federal “Stark Law” and related state laws. In particular, the False Claims Act prohibits intentionally submitting,
conspiring to submit, or causing to be submitted, false claims, records, or statements to the federal government, or intentionally failing to return overpayments, in
connection with reimbursement by federal government programs. In addition, any claim for government reimbursement also violates the False Claims Act where it
results from a violation of the AKS.
Both federal and state false claims laws permit private individuals to file qui tam or “whistleblower” lawsuits on behalf of the federal or state government.
Participants in the health and related benefits industry, including the Company, frequently are subject to actions under the False Claims Act or similar state laws.
The federal Stark Law generally prohibits physicians from referring Medicare or Medicaid beneficiaries for certain services, including outpatient prescription
drugs, to any entity with which the physician, or an immediate family member of the physician, has a financial relationship. The Stark Law further prohibits the
entity receiving a prohibited referral from presenting a claim for reimbursement by Medicare or Medicaid for services furnished pursuant to the prohibited referral.
Various states have enacted similar laws.
The ACA - The ACA significantly increased federal and state oversight of health plans. Among other requirements, it specifies minimum medical loss ratios
(“MLRs”) for Commercial and Medicare Insured products, specifies features required to be included in commercial benefit designs, limits commercial individual
and small group rating and pricing practices, encourages additional competition (including potential incentives for new participants to enter the marketplace), and
includes regulations and processes that could delay or limit the Company’s ability to appropriately increase its health plan premium rates. This in turn could
adversely affect the Company’s ability to continue to participate in certain product lines and/or geographies that it serves today.
In June 2021, the United States Supreme Court dismissed a challenge on procedural grounds that argued the ACA is unconstitutional in its entirety and issued an
opinion preserving the ACA and its consumer protections in its current form. Even though the ACA was deemed constitutional, there may nevertheless be
continued efforts to invalidate, modify, repeal or replace portions of it. In addition to litigation, parts of the ACA continue to evolve through the promulgation of
executive orders, legislation, regulations and guidance at the federal or state level. The Company expects the ACA, including potential changes thereto, to continue
to significantly impact its business operations and operating results, including pricing, medical benefit ratios (“MBRs”) and the geographies in which the
Company’s products are available.
Medicare Regulation - The Company’s Medicare Advantage products compete directly with Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage products offered by
other Medicare Advantage organizations and Medicare Supplement products offered by other insurers. The Company’s Medicare PDP and Medicare Supplement
products are products that Medicare beneficiaries who are enrolled in Original Medicare purchase to enhance their Original Medicare coverage.
The Company continues to expand the number of counties in which it offers Medicare products. The Company has expanded its Medicare service area and
products in 2022 and is seeking to substantially grow its Medicare membership, revenue and operating results over the next several years, including through growth
in Medicare Supplement products. The anticipated organic expansion of the Medicare service area and Medicare products offered and the Medicare-related
provisions of the ACA significantly increase the Company’s exposure to funding and regulation of, and changes in government policy with respect to and/or
funding or regulation of, the various Medicare programs in which the Company participates, including changes in the amounts payable to us under those programs
and/or new reforms or surcharges on existing programs. For example, the ACA requires minimum MLRs for Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D plans of
85%. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays minimum MLR rebates for three consecutive years, it will become ineligible to enroll new
members. If a Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D contract pays such rebates for five consecutive years, it will be terminated by CMS.
20

Table of Contents
Due to potential lower utilization of medical services by Medicare beneficiaries during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible certain Medicare Advantage
contracts may not meet the 85% MLR for consecutive years.
The Company’s Medicare Advantage and PDP products are heavily regulated by CMS. The regulations and contractual requirements applicable to the Company
and other private participants in Medicare programs are complex, expensive to comply with and subject to change. For example, the Medicare Advantage
Overpayment Rule, issued in 2014, implemented the ACA requirements that Medicare Advantage and PDP plans report and refund to CMS overpayments that
those plans receive from CMS. Failure to notify overpayments to CMS could result in liability under the False Claims Act. The precise interpretation, impact and
legality of this rule are subject to pending litigation. Payments the Company receives from CMS for its Medicare Advantage and Part D businesses also are subject
to risk adjustment based on the health status of the individuals enrolled. Elements of that risk adjustment mechanism continue to be challenged by the U.S.
Department of Justice (the “DOJ”), the Office of the Inspector General of the HHS (the “OIG”) and CMS itself. Substantial changes in the risk adjustment
mechanism, including changes that result from enforcement or audit actions, could materially affect the amount of the Company’s Medicare reimbursement,
require the Company to raise prices or reduce the benefits offered to Medicare beneficiaries, and potentially limit the Company’s (and the industry’s) participation
in the Medicare program.
The Company has invested significant resources to comply with Medicare standards, and its Medicare compliance efforts will continue to require significant
resources. CMS may seek premium and other refunds, prohibit the Company from continuing to market and/or enroll members in or refuse to passively enroll
members in one or more of the Company’s Medicare or Medicare-Medicaid demonstration (historically known as “dual eligible”) plans, exclude us from
participating in one or more Medicare, dual eligible or dual eligible special needs plan programs and/or institute other sanctions and/or civil monetary penalties
against the Company if it fails to comply with CMS regulations or its Medicare contractual requirements. The Company’s Medicare Supplement products are
regulated at the state level and subject to similar significant compliance requirements and risks.
In addition, in November 2020, the HHS released the final Rebate Rule (the “Rebate Rule”), which eliminates the regulatory safe harbor from prosecution under
the AKS for rebates from pharmaceutical companies to PBMs in Medicare Part D, replacing it with two far narrower safe harbors designed to directly benefit
patients with high out-of-pocket costs and to change the way PBMs are compensated. The new safe harbors are (i) for rebates which are passed on to the patient at
the point of sale and (ii) for flat service fee payments made to PBMs which cannot be tied to the list prices of drugs. It is unclear whether the Rebate Rule will be
enforceable, whether pharmaceutical companies will respond by reducing list prices, whether list prices in the private market may also be reduced, and what the
resulting impact will be to PBMs or the Company. The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (the “PCMA”), which represents PBMs, has filed a suit in an
effort to block the Rebate Rule, claiming that the Rebate Rule would lead to higher premiums in Medicare Part D and was adopted in an unlawful manner. The
Bipartisan Infrastructure Act of 2021 delays the effective date of the rebate rule to January 2026, and pending Reconciliation legislation would fully repeal the
Rebate Rule.
In December 2021, President Biden signed the Protecting Medicare and American Farmers from Sequester Cuts Act. The legislation extends the suspension of the
2% Medicare sequester cuts until March 2022. Starting in April 2022, the Medicare sequester cuts will be phased back in with a 1% cut that will continue through
June. Absent any further changes by Congress, the 2% Medicare sequester would be fully implemented again effective July 1, 2022. Congress suspended the
Medicare sequester cuts due to the COVID-19 pandemic, providing a continued increase in Medicare Advantage and Part D plan payments, as well as Medicare
fee-for-service provider payments. The legislation also includes a 3% increase in the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule payments for 2022. Congress enacted a
similar increase of 3.75% for 2021 which was set to expire. As a result of this increase, Medicare Advantage plans who have contracts with providers based on the
Medicare Physician Fee Schedule will need to increase their payment rates by 3%. This increase became effective in January 2022 and does not include any
allowance for the increased Medicare Advantage costs that result from the provision. Taken together, the two provisions represent a modest increase in Medicare
Advantage costs relative to our expectations for 2022.
Currently, Congress is considering legislation to add additional benefits to Medicare Part B, such as dental, hearing and vision benefits. The Congressional Budget
Office has not yet scored any of the proposals.
Going forward, the Company expects CMS, the OIG, the DOJ, other federal agencies and the U.S. Congress to continue to scrutinize closely each component of
the Medicare program (including Medicare Advantage, PDPs, demonstration projects such as Medicare-Medicaid plans and provider network access and
adequacy), modify the terms and requirements of the program and possibly seek to recast or limit private insurers’ roles. It is also possible that Congress may
reform the structure of the Medicare Part D program and may consider changes to Medicare Advantage payment policies due to recent recommendations by the
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission and to reduce the potential added cost burden of costly new
21

Table of Contents
benefits, or policies that impact drug pricing such as price controls and inflationary rebates applied to pharmaceutical manufacturers.
It is not possible to predict the outcome of such regulatory or Congressional activity, any of which could materially and adversely affect the Company.
Medicare Audits - CMS regularly audits the Company’s performance to determine its compliance with CMS’s regulations and its contracts with CMS and to
assess the quality of services it provides to Medicare Advantage and PDP beneficiaries. For example, CMS conducts risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”)
audits of a subset of Medicare Advantage contracts for each contract year. Since 2011, CMS has selected certain of the Company’s Medicare Advantage contracts
for various years for RADV audit, and the number of RADV audits continues to increase. The OIG also is auditing the Company’s risk adjustment data and that of
other companies, and the Company expects CMS and the OIG to continue auditing risk adjustment data. The Company also has received Civil Investigative
Demands (“CIDs”) from, and provided documents and information to, the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of its patient chart
review processes in connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D of the Medicare program.
In October 2018, CMS issued proposed rules related to, among other things, changes to the RADV audit methodology established by CMS in 2012. CMS projects
that the changes to the RADV audit methodology would increase its recoveries from Medicare Advantage plans as a result of RADV audits. CMS has requested
comments on the proposed rules, including whether the proposed RADV rule change should apply retroactively to audits of Medicare Advantage plans for contract
year 2011 and forward, and gave notice that it has extended the timeline for publication of the final rules until November 2022. While the Company submitted
timely comments to the proposed rules, if they are adopted as proposed there may be potential adverse effects, which could be material, on the Company’s
operating results, financial condition, and cash flows. CMS also has announced that its goal is to subject all Medicare Advantage contracts to either a
comprehensive or a targeted RADV audit for each contract year.
Medicare Star Ratings - A portion of each Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement is tied to the plan’s “star ratings.” The star rating system considers a variety
of measures adopted by CMS, including quality of preventative services, chronic illness management, compliance and overall customer satisfaction. Only
Medicare Advantage plans with an overall star rating of four or more stars (out of five stars) are eligible for a quality bonus in their basic premium rates. As a
result, the Company’s Medicare Advantage plans’ operating results in 2022 and going forward will be significantly affected by their star ratings. The Company’s
star ratings and past performance scores are adversely affected by the compliance issues that arise each year in its Medicare operations. CMS released the
Company’s 2022 star ratings in October 2021. The Company’s 2022 star ratings will be used to determine which of its Medicare Advantage plans have ratings of
four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2023. Based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2021, 87% of the Company’s Medicare
Advantage members were in plans with 2022 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars. CMS also gives PDPs star ratings which affect each PDP’s enrollment. Medicare
Advantage and PDP plans that are rated less than three stars for three consecutive years are subject to contract termination by CMS. CMS continues to revise its
star ratings system to make it harder to achieve four stars or more. Despite the Company’s success in achieving high 2022 star ratings and other quality measures
and the continuation of its improvement efforts, there can be no assurances that it will be successful in maintaining or improving its star ratings in future years.
Accordingly, the Company’s Medicare Advantage plans may not be eligible for full level quality bonuses, which could adversely affect the benefits such plans can
offer, reduce membership and/or reduce profit margins.
Medicare Benchmark Rates - In January 2021, CMS issued its final notice detailing final 2022 Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates. Final 2022
Medicare Advantage rates resulted in an increase in industry benchmark rates of approximately 4.1%. This rate increase only partially offsets the challenge the
Company faces from the impact of the increasing cost of medical care (including prescription medications) and CMS local and national coverage decisions that
require the Company to pay for services and supplies that are not factored into the Company’s bids. The federal government may seek to impose restrictions on the
configuration of pharmacy or other provider networks for Medicare Advantage and/or PDP plans, or otherwise restrict the ability of these plans to alter benefits,
negotiate prices or establish other terms to improve affordability or maintain viability of products. The Company currently believes that the payments it has
received and will receive in the near term are adequate to justify the Company’s continued participation in the Medicare Advantage and PDP programs, although
there are economic and political pressures to continue to reduce spending on the program, and this outlook could change.
340B Drug Pricing Program – The 340B Drug Pricing Program allows eligible Covered Entities to purchase prescription drugs from manufacturers at a steep
discount, and is overseen by the HHS and the Health Resources and Services Administration (“HRSA”). In 2020, a number of pharmaceutical manufacturers began
programs that limited Covered Entities’ participation in the program through contract pharmacies arrangements. In May 2021, HRSA sent enforcement letters to
22

Table of Contents
multiple manufacturers to curb these practices. In September 2021, HRSA forwarded the enforcement actions to the OIG for potential imposition of civil monetary
penalties. Those enforcement actions are currently subject to ongoing litigation. A reduction in Covered Entities’ participation in contract pharmacy arrangements,
as a result of the pending enforcement actions or otherwise, a reduction in the use of the Company’s administrative services by Covered Entities, or a reduction in
drug manufacturers’ participation in the program could materially and adversely affect the Company.
Anti-Remuneration Laws - Federal law prohibits, among other things, an entity from knowingly and willfully offering, paying, soliciting or receiving, subject to
certain exceptions and “safe harbors,” any remuneration to induce the referral of individuals or the purchase, lease or order of items or services for which payment
may be made under Medicare, Medicaid or certain other federal and state health care programs. A number of states have similar laws, some of which are not
limited to services paid for with government funds. Sanctions for violating these federal and state anti-remuneration laws may include imprisonment, criminal and
civil fines, and exclusion from participation in Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state government-sponsored health care programs. Companies involved in
public health care programs such as Medicare and/or Medicaid are required to maintain compliance programs to detect and deter fraud, waste and abuse, and are
often the subject of fraud, waste and abuse investigations and audits. The Company has invested significant resources to comply with Medicare and Medicaid
program standards. Ongoing vigorous law enforcement and the highly technical regulatory scheme mean that the Company’s compliance efforts in this area will
continue to require significant resources.
Antitrust and Unfair Competition - The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”) investigates and prosecutes practices that are “unfair trade practices” or “unfair
methods of competition.” Numerous lawsuits have been filed throughout the United States against pharmaceutical manufacturers, retail pharmacies and/or PBMs
under various federal and state antitrust and unfair competition laws challenging, among other things: (i) brand name drug pricing and rebate practices of
pharmaceutical manufacturers, (ii) the maintenance of retail or specialty pharmacy networks by PBMs, and (iii) various other business practices of PBMs and retail
pharmacies. In July 2021, the FTC approved several resolutions that direct agency staff to use compulsory process, such as subpoenas, to investigate seven specific
enforcement priorities. Priority targets include, among other businesses, health care businesses, such as pharmaceutical companies, pharmacy benefits managers
and hospitals. To the extent that the Company appears to have actual or potential market power in a relevant market or CVS Pharmacy, CVS Specialty or
MinuteClinic plays a unique or expanded role in a Health Care Benefits or Pharmacy Services segment product offering, the Company’s business arrangements and
uses of confidential information may be subject to heightened scrutiny from an anti-competitive perspective and possible challenge by state and/or federal
regulators and/or private parties.
Privacy and Confidentiality Requirements - Many of the Company’s activities involve the receipt, use and disclosure by the Company of personally identifiable
information (“PII”) as permitted in accordance with applicable federal and state privacy and data security laws, which require organizations to provide appropriate
privacy and security safeguards for such information. In addition to PII, the Company uses and discloses de-identified data for analytical and other purposes when
permitted. Additionally, there are industry standards for handling credit card data known as the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, which are a set of
requirements designed to help ensure that entities that process, store or transmit credit card information maintain a secure environment. Certain states have
incorporated these requirements into state laws or enacted other requirements relating to the use and/or disclosure of PII.
The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and the regulations issued thereunder (collectively, “HIPAA”), as further modified by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (“ARRA”) impose extensive requirements on the way in which health plans, providers, health care
clearinghouses (known as “covered entities”) and their business associates use, disclose and safeguard protected health information (“PHI”). Further, ARRA
requires the Company and other covered entities to report any breaches of PHI to impacted individuals and to the HHS and to notify the media in any states where
500 or more people are impacted by the unauthorized release or use of or access to PHI. Criminal penalties and civil sanctions may be imposed for failing to
comply with HIPAA standards. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (the “HITECH Act”), enacted as part of ARRA,
amended HIPAA to impose additional restrictions on third-party funded communications using PHI and the receipt of remuneration in exchange for PHI. The
HITECH Act also extended HIPAA privacy and security requirements and penalties directly to business associates. HHS has begun to audit health plans, providers
and other parties to enforce HIPAA compliance, including with respect to data security.
In addition to HIPAA, state health privacy laws apply to the extent they are more protective of individual privacy than is HIPAA, including laws that place stricter
controls on the release of information relating to specific diseases or conditions and requirements to notify members of unauthorized release or use of or access to
PHI. States also have adopted regulations to implement provisions of the Financial Modernization Act of 1999 (also known as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(“GLBA”)) which generally require insurers, including health insurers, to provide customers with notice regarding how their non-public personal health and
financial information is used and the opportunity to “opt out” of certain disclosures before the insurer
23

Table of Contents
shares such information with a non-affiliated third party. Like HIPAA, GLBA sets a “floor” standard, allowing states to adopt more stringent requirements
governing privacy protection. Complying with additional state requirements requires us to make additional investments beyond those the Company has made to
comply with HIPAA and GLBA.
The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015 encourages organizations to share cyber threat indicators with the federal government and, among other things,
directs HHS to develop a set of voluntary cybersecurity best practices for organizations in the health care industry. In addition, states have begun to enact more
comprehensive privacy laws and regulations addressing consumer rights to data access, deletion, protection or transparency, such as the California Consumer
Privacy Act (“CCPA”). States also are starting to issue regulations and proposed regulations specifically related to cybersecurity, such as the regulations issued by
the New York Department of Financial Services. Complying with conflicting cybersecurity regulations, which may differ from state to state, requires significant
resources. In addition, differing approaches to state privacy and/or cyber-security regulation and varying enforcement philosophies may materially and adversely
affect the Company’s ability to standardize its products and services across state lines. Widely-reported large scale commercial data breaches in the United States
and abroad increase the likelihood that additional data security legislation will be considered by additional states. These legislative and regulatory developments
will impact the design and operation of the Company’s businesses, its privacy and security strategy and its web-based and mobile assets.
Finally, each Public Exchange is required to adhere to privacy and security standards with respect to PII, and to impose privacy and security standards that are at
least as protective of PII as those the Public Exchange has implemented for itself or non-Public Exchange entities, which include insurers offering plans through
the Public Exchange and their designated downstream entities, including PBMs and other business associates. These standards may differ from, and be more
stringent than, HIPAA.
Consumer Protection Laws - The federal government has many consumer protection laws, such as the Federal Trade Commission Act, the Federal Postal Service
Act and the Consumer Product Safety Act. Most states also have similar consumer protection laws and a growing number of states regulate subscription programs.
In addition, the federal government and most states have adopted laws and/or regulations requiring places of public accommodation, health care services and other
goods and services to be accessible to people with disabilities. These consumer protection and accessibility laws and regulations have been the basis for
investigations, lawsuits and multistate settlements relating to, among other matters, the marketing of loyalty programs, and health care products and services,
pricing accuracy, expired front store products, financial incentives provided by drug manufacturers to pharmacies in connection with therapeutic interchange
programs, disclosures related to how personal data is used and protected and the accessibility of goods and services to people with disabilities. As a result of the
Company’s direct-to-consumer activities, including mobile and web-based solutions offered to members and to other consumers, the Company also is subject to
federal and state regulations applicable to electronic communications and to other general consumer protection laws and regulations. For example, the CCPA
became effective in 2020, and additional federal and state regulation of consumer privacy protection may be proposed or enacted in 2020. The Company expects
these new laws and regulations to impact the design of its products and services and the management and operation of its businesses and to increase its compliance
costs.
Transparency in Coverage Rule - In October 2020, the HHS, the U.S. Department of Labor (“DOL”) and the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS,” and together
with the HHS and DOL, the “Tri-Departments”) released a final rule requiring health insurers to disclose negotiated prices of drugs, medical services, supplies and
other covered items. The rule requires group health plans and health insurance issuers in the individual and group markets to disclose cost-sharing information
upon request, to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee and require plans and issuers to publicly disclose in-network provider rates, historical out-of-network
allowed amounts and the associated billed charges, and negotiated rates and historical net prices for prescription drugs. Disclosure of data in a machine readable
file is required beginning in January 2022, and insurers are required to have a consumer tool in place by January 2023. In August 2021, the federal government
delayed enforcement of the requirement to publish machine-readable files for in-network rates, out-of-network allowed amounts and billed charges until July 2022.
It also delayed enforcement of machine-readable files related to prescription drug pricing until further rulemaking occurs. The public disclosure of insurer- or
PBM-negotiated price concessions may result in drug manufacturers lowering discounts or rebates, resulting in higher drug costs for patients and impacting the
ability of the Company to negotiate drug prices and provide competitive products and services to consumers.
Additionally, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 was signed into law in December 2020 and contains further transparency provisions requiring group
health plans and health insurance issuers to report certain prescription drug costs, overall spending on health services and prescription drugs, and information about
premiums and the impact of rebates and other remuneration on premiums and out-of-pocket costs to the Tri-Departments. No later than 18 months after the first
submission and bi-annually thereafter, the Tri-Departments will release a public report on drug pricing trends, drug reimbursement, and the
24

Table of Contents
impact of drug prices on premiums. In August, the Tri-Departments deferred enforcement of both the December 2021 deadline for reporting 2020 plan year data
and the June 2022 deadline for reporting 2021 plan year data to December 2022.
Telemarketing and Other Outbound Contacts - Certain federal and state laws, such as the Telephone Consumer Protection Act and the Telemarketing Sales
Rule, give the FTC, the Federal Communications Commission and state attorneys general the ability to regulate, and bring enforcement actions relating to,
telemarketing practices and certain automated outbound contacts such as phone calls, texts or emails. Under certain circumstances, these laws provide consumers
with a private right of action. Violations of these laws could result in substantial statutory penalties and other sanctions.
Pharmacy and Professional Licensure and Regulation - The Company is subject to a variety of intersecting federal and state statutes and regulations that govern
the wholesale distribution of drugs; operation of retail, specialty, infusion, LTC and mail order pharmacies; licensure of facilities and professionals, including
pharmacists, technicians, nurses and other health care professionals; registration of facilities with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (the “DEA”) and
analogous state agencies that regulate controlled substances; packaging, storing, shipping and tracking of pharmaceuticals; repackaging of drug products; labeling,
medication guides and other consumer disclosures; interactions with prescribers and health care professionals; compounding of prescription medications;
dispensing of controlled and non-controlled substances; counseling of patients; transfers of prescriptions; advertisement of prescription products and pharmacy
services; security; inventory control; recordkeeping; reporting to Boards of Pharmacy, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”), the U.S. Consumer
Product Safety Commission, the DEA and related state agencies; and other elements of pharmacy practice. Pharmacies are highly regulated and have contact with a
wide variety of federal, state and local agencies with various powers to investigate, inspect, audit or solicit information, including Boards of Pharmacy and
Nursing, the DEA, the FDA, the DOJ, HHS and others. Many of these agencies have broad enforcement powers, conduct audits on a regular basis, can impose
substantial fines and penalties, and may revoke the license, registration or program enrollment of a facility or professional.
State Insurance, HMO and Insurance Holding Company Regulation - A number of states regulate affiliated groups of insurers and HMOs such as the
Company under holding company statutes. These laws may, among other things, require prior regulatory approval of dividends and material intercompany transfers
of assets and transactions between the regulated companies and their affiliates, including their parent holding companies. The Company expects the states in which
its insurance and HMO subsidiaries are licensed to continue to expand their regulation of the corporate governance and internal control activities of its insurance
companies and HMOs. Changes to state insurance, HMO and/or insurance holding company laws or regulations or changes to the interpretation of those laws or
regulations, including due to regulators’ increasing concerns regarding insurance company and/or HMO solvency due, among other things, to past and expected
payor insolvencies, could negatively affect the Company’s businesses in various ways, including through increases in solvency fund assessments, requirements that
the Company hold greater levels of capital and/or delays in approving dividends from regulated subsidiaries.
PBM offerings of prescription drug coverage under certain risk arrangements may be subject to laws and regulations in various states. Such laws may require that
the party at risk become licensed as an insurer, establish reserves or otherwise demonstrate financial viability. Laws that may apply in such cases include insurance
laws and laws governing MCOs and limited prepaid health service plans. In addition, several states require that PBMs become directly registered or licensed with
the department of insurance or similar government oversight agency regardless of any arrangements they have with clients. PBM licensure laws may include
oversight of certain PBM activities and operations and may include auditing of those activities.
The states of domicile of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries have statutory risk-based capital (“RBC”) requirements for health and other insurance companies
and HMOs based on the National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ (the “NAIC”) Risk-Based Capital for Insurers Model Act (the “RBC Model Act”).
These RBC requirements are intended to assess the capital adequacy of life and health insurers and HMOs, taking into account the risk characteristics of a
company’s investments and products. The RBC Model Act sets forth the formula for calculating RBC requirements, which are designed to take into account asset
risks, insurance risks, interest rate risks and other relevant risks with respect to an individual company’s business. In general, under these laws, an insurance
company or HMO must submit a report of its RBC level to the insurance department or insurance commissioner of its state of domicile for each calendar year. At
December 31, 2021, the RBC level of each of the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries was above the level that would require regulatory action.
For information regarding restrictions on certain payments of dividends or other distributions by the Company’s HMO and insurance company subsidiaries, see
Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The holding company laws for the states of domicile of certain of the Company’s subsidiaries also restrict the ability of any person to obtain control of an insurance
company or HMO without prior regulatory approval. Under those statutes, without such approval (or an exemption), no person may acquire any voting security of
an insurance holding company (such as the
25

Table of Contents
Company’s ultimate parent company, CVS Health Corporation) that controls an insurance company or HMO, or merge with such a holding company, if as a result
of such transaction such person would control the insurance holding company. Control is generally defined as the direct or indirect power to direct or cause the
direction of the management and policies of a person and is presumed to exist if a person directly or indirectly owns or controls 10% or more of the voting
securities of another person.
Certain states have laws that prohibit submitting a false claim or making a false record or statement in order to secure reimbursement from an insurance company.
These state laws vary, and violation of them may lead to the imposition of civil or criminal penalties.
Government Agreements and Mandates - From time to time, the Company and/or its various affiliates are subject to certain consent decrees, settlement and
other agreements, corrective action plans and corporate integrity agreements with various federal, state and local authorities relating to such matters as privacy
practices, controlled substances, PDPs, expired products, environmental and safety matters, marketing and advertising practices, PBM, LTC and other pharmacy
operations and various other business practices. Certain of these agreements contain ongoing reporting, monitoring and/or other compliance requirements for the
Company. Failure to meet the Company’s obligations under these agreements could result in civil or criminal remedies, financial penalties, administrative
remedies, and/or exclusion from participation in federal health care programs.
Environmental and Safety Regulation - The Company’s businesses are subject to various federal, state and local laws, regulations and other requirements
pertaining to protection of the environment, public health and employee safety, including, for example, regulations governing the management of hazardous
substances, the cleaning up of contaminated sites, and the maintenance of safe working conditions in the Company’s retail locations, distribution centers and other
facilities. Governmental agencies at the federal, state and local levels continue to focus on the retail and health care sectors’ compliance with such laws and
regulations, and have at times pursued enforcement activities. Any failure to comply with these regulations could result in fines or other sanctions by government
authorities.
ERISA Regulation - The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), provides for comprehensive federal regulation of certain employee
pension and benefit plans, including private employer and union sponsored health plans and certain other plans that contract with us to provide PBM services. In
general, the Company assists plan sponsors in the administration of their health benefit plans, including the prescription drug benefit portion of those plans, in
accordance with the plan designs adopted by the plan sponsors. In addition, the Company may have fiduciary duties where it has specifically contracted with a plan
sponsor to accept limited fiduciary responsibility, such as for the adjudication of initial prescription drug benefit claims and/or the appeals of denied claims under a
plan. In addition to its fiduciary provisions, ERISA imposes civil and criminal liability on service providers to health plans and certain other persons if certain
forms of illegal remuneration are made or received. These provisions of ERISA are broadly written and their application to specific business practices is often
uncertain.
Some of the Company’s health and related benefits and large case pensions products and services and related fees also are subject to potential issues raised by
judicial interpretations relating to ERISA. Under those interpretations, together with DOL regulations, the Company may have ERISA fiduciary duties with respect
to PBM members and/or certain general account assets held under contracts that are not guaranteed benefit policies. As a result, certain transactions related to those
general account assets are subject to conflict of interest and other restrictions, and the Company must provide certain disclosures to policyholders annually. The
Company must comply with these restrictions or face substantial penalties.
In addition, ERISA generally preempts all state and local laws that relate to employee benefit plans, but the extent of the pre-emption continues to be reviewed by
courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court. For example, in December 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld an Arkansas law that, among other things, mandates a
particular pricing methodology, establishes an appeals process for a pharmacy when the reimbursement is below the pharmacy’s acquisition cost, permits a
pharmacy to reverse and rebill if they cannot procure the drug from its wholesaler at a price equal to or less than the reimbursement rate, prohibits a PBM from
reimbursing a pharmacy less than the amount it reimburses an affiliate on a per unit basis, and permits a pharmacy to decline to dispense if the reimbursement is
lower than the pharmacy’s acquisition cost. Also, in November 2021, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit upheld a North Dakota law that regulates
employer-sponsored ERISA health plans and certain PBM practices within Medicare.
Other Legislative Initiatives and Regulatory Initiatives - The U.S. federal and state governments, as well as governments in other countries where the Company
does business, continue to enact and seriously consider many broad-based legislative and regulatory proposals that have had a material impact on or could
materially impact various aspects of the health care and related benefits system and the Company’s businesses, operating results and/or cash flows. For example:
26

Table of Contents
•
Under the Budget Control Act of 2011 and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 significant, automatic across-the-board budget cuts (known as
sequestration) began in March 2013, including Medicare spending cuts of not more than 2% of total program costs per year through 2024. Since then,
Congress has extended and modified sequestration a number of times. The CARES Act temporarily suspended Medicare sequestration from May 2020 to the
end of December 2020 and extended mandatory sequestration to 2030. Several subsequent acts have extended the temporary suspension of Medicare
sequestration through the end of March 2022, at which point a 1% sequestration will take effect April 2022 through June 2022, with the full 2% sequestration
due to resume in July 2022. Significant uncertainty remains as to whether and how the U.S. Congress will proceed with actions that create additional federal
revenue and/or with entitlement reform. The Company cannot predict future federal Medicare or federal or state Medicaid funding levels or the impact that
future federal or state budget actions or entitlement program reform, if it occurs, will have on the Company’s businesses, operations or operating results, but
the effects could be materially adverse, particularly on the Company’s Medicare and/or Medicaid revenues, MBRs and operating results.
•
The European Union’s (“EU’s”) General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) began to apply across the EU during 2018.
•
Other significant legislative and/or regulatory measures which are or recently have been under consideration include the following:
•
Increasing the corporate tax rate.
•
Eliminating payment of manufacturer’s rebates on prescription drugs to PBMs, PDPs and Managed Medicaid organizations in connection with
federally funded health care programs.
•
Imposing requirements and restrictions on the design and/or administration of pharmacy benefit plans offered by the Company’s and its clients’
health plans and/or its PBM clients and/or the services the Company provides to those clients, including prohibiting “differential” or “spread” pricing
in PBM contracts; restricting or eliminating the use of formularies for prescription drugs; restricting the Company’s ability to require members to
obtain drugs through a home delivery or specialty pharmacy; restricting the Company’s ability to place certain specialty or other drugs in the higher
cost tiers of its pharmacy formularies; restricting the Company’s ability to make changes to drug formularies and/or clinical programs; limiting or
eliminating rebates on pharmaceuticals; requiring the use of up front purchase price discounts on pharmaceuticals in lieu of rebates; restricting the
Company’s ability to configure and reimburse its health plan and retail pharmacy provider networks, including use of CVS Pharmacy locations; and
restricting or eliminating the use of certain drug pricing methodologies.
•
Increasing federal or state government regulation of, or involvement in, the pricing and/or purchasing of drugs.
•
Restricting the Company’s ability to limit providers’ participation in its networks and/or remove providers from its networks by imposing network
adequacy requirements or otherwise (including in its Medicare and Commercial Health Care Benefits products).
•
Imposing assessments on (or to be collected by) health plans or health carriers that may or may not be passed through to their customers. These
assessments may include assessments for insolvency, the uninsured, uncompensated care, Medicaid funding or defraying health care provider
medical malpractice insurance costs.
•
Mandating coverage by the Company’s and its clients’ health plans for additional conditions and/or specified procedures, drugs or devices (e.g., high
cost pharmaceuticals, experimental pharmaceuticals and oral chemotherapy regimens).
•
Regulating electronic connectivity.
•
Mandating or regulating the disclosure of provider fee schedules, manufacturer’s rebates and other data about the Company’s payments to providers
and/or payments the Company receives from pharmaceutical manufacturers.
•
Mandating or regulating disclosure of provider outcome and/or efficiency information.
•
Prescribing or limiting members’ financial responsibility for health care or other covered services they utilize, including restricting “surprise” bills by
providers and by specifying procedures for resolving “surprise” bills.
•
Prescribing payment levels for health care and other covered services rendered to the Company’s members by providers who do not have contracts
with the Company.
•
Assessing the medical device status of home infusion therapy products and/or solutions, mobile consumer wellness tools and clinical decision support
tools, which may require compliance with FDA requirements in relation to some of these products, solutions and/or tools.
•
Restricting the ability of employers and/or health plans to establish or impose member financial responsibility.
•
Proposals to expand benefits under Original Medicare.
•
Amending or supplementing ERISA to impose greater requirements on PBMs or the administration of employer-funded benefit plans or limit the
scope of current ERISA pre-emption, which would among other things expose
27

Table of Contents
the Company and other health plans to expanded liability for punitive and other extra-contractual damages and additional state regulation.
It is uncertain whether the Company can counter the potential adverse effects of such potential legislation or regulation on its operating results or cash flows,
including whether it can recoup, through higher premium rates, expanded membership or other measures, the increased costs of mandated coverage or benefits,
assessments, fees, taxes or other increased costs, including the cost of modifying its systems to implement any enacted legislation or regulations.
The Company’s businesses also may be affected by other legislation and regulations. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act creates
incentives for whistleblowers to speak directly to the government rather than utilizing internal compliance programs and reduces the burden of proof under the
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (the “FCPA”). There also are laws and regulations that set standards for the escheatment of funds to states.
Health savings accounts, health reimbursement arrangements and flexible spending accounts and certain of the tax, fee and subsidy provisions of the ACA also are
regulated by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service.
The Company also may be adversely affected by court and regulatory decisions that expand or revise the interpretations of existing statutes and regulations or
impose medical malpractice or bad faith liability. Federal and state courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court, continue to consider cases, and federal and state
regulators continue to issue regulations and interpretations, addressing bad faith liability for denial of medical claims, the scope of ERISA’s fiduciary duty
requirements, the scope of the False Claims Act and the pre-emptive effect of ERISA and Medicare Part D on state laws.
Contract Audits - The Company is subject to audits of many of its contracts, including its PBM client contracts, its PBM rebate contracts, its PBM network
contracts, its contracts relating to Medicare Advantage and/or Medicare Part D, the agreements the Company’s pharmacies enter into with other payors, its
Medicaid contracts and its customer contracts. Because some of the Company’s contracts are with state or federal governments or with entities contracted with
state or federal agencies, audits of these contracts are often regulated by the federal or state agencies responsible for administering federal or state benefits
programs, including those which operate Medicaid fee for service plans, Managed Medicaid plans, Medicare Part D plans or Medicare Advantage organizations.
Federal Employee Health Benefits Program - The Company’s subsidiaries contract with the Office of Personnel Management (the “OPM”) to provide managed
health care services under the FEHB program in their service areas. These contracts with the OPM and applicable government regulations establish premium rating
arrangements for this program. In addition to other requirements, such as the Transparency in Coverage Rule note above, OPM regulations require that community-
rated FEHB plans meet a FEHB program-specific minimum MLR by plan code and market. Managing to these rules is complicated by the simultaneous
application of the minimum MLR standards and associated premium rebate requirements of the ACA. The Company also has a contractual arrangement with
carriers for the FEHB program, such as the BlueCross BlueShield Association, to provide pharmacy services to federal employees, postal workers, annuitants, and
their dependents under the Government-wide Service Benefit Plan, as authorized by the FEHB Act and as part of the FEHB program. Additionally, the Company
manages certain FEHB plans on a “cost-plus” basis. These arrangements subject the Company to certain aspects of the FEHB Act, and other federal regulations,
such as the FEHB Acquisition Regulation, that otherwise would not be applicable to the Company. The OPM also is auditing the Company and its other contractors
to, among other things, verify that plans meet their applicable FEHB program-specific MLR and the premiums established under the OPM’s Insured contracts and
costs allocated pursuant to the OPM’s cost-based contracts are in compliance with the requirements of the applicable FEHB program. The OPM may seek premium
refunds or institute other sanctions against the Company if it fails to comply with the FEHB program requirements.
Clinical Services Regulation - The Company provides clinical services to health plans, PBMs and providers for a variety of complex and common medical
conditions, including arranging for certain members to participate in disease management programs. State laws regulate the practice of medicine, the practice of
pharmacy, the practice of nursing and certain other clinical activities. Clinicians engaged in a professional practice in connection with the provision of clinical
services must satisfy applicable state licensing requirements and must act within their scope of practice.
Third Party Administration and Other State Licensure Laws - Many states have licensure or registration laws governing certain types of administrative
organizations, such as PPOs, TPAs and companies that provide utilization review services. Several states also have licensure or registration laws governing the
organizations that provide or administer consumer card programs (also known as cash card or discount card programs).
28

Table of Contents
International Regulation - The Company has insurance licenses in several foreign jurisdictions and does business directly or through local affiliations in
numerous countries around the world. The Company has taken steps to be able to continue to serve customers in the European Economic Area following the United
Kingdom’s exit from the EU (“Brexit”).
The Company’s international operations are subject to different, and sometimes more stringent, legal and regulatory requirements, which vary widely by
jurisdiction, including anti-corruption laws; economic sanctions laws; various privacy, insurance, tax, tariff and trade laws and regulations; corporate governance,
privacy, data protection (including the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation which began to apply across the EU during 2018), data mining, data transfer, labor
and employment, intellectual property, consumer protection and investment laws and regulations; discriminatory licensing procedures; compulsory cessions of
reinsurance; required localization of records and funds; higher premium and income taxes; limitations on dividends and repatriation of capital; and requirements for
local participation in an insurer’s ownership. In addition, the expansion of the Company’s operations into foreign countries increases the Company’s exposure to
the anti-bribery, anti-corruption and anti-money laundering provisions of U.S. law, including the FCPA, and corresponding foreign laws, including the U.K.
Bribery Act 2010 (the “UK Bribery Act”).
Anti-Corruption Laws - The FCPA prohibits offering, promising or authorizing others to give anything of value to a foreign government official to obtain or
retain business or otherwise secure a business advantage. The Company also is subject to applicable anti-corruption laws of the jurisdictions in which it operates. In
many countries outside the United States, health care professionals are employed by the government. Therefore, the Company’s dealings with them are subject to
regulation under the FCPA. Violations of the FCPA and other anti-corruption laws may result in severe criminal and civil sanctions as well as other penalties, and
there continues to be a heightened level of FCPA enforcement activity by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and the DOJ. The UK
Bribery Act is an anti-corruption law that is broader in scope than the FCPA and applies to all companies with a nexus to the United Kingdom. Disclosures of
FCPA violations may be shared with the UK authorities, thus potentially exposing companies to liability and potential penalties in multiple jurisdictions.
Anti-Money Laundering Regulations - Certain lines of the Company’s businesses are subject to Treasury anti-money laundering regulations. Those lines of
business have implemented anti-money laundering policies designed to ensure their compliance with the regulations. The Company also is subject to anti-money
laundering laws in non-U.S. jurisdictions where it operates.
Office of Foreign Assets Control - The Company also is subject to regulation by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of Treasury
(“OFAC”). OFAC administers and enforces economic and trade sanctions based on U.S. foreign policy and national security goals against targeted foreign
countries and regimes, terrorists, international narcotics traffickers, those engaged in activities related to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and other
threats to the national security, foreign policy or economy of the United States. In addition, the Company is subject to similar regulations in the non-U.S.
jurisdictions in which it operates.
FDA Regulation - The FDA regulates the Company’s compounding pharmacy and clinical research operations. The FDA also generally has authority to, among
other things, regulate the manufacture, distribution, sale and labeling of medical devices (including hemodialysis devices such as the device the Company is
developing and mobile medical devices) and many products sold through retail pharmacies, including prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, cosmetics,
dietary supplements and certain food items. In addition, the FDA regulates the Company’s activities as a distributor of store brand products.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Health Care Benefits Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state, local
and international statutes and regulations governing its Health Care Benefits segment specifically.
Overview - Differing approaches to state insurance regulation and varying enforcement philosophies may materially and adversely affect the Company’s ability to
standardize its Health Care Benefits products and services across state lines. These laws and regulations, including the ACA, restrict how the Company conducts its
business and result in additional burdens and costs to the Company. Significant areas of governmental regulation include premium rates and rating methodologies,
underwriting rules and procedures, required benefits, sales and marketing activities, provider rates of payment, restrictions on health plans’ ability to limit
providers’ participation in their networks and/or remove providers from their networks and financial condition (including reserves and minimum capital or risk
based capital requirements). These laws and regulations are different in each jurisdiction and vary from product to product.
29

Table of Contents
Each health insurer and HMO must file periodic financial and operating reports with the states in which it does business. In addition, health insurers and HMOs are
subject to state examination and periodic license renewal. Applicable laws also restrict the ability of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries to pay dividends, and
certain dividends require prior regulatory approval. In addition, some of the Company’s businesses and related activities may be subject to PPO, MCO, utilization
review or TPA-related licensure requirements and regulations. These licensure requirements and regulations differ from state to state, but may contain provider
network, contracting, product and rate, financial and reporting requirements. There also are laws and regulations that set specific standards for the Company’s
delivery of services, payment of claims, fraud prevention, protection of consumer health information, and payment for covered benefits and services.
Required Regulatory Approvals - The Company must obtain and maintain regulatory approvals to price, market and administer many of its Health Care Benefits
products. Supervisory agencies, including CMS, the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight and the DOL, as well as state health, insurance,
managed care and Medicaid agencies, have broad authority to take one or more of the following actions:
•
Grant, suspend and revoke the Company’s licenses to transact business;
•
Suspend or exclude the Company from participation in government programs;
•
Suspend or limit the Company’s authority to market products;
•
Regulate many aspects of the products and services the Company offers, including the pricing and underwriting of many of its products and services;
•
Assess damages, fines and/or penalties;
•
Terminate the Company’s contract with the government agency and/or withhold payments from the government agency to the Company;
•
Impose retroactive adjustments to premiums and require the Company to pay refunds to the government, customers and/or members;
•
Restrict the Company’s ability to conduct acquisitions or dispositions;
•
Require the Company to maintain minimum capital levels in its subsidiaries and monitor its solvency and reserve adequacy;
•
Regulate the Company’s investment activities on the basis of quality, diversification and other quantitative criteria; and/or
•
Exclude the Company’s plans from participating in Public Exchanges if they are deemed to have a history of “unreasonable” premium rate increases or fail to
meet other criteria set by HHS or the applicable state.
The Company’s operations, current and past business practices, current and past contracts, and accounts and other books and records are subject to routine, regular
and special investigations, audits, examinations and reviews by, and from time to time the Company receives subpoenas and other requests for information from,
federal, state and international supervisory and enforcement agencies, attorneys general and other state, federal and international governmental authorities and
legislators.
Commercial Product Pricing and Underwriting Restrictions - Pricing and underwriting regulation by states limits the Company’s underwriting and rating
practices and those of other health insurers, particularly for small employer groups, and varies by state. In general, these limitations apply to certain customer
segments and limit the Company’s ability to set prices for new or renewing groups, or both, based on specific characteristics of the group or the group’s prior claim
experience. In some states, these laws and regulations restrict the Company’s ability to price for the risk it assumes and/or reflect reasonable costs in the
Company’s pricing.
The ACA expanded the premium rate review process by, among other things, requiring the Company’s Commercial Insured rates to be reviewed for
“reasonableness” at either the state or the federal level. HHS established a federal premium rate review process that generally applies to proposed premium rate
increases equal to or exceeding a federally (or lower state) specified threshold. HHS’s rate review process imposes additional public disclosure requirements as
well as additional review on filings requesting premium rate increases equal to or exceeding this “reasonableness” threshold. These combined state and federal
review requirements may prevent, further delay or otherwise affect the Company’s ability to price for the risk it assumes, which could adversely affect its MBRs
and operating results, particularly during periods of increased utilization of medical services and/or medical cost trend or when such utilization and/or trend
exceeds the Company’s projections.
The ACA also specifies minimum MLRs of 85% for large group Commercial products and 80% for individual and small group Commercial products. Because the
ACA minimum MLRs are structured as “floors” for many of their requirements, states have the latitude to enact more stringent rules governing these restrictions.
For Commercial products, states have and may adopt higher minimum MLR requirements, use more stringent definitions of “medical loss ratio,” incorporate
minimum MLR
30

Table of Contents
requirements into prospective premium rate filings, require prior approval of premium rates or impose other requirements related to minimum MLR. Minimum
MLR requirements and similar actions further limit the level of margin the Company can earn in its Insured Commercial products while leaving the Company
exposed to medical costs that are higher than those reflected in its pricing. The Company also may be subject to significant fines, penalties, premium refunds and
litigation if it fails to comply with minimum MLR laws and regulations.
In addition, the Company requested increases in its premium rates in its Commercial Health Care Benefits business for 2022 and expects to continue to request
increases in those rates for 2023 and beyond in order to adequately price for projected medical cost trends, required expansions of coverage and rating limits, and
significant assessments, fees and taxes imposed by the federal and state governments, including as a result of the ACA. The Company’s rates also must be adequate
to reflect adverse selection in its products, particularly in small group Commercial products. These rate increases may be significant and thus heighten the risks of
adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and adverse selection and the likelihood that the Company’s requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced
or delayed, which could lead to operating margin compression.
Many of the laws and regulations governing the Company’s pricing and underwriting practices also limit the differentials in premium rates insurers and other
carriers may charge between new and renewal business, and/or between groups based on differing characteristics. They may also require that carriers disclose to
customers the basis on which the carrier establishes new business and renewal premium rates and limit the ability of a carrier to terminate customers’ coverage.
Recently, with respect to quality improvement activities (“QIAs”) that health plans report to HHS, revised regulations no longer provide insurers the option of
reporting a flat amount equal to 0.8 percent of earned premium in lieu of reporting the insurers' actual itemized QIA expenditures. This change will impact the
Company’s future MLR calculations and reporting since we have utilized the 0.8 percent premium election.
Medicaid Regulation - The Company is seeking to substantially grow its Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan businesses over the next
several years. As a result, the Company also is increasing its exposure to changes in government policy with respect to and/or regulation of the various Medicaid,
dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs in which the Company participates, including changes in the amounts payable to the Company under
those programs.
Since 2017, Managed Medicaid products, including those the Company offers, are subject to a minimum federal MLR of 85%. A Medicaid managed care quality
rating system and provider network adequacy requirements also apply to Medicaid products. Because the federal minimum MLR is structured as a “floor,” states
have the latitude to enact more stringent rules governing these restrictions. For Managed Medicaid products, states may adopt higher minimum MLR requirements,
use more stringent definitions of “medical loss ratio” or impose other requirements related to minimum MLR. Minimum MLR requirements and similar actions
further limit the level of margin the Company can earn in its Insured Medicaid products while leaving the Company exposed to medical costs that are higher than
those reflected in its pricing. The Company also may be subject to significant fines, penalties, premium refunds and litigation if it fails to comply with minimum
MLR laws and regulations.
States continue to consider Medicaid expansion; however, 12 states have still not decided to expand as of 2022. States may opt out of the elements of the ACA
requiring expansion of Medicaid coverage without losing their current federal Medicaid funding. In addition, the election of new governors and/or state legislatures
may impact states’ previous decisions regarding Medicaid expansion. Although Congress enacted incentives for states that had not yet done so to expand Medicaid,
this incentive alone may not persuade holdout states to expand.
In 2021, Medicaid MCOs faced new requirements and state flexibility that were finalized in the 2020 Medicaid managed care final rule. States now have flexibility
related to rate setting and provider network adequacy that could adversely or positively impact our Medicaid plans. Other changes related to managed care
operations include beneficiary communications, appeals and grievances, and provider directories.
The economic aspects of the Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan business vary from state to state and are subject to frequent change.
Medicaid premiums are paid by each state and differ from state to state. The federal government and certain states also are considering proposals and legislation for
Medicaid and dual eligible program reforms or redesigns, including restrictions on the collection of manufacturer’s rebates on pharmaceuticals by Medicaid MCOs
and their contracted PBMs, further program, population and/or geographic expansions of risk-based managed care, increasing beneficiary cost-sharing or payment
levels, and changes to benefits, reimbursement, eligibility criteria, provider network adequacy requirements (including requiring the inclusion of specified high cost
providers in the Company’s networks) and program structure. In some states, current Medicaid and dual eligible funding and premium revenue may not be
adequate for the Company to continue
31

Table of Contents
program participation. The Company’s Medicaid and dual eligible contracts with states (or sponsors of Medicaid managed care plans) are subject to cancellation by
the state (or the sponsors of the managed care plans) after a short notice period without cause (e.g., when a state discontinues a managed care program) or in the
event of insufficient state funding.
The Company’s Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan products also are heavily regulated by CMS and state Medicaid agencies, which have
the right to audit the Company’s performance to determine compliance with CMS contracts and regulations. The Company’s Medicaid products, dual eligible
products and CHIP contracts also are subject to complex federal and state regulations and oversight by state Medicaid agencies regarding the services provided to
Medicaid enrollees, payment for those services, network requirements (including mandatory inclusion of specified high-cost providers), and other aspects of these
programs, and by external review organizations which audit Medicaid plans on behalf of state Medicaid agencies. The laws, regulations and contractual
requirements applicable to the Company and other participants in Medicaid and dual eligible programs, including requirements that the Company submit encounter
data to the applicable state agency, are extensive, complex and subject to change. The Company has invested significant resources to comply with these standards,
and its Medicaid and dual eligible program compliance efforts will continue to require significant resources. CMS and/or state Medicaid agencies may fine the
Company, withhold payments to the Company, seek premium and other refunds, terminate the Company’s existing contracts, elect not to award the Company new
contracts or not to renew the Company’s existing contracts, prohibit the Company from continuing to market and/or enroll members in or refuse to automatically
assign members to one or more of the Company’s Medicaid or dual eligible products, exclude the Company from participating in one or more Medicaid or dual
eligible programs and/or institute other sanctions and/or civil monetary penalties against the Company if it fails to comply with CMS or state regulations or
contractual requirements.
The Company cannot predict whether pending or future federal or state legislation or court proceedings will change various aspects of the Medicaid program, nor
can it predict the impact those changes will have on its business operations or operating results, but the effects could be materially adverse.
Federal and State Reporting - The Company is subject to extensive financial and business reporting requirements, including penalties for inaccuracies and/or
omissions, at both the federal and state level. The Company’s ability to comply with certain of these requirements depends on receipt of information from third
parties that may not be readily available or reliably provided in all instances. The Company is and will continue to be required to modify its information systems,
dedicate significant resources and incur significant expenses to comply with these requirements. However, the Company cannot eliminate the risks of unavailability
of or errors in its reports.
Product Design and Administration and Sales Practices - State and/or federal regulatory scrutiny of health care benefit product design and administration and
marketing and advertising practices, including the filing of insurance policy forms, the adequacy of provider networks, the accuracy of provider directories, and the
adequacy of disclosure regarding products and their administration, is increasing as are the penalties being imposed for inappropriate practices. Medicare, Medicaid
and dual eligible products and products offering more limited benefits in particular continue to attract increased regulatory scrutiny.
Guaranty Fund Assessments/Solvency Protection - Under guaranty fund laws existing in all states, insurers doing business in those states can be assessed (in
most states up to prescribed limits) for certain obligations of insolvent insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. The life and health insurance guaranty
associations in which the Company participates that operate under these laws respond to insolvencies of long-term care insurers as well as health insurers. The
Company’s assessments generally are based on a formula relating to the Company’s health care premiums in the state compared to the premiums of other insurers.
Certain states allow assessments to be recovered over time as offsets to premium taxes. Some states have similar laws relating to HMOs and/or other payors such
as not-for-profit consumer governed health plans established under the ACA. While historically the Company has ultimately recovered more than half of guaranty
fund assessments through statutorily permitted premium tax offsets, significant increases in assessments could lead to legislative and/or regulatory actions that limit
future offsets.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Pharmacy Services Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state and
local statutes and regulations governing the operation of its Pharmacy Services segment specifically. Among these are the following:
PBM Laws and Regulation - Legislation and/or regulations seeking to regulate PBM activities in a comprehensive manner have been proposed or enacted in a
number of states. This legislation could adversely affect the Company’s ability to conduct business on commercially reasonable terms in states where the
legislation is in effect and the Company’s ability to standardize
32

Table of Contents
its PBM products and services across state lines. In addition, certain quasi-regulatory organizations, including the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy and
the NAIC and the National Council of Insurance Legislators, have issued model regulations or may propose future regulations concerning PBMs and/or PBM
activities. Similarly, credentialing organizations such as URAC have established voluntary standards regarding PBM, mail order pharmacy and/or specialty
pharmacy activities. While the actions of these quasi-regulatory or standard-setting organizations do not have the force of law, they may influence states to adopt
their requirements or recommendations and influence client requirements for PBM, mail order pharmacy and/or specialty pharmacy services. Moreover, any
standards established by these organizations could also impact the Company’s health plan clients and/or the services provided to those clients and/or the
Company’s health plans.
The Company’s PBM activities also are regulated directly and indirectly at the federal and state levels, including being subject to the False Claims Act and state
false claims acts and the AKS and state anti-kickback laws. These laws and regulations govern, and proposed legislation and regulations may govern and/or further
restrict, critical PBM practices, including disclosure, receipt and retention of rebates and other payments received from pharmaceutical manufacturers; use of,
administration of and/or changes to drug formularies, maximum allowable cost (“MAC”) list pricing, average wholesale prices (“AWP”) and/or clinical programs;
the offering to plan sponsors of pricing that includes retail network “differential” or “spread” (i.e., a difference between the drug price charged to the plan sponsor
by a PBM and the price paid by the PBM to the dispensing provider); reconciliation to pricing guarantees; disclosure of data to third parties; drug UM practices;
the level of duty a PBM owes its customers; configuration of pharmacy networks; the operations of the Company’s pharmacies (including audits of its pharmacies);
disclosure of negotiated provider reimbursement rates; disclosure of fees associated with administrative service agreements and patient care programs that are
attributable to members’ drug utilization; and registration or licensing of PBMs. Failure by the Company or one of its PBM services suppliers to comply with these
laws or regulations could result in material fines and/or sanctions and could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results and/or cash flows.
The Company’s PBM service contracts, including those in which the Company assumes certain risks under performance guarantees or similar arrangements, are
generally not subject to insurance regulation by the states. However, state departments of insurance are increasing their oversight of PBM activities due to
legislation passing in a number of states requiring PBMs to register or obtain a license with the department, including through market conduct examinations and
other audits our licensed entities. In addition, rulemaking is either underway or has already taken place in a number of states with the areas of focus on licensure
requirements, pharmacy reimbursement for generics (MAC reimbursement) and pharmacy audits - most of which fall under the state insurance code.
Most-Favored-Nation Rule - In November 2020, HHS released the Most-Favored-Nation Rule (the “MFN Rule”), which requires CMS to take a most-favored-
nation approach in calculating payment for Medicare Part B drugs. The MFN Rule will test paying Part B drugs at comparable amounts to the lowest adjusted price
paid by any country in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development that has a Gross Domestic Product (“GDP”) per capita that is at least 60% of
the U.S. GDP per capita. The MFN Rule will also test a redesign of the percentage add-on payment structure under Medicare Part B to remove incentives for use of
higher-cost drugs through a flat per-dose add-on payment, and will include a financial hardship exemption for participants. The mandatory MFN Rule will operate
for seven years, from January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2027. Over the course of the model, CMS will monitor and evaluate the impact of the MFN Rule on
beneficiary access to drugs, program costs, and the quality of care for beneficiaries. Further, CMS commits to assess initial impacts of the MFN Rule on quality of
care, including access to drugs, prior to beginning performance year 5. Multiple pharmaceutical manufacturers have sued HHS over the rule, and it is currently
delayed due to a temporary restraining order prohibiting CMS from implementing it. If implemented, the MFN Rule may impact the ability of the Company to
negotiate drug prices and provide competitive products and services to consumers. In August 2021, CMS published a proposed rule to rescind the MFN Rule. It is
unclear whether this rescission may be followed by regulatory or legislative alternatives that present similar, or even more substantial, patient access, provider
reimbursement, and other concerns.
Pharmacy Network Access Legislation - Medicare Part D and a majority of states now have some form of legislation affecting the Company’s (and its health
plans’ and its health plan clients’) ability to limit access to a pharmacy provider network or remove pharmacy network providers. For example, certain “any willing
provider” legislation may require the Company or its clients to admit a nonparticipating pharmacy if such pharmacy is willing and able to meet the plan’s price and
other applicable terms and conditions for network participation. These laws could negatively affect the services and economic benefits achievable through a limited
pharmacy provider network. Also, a majority of states now have some form of legislation affecting the Company’s ability (and the Company’s and its client health
plans’ ability) to conduct audits of network pharmacies regarding claims submitted to the Company for payment. These laws could negatively affect the
Company’s ability to recover overpayments of claims submitted by network pharmacies that the Company identifies through pharmacy audits.
33

Table of Contents
Finally, several states have passed legislation that limits the ability of PBMs and health insurers to provide special benefit structures for use with affiliated
pharmacies, which could result in reduced savings to clients and consumers.
Pharmacy Pricing Legislation - A number of states have passed legislation regulating the Company’s ability to manage and establish MACs for generic
prescription drugs. MAC methodology is a common cost management practice used by private and public payors (including CMS) to pay pharmacies for
dispensing generic prescription drugs. MAC prices specify the allowable reimbursement by a PBM for a particular strength and dosage of a generic drug that is
available from multiple manufacturers but sold at different prices. State legislation can regulate the disclosure of MAC prices and MAC price methodologies, the
kinds of drugs that a PBM can pay for at a MAC price, and the rights of pharmacies to appeal a MAC price established by a PBM. These laws could negatively
affect the Company’s ability to establish MAC prices for generic drugs. Additionally, some states have passed legislation that would create a reimbursement
benchmark mandate, such as the national average drug acquisition cost and/or the wholesale acquisition cost (“WAC”), plus a set dispensing fee, for pharmacies in
the network.
Formulary and Plan Design Regulation - A number of government entities regulate the administration of prescription drug benefits. HHS regulates how
Medicare Part D formularies are developed and administered, including requiring the inclusion of all drugs in certain classes and categories, subject to limited
exceptions. Under the ACA, CMS imposes drug coverage requirements for health plans required to cover essential health benefits, including plans offered through
federal or state Public Exchanges. Additionally, the NAIC and health care accreditation agencies like NCQA and URAC have developed model acts and standards
for formulary development that are often incorporated into government requirements. Many states regulate the scope of prescription drug coverage, as well as the
delivery channels to receive prescriptions, for insurers, MCOs and Medicaid managed care plans. The increasing government regulation of formularies could
significantly affect the Company’s ability to develop and administer formularies, pharmacy networks and other plan design features. Similarly, some states prohibit
health plan sponsors from implementing certain restrictive pharmacy benefit plan design features. This regulation could limit or preclude (i) limited networks, (ii) a
requirement to use particular providers, (iii) copayment differentials among providers and (iv) formulary tiering practices.
Laws and Regulations Related to the Retail/LTC Segment
In addition to the laws and regulations discussed above that may affect multiple segments of the Company’s business, the Company is subject to federal, state and
local statutes and regulations governing the operation of its Retail/LTC segment specifically. Among these are the following:
Retail Medical Clinics - States regulate retail medical clinics operated by nurse practitioners or physician assistants through physician oversight, clinic and lab
licensure requirements and the prohibition of the corporate practice of medicine. A number of states have implemented or proposed laws or regulations that impact
certain components of retail medical clinic operations such as physician oversight, signage, third party contracting requirements, bathroom facilities, and scope of
services. These laws and regulations may affect the operation and expansion of the Company’s owned and managed retail medical clinics.
Other Laws - Other federal, state and local laws and regulations also impact the Company’s retail operations, including laws and regulations governing the
practice of optometry, the practice of audiology, the provision of dietician services and the sale of durable medical equipment, contact lenses, eyeglasses, hearing
aids and alcohol.
Available Information
CVS Health Corporation was incorporated in Delaware in 1996. The corporate office is located at One CVS Drive, Woonsocket, Rhode Island 02895, telephone
(401) 765-1500. CVS Health Corporation’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the trading symbol “CVS.” General information about
the Company is available through the Company’s website at http://www.cvshealth.com. The Company’s financial press releases and filings with the SEC are
available free of charge within the Investors section of the Company’s website at http://investors.cvshealth.com. In addition, the SEC maintains an internet site that
contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers, such as the Company, that file electronically with the SEC. The address
of that website is http://www.sec.gov. The information on or linked to the Company’s website is neither a part of nor incorporated by reference in this 10-K or any
of the Company’s other SEC filings.
In accordance with guidance provided by the SEC regarding use by a company of its websites and social media channels as a means to disclose material
information to investors and to comply with its disclosure obligations under SEC Regulation FD, CVS Health Corporation (the “Registrant”) hereby notifies
investors, the media and other interested parties that it intends to continue to use its media and investor relations website (http://investors.cvshealth.com/) and its
Twitter feed (@CVSHealthIR)
34

Table of Contents
to publish important information about the Registrant, including information that may be deemed material to investors. The list of social media channels that the
Registrant uses may be updated on its media and investor relations website from time to time. The Registrant encourages investors, the media, and other interested
parties to review the information the Registrant posts on its website and social media channels as described above, in addition to information announced by the
Registrant through its SEC filings, press releases and public conference calls and webcasts.
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
You should carefully consider each of the following risks and uncertainties and all of the other information set forth in this 10-K. These risks and uncertainties and
other factors may affect forward-looking statements, including those we make in this 10-K or elsewhere, such as in news releases or investor or analyst calls,
meetings or presentations, on our websites or through our social media channels. The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face. There
can be no assurance that we have identified all the risks that affect us. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently believe to
be immaterial also may adversely affect our businesses. Any of these risks or uncertainties could cause our actual results to differ materially from our expectations
and the expected results discussed in our forward-looking statements. You should not consider past results to be an indication of future performance.
If any of the following risks or uncertainties develops into actual events or if the circumstances described in the risks or uncertainties occur or continue to occur,
those events or circumstances could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results, cash flows, financial condition and/or stock price, among
other effects on us. You should read the following section in conjunction with the MD&A, included in Item 7 of this 10-K, our consolidated financial statements
and the related notes, included in Item 8 of this 10-K, and our “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” in this 10-K.
Summary
The following is a summary of the principal risks we face that could negatively impact our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition:
Risks Relating to Our Businesses
•
The impact COVID-19 will have on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be material and
adverse.
•
We may not be able to accurately forecast health care and other benefit costs.
•
Adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad can materially and adversely impact our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
•
Each of our segments operates in a highly competitive and evolving business environment.
•
A change in our Health Care Benefits product mix may adversely affect our profit margins.
•
We can provide no assurance that we will be able to compete successfully and profitably on Public Exchanges.
•
Negative public perception of the industries in which we operate can adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and prospects.
•
We must maintain and improve our relationships with our customers and increase the demand for our products and services.
•
We face risks relating to the availability, pricing and safety profiles of prescription drugs that we purchase and sell.
•
The reserves we hold for expected claims in our Insured Health Care Benefits products are based on estimates that involve an extensive degree of judgment
and are inherently variable, and any reserve, including a premium deficiency reserve, may be insufficient.
•
We are exposed to risks relating to the solvency of other insurers.
Risks From Changes in Public Policy and Other Legal and Regulatory Risks
•
We are subject to potential changes in public policy, laws and regulations, including reform of the U.S. health care system and entitlement programs.
•
If we fail to comply with applicable laws and regulations we could be subject to significant adverse regulatory actions.
•
If our compliance or other systems and processes fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and become subject to regulatory
actions and/or litigation.
35

•
We routinely are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings, including class actions and qui tam actions. Many of these proceedings seek
substantial damages which may not be covered by insurance.
•
We frequently are subject to regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews that could result in changes to our business practices and also
could result in material refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities and other sanctions.
•
Our litigation and regulatory risk profiles are changing as we offer new products and services and expand in business areas beyond our historical core
businesses.
•
We face unique regulatory and other challenges in our Medicare and Medicaid businesses.
•
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues.
•
We may not be able to obtain adequate premium rate increases in our Insured Health Care Benefits products, MBRs and operating results and could magnify
the adverse impact of increases in health care and other benefit costs and of ACA assessments, fees and taxes.
•
Minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in our Insured Health Care Benefits products while leaving us exposed to higher
than expected medical costs. Challenges to our minimum MLR rebate methodology and/or reports could adversely affect our operating results.
•
Our operating results may be adversely affected by changes in laws and policies governing employers and by union organizing activity.
Risks Associated with Mergers, Acquisitions, and Divestitures
•
We may be unable to successfully integrate companies we acquire.
•
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities, which may be unsuccessful, cause us
to assume unanticipated liabilities, disrupt our existing businesses, be dilutive or lead us to assume significant debt, among other things.
Risks Related to Our Operations
•
Failure to meet customer and investor expectations, including with respect to environmental, social and governance goals, may harm our brand and reputation,
our ability to retain and grow our customer base and membership.
•
We and our vendors have experienced and continue to experience information security incidents. We can provide no assurance that we or our vendors will be
able to contain detect or prevent incident.
•
Data governance failures or the failure or disruption of our information technology or infrastructure can adversely affect our reputation, businesses and
prospects. Our use and disclosure of members’, customers’ and other constituents’ sensitive information is subject to complex regulations at multiple levels.
•
Product liability, product recall or personal injury issues could damage our reputation.
•
We face significant competition in attracting and retaining talented employees. Further, managing succession for, and retention of, key executives is critical to
our success.
•
Sales of our products and services are dependent on our ability to attract and motivate internal sales personnel and independent third-party brokers, consultants
and agents. We may be subject to penalties or other regulatory actions as a result of the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling our products.
•
Failure of our businesses to effectively collaborate could prevent us from maximizing our operating results.
•
Pursuing multiple information technology improvement initiatives simultaneously could make continued development and implementation significantly more
challenging.
•
We are subject to payment-related risks that could increase our operating costs, expose us to fraud or theft, subject us to potential liability and disrupt our
business operations.
•
Both our and our vendors’ operations are subject to a variety of business continuity hazards and risks that could interrupt our operations or otherwise adversely
affect our performance and operating results.
Financial Risks
•
We would be adversely affected by downgrades or potential downgrades in our credit ratings, should they occur, or if we do not effectively deploy our capital.
•
Goodwill and other intangible assets could, in the future, become impaired.
36

•
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and global capital markets can significantly and adversely affect the value of our investments in debt and equity securities,
mortgage loans, alternative instruments and other investments.
Risks Related to Our Relationships with Manufacturers, Providers, Suppliers and Vendors
•
We face risks relating to the market availability, pricing, suppliers and safety profiles of prescription drugs and other products that we purchase and sell.
•
We need to be able to maintain our ability to contract with providers on competitive terms and develop and maintain attractive networks with high quality
providers.
•
If our suppliers or service providers fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to comply with applicable laws or regulations, we may be exposed to
brand and reputational harm, litigation and/or regulatory action.
•
We may experience increased medical and other benefit costs, litigation risk and customer and member dissatisfaction when providers that do not have
contracts with us render services to our Health Care Benefits members.
•
Continuing consolidation and integration among providers and other suppliers may increase our costs and increase competition.
Risks Related to COVID-19
The spread of, impact of and response to COVID-19 underscores and amplifies certain risks we face. The impact COVID-19 will have on our businesses,
operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be material and adverse.
COVID-19 has spread to every state in the U.S., has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and has severely impacted, and is expected to
continue to severely impact, the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world.
The legislative and regulatory environment governing our businesses is dynamic and changing frequently, including the Families First Act, the CARES Act, the
American Rescue Plan Act and mandated increases to the medical services we must pay for without a corresponding increase in the premiums we receive in our
Health Care Benefits Insured products. As a result of COVID-19, including legislative and/or regulatory responses to COVID-19, the premiums we charge in our
Insured Health Care Benefits products may prove to be insufficient to cover the cost of medical services delivered to our Insured medical members, which may
increase significantly as a result of higher utilization rates of medical facilities and services and other increases in associated hospital and pharmaceutical costs.
Federal, state and local governmental policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, including existing and new variants, such as mask and
vaccination mandates, restrictions on large gatherings and social distancing directives, may not effectively combat the severity and/or duration of the COVID-19
pandemic and have resulted in, among other things, a reduction in utilization that is discretionary, the cancellation of elective medical procedures, reduced
customer traffic and front store sales in our retail pharmacies, our customers being ordered to close or severely curtail their operations, the adoption of work-from-
home policies and a reduction in diagnostic reporting due to reductions in health care provider visits and restrictions on our access to providers’ medical records, all
of which impact our businesses. Among other impacts of these policies and initiatives on our businesses, there may be changes in medical claims submission
patterns and an adverse impact on (i) drug utilization due to the reduction in discretionary visits with providers; (ii) front store sales as a result of reduced customer
traffic in our retail pharmacies; (iii) medical membership in our Health Care Benefits segment and covered lives in our PBM clients due to reductions in workforce
at our existing customers (including due to business failures) as well as reduced willingness to change benefits providers by prospective customers; (iv) benefit
costs due to COVID-19 related support programs we have put in place for our medical members and mandated increases to the medical services we must pay for
without a corresponding increase in the premiums we receive in our Insured Health Care Benefits products; and (v) the amount, timing and collectability of
payments to the Company from customers, clients, government payers and members as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on them. Over time, these policies and
initiatives also may cause us to experience increased benefit costs and/or decreased revenues in our Health Care Benefits segment if, as a result of our medical
members not seeing their providers as a result of COVID-19, we are unable to implement clinical initiatives to manage benefit costs and chronic conditions of our
medical members and appropriately document their risk profiles.
In addition, in response to COVID-19, during the first half of 2020, we began to offer our medical members expanded benefit coverage and became obligated by
governmental action to provide other additional coverage. This expanded benefit coverage continued to be provided without a corresponding increase in the
premiums we receive in our Insured Health Care Benefits
37

products. We also are taking actions designed to help provide financial and administrative relief for the health care provider community. Such measures and any
further steps we take or are required to take to expand or otherwise modify the services delivered to our Health Care Benefits members, provide relief for the health
care provider community, or in connection with the relaxation of social distancing directives and other restrictions on movement and economic activity intended to
reduce the spread of COVID-19, including the potential for widespread testing and vaccination, including boosters, as a component of lifting those measures, could
adversely impact our benefit costs, MBR and operating results.
The various initiatives we have implemented to slow and/or reduce the impact of COVID-19 and the COVID-19-related support programs we have put in place for
our customers, medical members and colleagues have increased our operating expenses and reduced the efficiency of our operations. Our operating results will
continue to be adversely affected so long as these initiatives continue or if they are expanded. In addition, any adverse economic conditions that could be caused by
COVID-19 may have an adverse impact on our net investment income and the value of our investment portfolio.
The spread of COVID-19, or actions taken to mitigate its spread, could have material and adverse effects on our ability to operate our businesses effectively,
including as a result of the complete or partial closure of facilities, labor shortages and/or financial difficulties experienced by third-party service providers.
Disruptions in our supply chains, our distribution chains and/or public and private infrastructure, including those caused by industry capacity constraints, material
availability, global logistics delays and constraints arising from, among other things, the transportation capacity of ocean shipping containers, and labor availability
constraints, could materially and adversely impact our business operations. We have transitioned a significant subset of our colleagues to a remote work
environment in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, as have a significant number of our third-party service providers, which may amplify certain risks to
our businesses, including an increased demand for information technology resources, increased risk of phishing and other cybersecurity attacks, increased risk of
unauthorized dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary or confidential information about us or our medical members or other third-parties and
increased risk of business interruptions.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and the severity and duration of the pandemic and scope and intensity of the governmental response to it are
unknown at this time. We believe COVID-19’s impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition primarily will be driven by the
geographies impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; vaccination rates; the severity of any new COVID-19 variants and whether vaccines are
effective in combating them; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and consumer behavior and health care utilization patterns; and the timing,
scope and impact of any additional stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are
beyond our knowledge and control. As a result, the impact COVID-19 will have on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is
uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material. COVID-19 also may result in legal and regulatory proceedings, investigations and claims against us.
Risks Relating to Our Businesses
We may not be able to accurately forecast health care and other benefit costs, which could adversely affect our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating
results. There can be no assurance that future health care and other benefits costs will not exceed our projections.
As a result of COVID-19, the current economic environment is adverse and less predictable than recently experienced, which has caused and may continue to cause
unanticipated and significant volatility in our health care and other benefits costs, including COVID-19 related testing and vaccination and post-acute care skilled
nursing facility and behavioral health costs. In January 2021, the President of the United States issued an executive order to support government efforts to expand
access, availability and use of COVID-19 diagnostic, screening and surveillance and addressed the cost of COVID-19 testing by facilitating COVID-19 testing free
of charge to those who lack comprehensive health insurance and clarifying group health plans’ and health insurance issuers’ obligations to provide coverage for
COVID-19 testing. In January 2022, the HHS announced that commercial health insurers must cover the cost of up to eight rapid COVID-19 OTC test kits per
individual per 30-day period. In addition, the timing of vaccine administration to the general public and related costs as well as the identification of new, more
infectious strains of the COVID-19 virus and whether the vaccines will be effective against such new strains are uncertain and may impact our MBR. Premiums for
our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which comprised 93% of our Health Care Benefits revenues for 2021, are priced in advance based on our forecasts of
health care and other benefit costs during a fixed premium period, which is generally twelve months. These forecasts are typically developed several months before
the fixed premium period begins, are influenced by historical data (and recent historical data in particular), are dependent on our ability to anticipate and detect
medical cost trends and changes in our members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns and medical claim submission patterns and require a significant
degree of judgment. For example, our revenue on Medicare policies is based on bids submitted in June of the year before the contract year. Cost increases in excess
of
38

our projections cannot be recovered in the fixed premium period through higher premiums. As a result, our profits are particularly sensitive to the accuracy of our
forecasts of the increases in health care and other benefit costs that we expect to occur and our ability to anticipate and detect medical cost trends. For 2022, those
forecasts include adjustments made to pricing based on prospective expectations for liabilities due to testing, vaccines, direct COVID-19 treatment and deferred
care. Risk-adjusted revenue has been adjusted for deferred care, and forecasted enrollment considers assumptions about the economic environment, though
COVID-19 related impacts remain uncertain. During periods when health care and other benefit costs, utilization and/or medical costs trends experience significant
volatility and medical claim submission patterns are changing rapidly as a result of COVID-19, accurately detecting, forecasting, managing, reserving and pricing
for our (and our self-insured customers’) medical cost trends and incurred and future health care and other benefits costs is more challenging. There can be no
assurance regarding the accuracy of the health care or other benefit cost projections reflected in our pricing, and our health care and other benefit costs (including
COVID-19 related testing and vaccination and post-acute care skilled nursing facility and behavioral health costs) are affected by COVID-19 and other external
events over which we have no control. Even relatively small differences between predicted and actual health care and other benefit costs as a percentage of
premium revenues can result in significant adverse changes in our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
A number of factors contribute to rising health care and other benefit costs, including COVID-19, previously uninsured members entering the health care system,
changes in members’ behavior and health care utilization patterns, turnover in our membership, additional government mandated benefits or other regulatory
changes (including under the Families First Act, the CARES Act, and the American Rescue Plan Act), changes in the health status of our members, the aging of the
population and other changing demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology, increases in the number and cost of prescription drugs (including
specialty pharmacy drugs and ultra-high cost drugs and therapies), direct-to-consumer marketing by drug manufacturers, the increasing influence of social media
on our members’ health care utilization and other behaviors, changes in health care practices and general economic conditions (such as inflation and employment
levels). In addition, government-imposed limitations on Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements to health plans and providers have caused the private sector to
bear a greater share of increasing health care and other benefits costs over time, and future amendments to the ACA that increase the uninsured population may
amplify this problem. Other factors that affect our health care and other benefit costs include epidemics or other pandemics, changes as a result of the ACA,
changes to the ACA and other changes in the regulatory environment, the evolution toward a consumer driven business model, new technologies, influenza-related
health care costs (which may be substantial and higher than we expected), clusters of high-cost cases, health care provider and member fraud, and numerous other
factors that are or may be beyond our control. For example, the 2020-2021 influenza season was impacted by efforts taken to reduce the spread of COVID-19; and
the 2019-2020 influenza season had an earlier than average start and had a higher incidence of influenza than the 2018-2019 influenza season.
Our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results and competitiveness depend in large part on our ability to appropriately manage future health care and other
benefit costs through underwriting criteria, product design, provider network configuration, negotiation of favorable provider contracts and medical management
programs. Our medical cost management programs may not be successful and may have a smaller impact on health care and benefit costs than we expect. The
factors described above may adversely affect our ability to predict and manage health care and other benefit costs, which can adversely affect our competitiveness
and operating results.
Furthermore, if we are not able to accurately and promptly anticipate and detect medical cost trends or accurately estimate the cost of incurred but not yet reported
claims or reported claims that have not been paid, our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future health care costs and reflect our current benefit cost
experience in our pricing process may be limited, which would further amplify the extent of any adverse impact on our operating results. These risks are
particularly acute during periods when health care and other benefit costs, utilization and/or medical cost trends experience significant volatility and medical claim
submission patterns are changing rapidly as a result of COVID-19. Such risks are further magnified by the ACA and other existing and future legislation and
regulations that limit our ability to price for our projected and/or experienced increases in utilization and/or medical cost trends.
There can be no assurance that future health care and other benefits costs will not exceed our projections.
Adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad can materially and adversely impact our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition,
and we do not expect these conditions to improve in the near future.
Adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad, including those caused by COVID-19, can materially and adversely impact our businesses, operating results,
cash flows and financial condition, including:
39

•
In our Pharmacy Services segment, by causing drug utilization to decline, reducing demand for PBM services and adversely affecting the financial health of
our PBM clients.
•
In our Retail/LTC segment, by causing drug utilization to decline, changing consumer purchasing power, preferences and/or spending patterns leading to
reduced consumer demand for products sold in our stores and adversely affecting the financial health of our LTC pharmacy customers.
•
By causing our existing customers to reduce workforces (including due to business failures), which would reduce our revenues, the number of covered lives in
our PBM clients and/or the number of members our Health Care Benefits segment serves.
•
By causing our clients and customers and potential clients and customers, particularly those with the most employees or members, and state and local
governments, to force us to compete more vigorously on factors such as price and service, including service, discount and other performance guarantees, to
retain or obtain their business.
•
By causing customers and potential customers of our Health Care Benefits and Retail/LTC segments to purchase fewer products and/or products that generate
less profit for us than the ones they currently purchase or otherwise would have purchased.
•
By causing customers and potential customers of our Health Care Benefits segment, particularly smaller employers and individuals, to forego obtaining or
renewing their health and other coverage with us.
•
In our Health Care Benefits segment, by causing unanticipated increases and volatility in utilization of medical and other covered services, including COVID-
19 related testing, vaccination and behavioral health services, by our medical members, changes in medical claim submission patterns and/or increases in
medical unit costs and/or provider behavior, each of which would increase our costs and limit our ability to accurately detect, forecast, manage, reserve and
price for our (and our self-insured customers’) medical cost trends and incurred and future health care and other benefits costs.
•
By increasing medical unit costs and causing changes in provider behavior in our Health Care Benefits segment as hospitals and other providers attempt to
maintain revenue levels in their efforts to adjust to their own COVID-19-related and other economic challenges.
•
By weakening the ability or perceived ability of the issuers and/or guarantors of the debt or other securities we hold in our investment portfolio to perform on
their obligations to us, which could result in defaults in those securities and has reduced, and may further reduce, the value of those securities and has created,
and may continue to create, net realized capital losses for us that reduce our operating results.
•
By weakening the ability of our customers, including self-insured customers in our Health Care Benefits segment, medical providers and the other companies
with which we do business as well as our medical members to perform their obligations to us or causing them not to perform those obligations, either of which
could reduce our operating results.
•
By weakening the ability of our former subsidiaries and/or their purchasers to satisfy their lease obligations that we have guaranteed and causing the Company
to be required to satisfy those obligations.
•
By weakening the financial condition of other insurers, including long-term care insurers and life insurers, which increases the risk that we will receive
significant assessments for obligations of insolvent insurers to policyholders and claimants.
•
By causing, over time, inflation that could cause interest rates to increase and thereby increase our interest expense and reduce our operating results, as well as
decrease the value of the debt securities we hold in our investment portfolio, which would reduce our operating results and/or adversely affect our financial
condition.
Furthermore, reductions in workforce by our customers can cause unanticipated increases in the health care and other benefits costs of our Health Care Benefits
segment. For example, our business associated with members who have elected to receive benefits under Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (known
as “COBRA”) typically has an MBR that is significantly higher than our overall Commercial MBR.
Each of our segments operates in a highly competitive and evolving business environment; and operating income in the industries in which we compete may
decline.
Each of our segments, Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services, which includes our PBM business, and Retail/LTC, operates in a highly competitive and evolving
business environment. Specifically:
•
As competition increases in the geographies in which we operate, including competition from new entrants, a significant increase in price compression and/or
reimbursement pressures could occur, and this could require us to reevaluate our pricing structures to remain competitive.
•
In our Health Care Benefits segment we are seeking to substantially grow our Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan membership over the
next several years. In many instances, to acquire and retain our government
40

customers’ business, we must bid against our competitors in a highly competitive environment. Winning bids often are challenged successfully by
unsuccessful bidders, and may also be withdrawn or cancelled by the issuing agency.
•
Customer contracts in our Health Care Benefits segment are generally for a period of one year, and our customers have considerable flexibility in moving
between us and our competitors. One of the key factors on which we compete for customers, especially in uncertain economic environments, is overall cost.
We are therefore under pressure to contain premium price increases despite being faced with increasing health care and other benefit costs and increasing
operating costs. If we are unable to increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely
affected. If we are unable to limit our price increases, we may lose members to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and
operating results. In response to rising prices, our customers may elect to self-insure or to reduce benefits in order to limit increases in their benefit costs.
Alternatively, our customers may purchase different types of products from us that are less profitable. Such elections may result in reduced membership in our
more profitable Insured products and/or lower premiums for our Insured products, which may adversely affect our revenues and operating results, although
such elections also may reduce our health care and other benefit costs. In addition, our Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP products are subject to termination
without cause, periodic re-bid, rate adjustment and program redesign, as customers seek to contain their benefit costs, particularly in an uncertain economy,
and our exposure to this risk is increasing as we grow our Government products membership. These actions may adversely affect our membership, revenues
and operating results.
•
We requested increases in our premium rates in our Commercial Health Care Benefits business for 2021 and expect to request increases in those rates for 2022
and beyond in order to adequately price for projected medical cost trends, required expansions of coverage and rating limits, and significant assessments, fees
and taxes imposed by federal and state governments, including as a result of the ACA. Our rates also must be adequate to reflect the risk that our products will
be selected by people with a higher risk profile or utilization rate than the pool of participants we anticipated when we established pricing for the applicable
products (also known as “adverse selection”), particularly in small group Commercial products. These rate increases may be significant and thus heighten the
risks of adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and adverse selection and the likelihood that our requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced
or delayed, which could lead to operating margin compression.
•
The competitive success of our Pharmacy Services segment is dependent on our ability to establish and maintain contractual relationships with network
pharmacies as PBM clients evaluate adopting narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks.
•
The competitive success of our Retail/LTC segment and our specialty pharmacy operations is dependent on our ability to establish and maintain contractual
relationships with PBMs and other payors on acceptable terms as the payors’ clients evaluate adopting narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks.
•
In our PBM business, we maintain contractual relationships with brand name drug manufacturers that provide for purchase discounts and/or rebates on drugs
dispensed by pharmacies in our retail network and by our specialty and mail order pharmacies (all or a portion of which may be passed on to clients).
Manufacturer’s rebates often depend on a PBM’s ability to meet contractual requirements, including the placement of a manufacturer’s products on the PBM’s
formularies. If we lose our relationship with one or more drug manufacturers, or if the discounts or rebates provided by drug manufacturers decline, our
operating results, cash flows and/or prospects could be adversely affected.
•
The PBM industry has been experiencing price compression as a result of competitive pressures and increased client demands for lower prices, increased
revenue sharing, including sharing in a larger portion of rebates received from drug manufacturers, enhanced service offerings and/or higher service levels.
Marketplace dynamics and regulatory changes also have adversely affected our ability to offer plan sponsors pricing that includes the use of retail
“differential” or “spread,” which could adversely affect our future profitability, and we expect these trends to continue.
•
Our retail pharmacy, specialty pharmacy and LTC pharmacy operations have been affected by reimbursement pressure caused by competition, including client
demands for lower prices, generic drug pricing, earlier than expected generic drug introductions and network reimbursement pressure. If we are unable to
increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely affected. If we are unable to limit our
price increases, we may lose customers to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and operating results.
•
A shift in the mix of our pharmacy prescription volume towards programs offering lower reimbursement rates as a result of competition or otherwise could
adversely affect our margins, including the ongoing shift in pharmacy mix towards 90-day prescriptions at retail and the ongoing shift in pharmacy mix
towards Medicare Part D prescriptions.
•
PBM client contracts often are for a period of approximately three years. However, PBM clients may require early or periodic re-negotiation of pricing prior to
contract expiration. PBM clients are generally well informed, can move between us and our competitors and often seek competing bids prior to expiration of
their contracts. We are therefore under pressure to contain price increases despite being faced with increasing drug costs and increasing operating costs. If we
are unable to increase our prices to reflect, or otherwise mitigate the impact of, increasing costs, our profitability will be adversely
41

affected. If we are unable to limit our price increases, we may lose customers to competitors with more favorable pricing, adversely affecting our revenues and
operating results.
•
The operating results and margins of our LTC business are further affected by the increased efforts of health care payors to negotiate reduced or capitated
pricing arrangements and by the financial health of, and purchases and sales of, our LTC customers.
In addition, competitors in each of our businesses may offer services and pricing terms that we may not be willing or able to offer. Competition also may come
from new entrants and other sources in the future. Unless we can demonstrate enhanced value to our clients through innovative product and service offerings in the
rapidly changing health care industry, we may be unable to remain competitive.
Disruptive innovation by existing or new competitors could alter the competitive landscape in the future and require us to accurately identify and assess such
alterations and make timely and effective changes to our strategies and business model to compete effectively. For example, decisions to buy our Health Care
Benefits and Pharmacy Services products and services increasingly are made or influenced by consumers, either through direct purchasing (e.g., Medicare
Advantage plans and PDPs) or through Public Exchanges and private health insurance exchanges that allow individual choice. Consumers also are increasingly
seeking to access consumer goods and health care products and services locally and through other direct channels such as mobile devices and websites. To compete
effectively in the consumer-driven marketplace, we will be required to develop or acquire new capabilities, attract new talent and develop new service and
distribution relationships that respond to consumer needs and preferences.
Changes in marketplace dynamics or the actions of competitors or manufacturers, including industry consolidation, the emergence of new competitors and strategic
alliances, and decisions to exclude us from new narrow or restricted retail pharmacy networks could materially and adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or prospects.
We can provide no assurance that we will be able to compete successfully on Public Exchanges or that our pricing or other actions will result in the
profitability of our Public Exchange products.
In January 2022, we entered into the Public Exchanges in eight states. To compete effectively on Public Exchanges, we have developed or acquired the technology,
systems, tools and talent necessary to interact with Public Exchanges and engage Public Exchange consumers through enhanced consumer-focused sales, marketing
channels and customer interfaces. We have also created new customer service programs and product offerings. While participating on the Public Exchanges, we
will have to respond to pricing and other actions taken by existing competitors and regulators as well as potentially disruptive new entrants, which could reduce our
profit margins. Due to the price transparency provided by Public Exchanges, when we market products we face competitive pressures from existing and new
competitors who may have lower cost structures. Our competitors may bring their Public Exchange and other consumer products to market more quickly, have
greater experience marketing to consumers and/or may be targeting the higher margin portions of our business. We can provide no assurance that we will be able to
compete successfully or profitably on Public Exchanges or that we will be able to benefit from any opportunities presented by Public Exchanges.
In addition, there can be no assurance that our pricing or other actions will result in the profitability of our Public Exchange products in 2022 or any future year.
We have set 2022 premium rates for our Public Exchange products based on our projections, including as to the health status and quantity of membership and
utilization of medical and/or other covered services by members. The accuracy of the projections reflected in our pricing may be impacted by (i) adverse selection
among individuals who require or utilize more expensive medical and/or other covered services, (ii) other plans’ withdrawals from participation in the Public
Exchanges we serve and (iii) legislation, regulations, enforcement activity and/or judicial decisions that cause Public Exchanges to operate in a manner different
than what we projected in setting our premium rates.
A change in our Health Care Benefits product mix may adversely affect our profit margins.
Our Insured Health Care Benefits products that involve greater potential risk generally tend to be more profitable than our ASC products. Historically, smaller
employer groups have been more likely to purchase Insured Health Care Benefits products because such purchasers are generally unable or unwilling to bear
greater liability for health care expenditures, although over the last several years even relatively small employers have moved to ASC products. We also serve, and
expect to grow our business with, government-sponsored programs, including Medicare and Medicaid, that are subject to competitive bids and have lower profit
margins than our Commercial Insured Health Care Benefits products. A shift of enrollees from more profitable products to less profitable products could have a
material adverse effect on the Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results.
42

Negative public perception of the industries in which we operate, or of our industries’ or our practices, can adversely affect our businesses, operating results,
cash flows and prospects.
Our brand and reputation are two of our most important assets, and the industries in which we operate have been and are negatively perceived by the public from
time to time. Negative publicity may come as a result of adverse media coverage, litigation against us and other industry participants, the ongoing public debates
over drug pricing, PBMs, government involvement in drug pricing and purchasing, changes to the ACA, “surprise” medical bills, governmental hearings and/or
investigations, actual or perceived shortfalls regarding our industries’ or our own products and/or business practices (including PBM operations, drug pricing and
insurance coverage determinations) and social media and other media relations activities. Negative publicity also may come from a failure to meet customer
expectations for consistent, high quality and accessible care. This risk may increase as we continue to offer products and services that make greater use of data and
as our business model becomes more focused on delivering health care to consumers.
In addition, by working with the U.S. government in the distribution and administration of the COVID-19 vaccine, the Company may be subject to negative
publicity related to the government’s actions in response to COVID-19 that are outside of the ability of the Company to control.
Negative public perception and/or publicity of our industries in general, or of us or our key vendors, brokers or product distribution networks in particular, can
further increase our costs of doing business and adversely affect our operating results and our stock price by:
•
adversely affecting our brand and reputation;
•
adversely affecting our ability to market and sell our products and/or services and/or retain our existing customers and members;
•
requiring us to change our products and/or services;
•
reducing or restricting the revenue we can receive for our products and/or services; and/or
•
increasing or significantly changing the regulatory and legislative requirements with which we must comply.
We must maintain and improve our relationships with our retail and specialty pharmacy customers and increase the demand for our products and services,
including proprietary brands.
The success of our businesses depends in part on customer loyalty, superior customer service and our ability to persuade customers to frequent our retail stores and
online sites and to purchase products in additional categories and our proprietary brands. Failure to timely identify or effectively respond to changing consumer
preferences and spending patterns, and evolving demographic mixes in the communities we serve, an inability to expand the products being purchased by our
clients and customers, or the failure or inability to obtain or offer particular categories of products could adversely affect our relationship with our customers and
clients and the demand for our products and services and could result in excess inventories of products.
We offer our retail customers proprietary brand products that are available exclusively at our retail stores and through our online retail sites. The sale of proprietary
products subjects us to unique risks including potential product liability risks, mandatory or voluntary product recalls, potential supply chain and distribution chain
disruptions for raw materials and finished products, our ability to successfully protect our intellectual property rights and the rights of applicable third parties, and
other risks generally encountered by entities that source, market and sell private-label products. We also face similar risks for the other products we sell in our retail
operations, including supply chain and distribution chain disruption risk. Any failure to adequately address some or all of these risks could have an adverse effect
on our retail business, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition. Additionally, an increase in the sales of our proprietary brands may adversely affect
our sales of products owned by our suppliers and adversely impact certain of our supplier relationships. Our ability to locate qualified, economically stable
suppliers who satisfy our requirements, and to acquire sufficient products in a timely and effective manner, is critical to ensuring, among other things, that
customer confidence is not diminished. Any failure to develop sourcing relationships with a broad and deep supplier base could adversely affect our operating
results and erode customer loyalty.
We also could be adversely affected if we fail to identify or effectively respond to changes in marketplace dynamics. For example, specialty pharmacy represents a
significant and growing proportion of prescription drug spending in the U.S., a significant portion of which is dispensed outside of traditional retail pharmacies.
Because our specialty pharmacy business focuses on complex and high-cost medications, many of which are made available by manufacturers to a limited number
of pharmacies (so-called limited distribution drugs) that serve a relatively limited universe of patients, the future growth of our
43

specialty pharmacy business depends largely upon expanding our access to key drugs and penetration in certain treatment categories. Any contraction of our base
of patients or reduction in demand for the prescriptions we currently dispense could have an adverse effect on our specialty pharmacy business, operating results
and cash flows.
We face risks relating to the availability, pricing and safety profiles of prescription drugs that we purchase and sell.
The profitability of our Retail/LTC and Pharmacy Services segments is dependent upon the utilization of prescription drug products. We dispense significant
volumes of brand name and generic drugs from our retail, LTC, specialty and mail order pharmacies, and the retail pharmacies in our PBM’s network also dispense
significant volumes of brand name and generic drugs. Our revenues, operating results and cash flows may decline if physicians cease writing prescriptions for
drugs or the utilization of drugs is reduced, including due to:
•
increased safety risk profiles or regulatory restrictions;
•
manufacturing or other supply issues;
•
a reduction in drug manufacturers’ participation in federal programs;
•
certain products being withdrawn by their manufacturers or transitioned to over-the-counter products;
•
future FDA rulings restricting the supply or increasing the cost of products;
•
the introduction of new and successful prescription drugs or lower-priced generic alternatives to existing brand name products; or
•
inflation in the price of drugs.
In addition, increased utilization of generic drugs (which normally yield a higher gross profit rate than equivalent brand name drugs) has resulted in pressure to
decrease reimbursement payments to retail, mail order, specialty and LTC pharmacies for generic drugs, causing a reduction in our margins on sales of generic
drugs. Consolidation within the generic drug manufacturing industry and other external factors may enhance the ability of manufacturers to sustain or increase
pricing of generic drugs and diminish our ability to negotiate reduced generic drug acquisition costs. Any inability to offset increased brand name or generic
prescription drug acquisition costs or to modify our activities to lessen the financial impact of such increased costs could have a significant adverse effect on our
operating results.
The reserves we hold for expected claims in our Insured Health Care Benefits products are based on estimates that involve an extensive degree of judgment
and are inherently variable. Any reserve, including a premium deficiency reserve, may be insufficient. If actual claims exceed our estimates, our operating
results could be materially adversely affected, and our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future costs may be limited.
A large portion of health care claims are not submitted to us until after the end of the quarter in which services are rendered by providers to our members. Our
reported health care costs payable for any particular period reflect our estimates of the ultimate cost of such claims as well as claims that have been reported to us
but not yet paid. We also must estimate the amount of rebates payable under the MLR rules of the ACA, CMS and the OPM and the amounts payable by us to, and
receivable by us from, the United States federal government under the ACA’s remaining premium stabilization program.
Our estimates of health care costs payable are based on a number of factors, including those derived from historical claim experience, but this estimation process
also makes use of extensive judgment. Considerable variability is inherent in such estimates, and the accuracy of the estimates is highly sensitive to changes in
medical claims submission and processing patterns and/or procedures, turnover and other changes in membership, changes in product mix, changes in the
utilization of medical and/or other covered services, including prescription drugs, changes in medical cost trends, changes in our medical management practices
and the introduction of new benefits and products. We estimate health care costs payable periodically, and any resulting adjustments, including premium deficiency
reserves, are reflected in current-period operating results within benefit costs. For example, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we established a premium
deficiency reserve of $16 million and $11 million, respectively, related to Medicaid products in the Health Care Benefits segment. A worsening (or improvement)
of health care cost trend rates or changes in claim payment patterns from those that we assumed in estimating health care costs payable as of December 31, 2021
would cause these estimates to change in the near term, and such a change could be material.
Furthermore, if we are not able to accurately and promptly anticipate and detect medical cost trends or accurately estimate the cost of incurred but not yet reported
claims or reported claims that have not been paid, our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future health care costs and reflect our current benefit cost
experience in our pricing process may be limited, which would further exacerbate the extent of any adverse impact on our operating results. These risks are
particularly acute during and following periods when utilization of medical and/or other covered services and/or medical cost trends are below
44

recent historical levels and in products where there is significant turnover in our membership each year, and such risks are further magnified by the ACA and other
legislation and regulations that limit our ability to price for our projected and/or experienced increases in utilization and/or medical cost trends.
Our operating results are affected by the health of the economy in general and in the geographies we serve.
Our businesses are affected by the U.S. economy and consumer confidence in general and in the geographies we serve, including various economic factors,
including inflation and changes in consumer purchasing power, preferences and/or spending patterns. An unfavorable, uncertain or volatile economic environment
could cause a decline in drug utilization, an increase in health care utilization and dampen demand for PBM services as well as consumer demand for products sold
in our retail stores.
If our customers’ operating and financial performance deteriorates, or they are unable to make scheduled payments or obtain adequate financing, our customers
may not be able to pay timely, or may delay payment of, amounts owed to us. Any inability of our customers to pay us for our products and services may adversely
affect our businesses, operating results and cash flows. In addition, both state and federal government sponsored payers, as a result of budget deficits or spending
reductions, may suspend payments or seek to reduce their health care expenditures resulting in our customers delaying payments to us or renegotiating their
contracts with us.
Further, economic conditions including interest rate fluctuations, changes in capital market conditions and regulatory changes may affect our ability to obtain
necessary financing on acceptable terms, our ability to secure suitable store locations under acceptable terms, our ability to execute sale-leaseback transactions
under acceptable terms and the value of our investment portfolio. Adverse changes in the U.S. economy, consumer confidence and economic conditions could have
an adverse effect on our businesses and financial results. This adverse effect could be further exacerbated by the increasing prevalence of high deductible health
plans and health plan designs favoring co-insurance over co-payments as members and other consumers may decide to postpone, or not to seek, medical treatment
which may lead them to incur more expensive medical treatment in the future and/or decrease our prescription volumes.
In addition, our Health Care Benefits membership remains concentrated in certain U.S. geographies and in certain industries. Unfavorable changes in health care or
other benefit costs or reimbursement rates or increased competition in those geographic areas where our membership is concentrated could therefore have a
disproportionately adverse effect on our Health Care Benefits segment’s operating results. Our Health Care Benefits membership has been and may continue to be
affected by workforce reductions by our customers due to adverse and/or uncertain general economic conditions, especially in the U.S. geographies and industries
where our membership is concentrated. As a result, we may not be able to profitably grow and diversify our Health Care Benefits membership geographically, by
product type or by customer industry, and our revenues and operating results may be disproportionately affected by adverse changes affecting our customers.
We are exposed to risks relating to the solvency of other insurers.
We are subject to assessments under guaranty fund laws existing in all states for obligations of insolvent insurance companies (including long-term care insurers),
HMOs, ACA co-ops and other payors to policyholders and claimants. For example, in the first quarter of 2017, Aetna recorded a discounted estimated liability
expense of $231 million pretax for our estimated share of future assessments for long-term care insurer Penn Treaty Network America Insurance Company and one
of its subsidiaries. Guaranty funds are maintained by state insurance commissioners to protect policyholders and claimants in the event that an insurer, HMO, ACA
co-op and/or other payor becomes insolvent or is unable to meet its financial obligations. These funds are usually financed by assessments against insurers
regulated by a state. Future assessments may have an adverse effect on our operating results and cash flows.
Extreme events, or the threat of extreme events, could materially impact our businesses and health care (including behavioral health) costs.
Nuclear, biological or other attacks, or other acts of violence, including active shooter situations, whether as a result of war or terrorism or otherwise; other man-
made disasters; natural disasters, such as hurricanes, tropical storms, floods, fires, earthquakes, tsunamis, cyclones, typhoons or extreme weather conditions such as
major or extended winter storms, droughts and tornados, whether as a result of climate change or otherwise; epidemics; pandemics and other extreme events can
affect the U.S. economy in general, our industries and us specifically. In particular, such extreme events or the threat of such extreme events could result in
significant health care (including behavioral health) costs, which also would be affected by the government’s actions and the responsiveness of public health
agencies and other insurers. Such extreme events or the threat of
45

such extreme events also could disrupt our supply chains and/or our distribution chains for the products we sell. In addition, our employees and those of our
vendors are concentrated in certain large, metropolitan areas which may be particularly exposed to these events. Such events could adversely affect our businesses,
operating results and cash flows, and, in the event of extreme circumstances, our financial condition or viability, particularly if our responses to such events are less
adequate than those of our competitors.
We may be unable to achieve our environmental, social and governance goals.
We are dedicated to corporate social responsibility and sustainability and face pressures from our colleagues, customers, and stockholders to make significant
advancements in environmental, social and governance matters. In part to address these concerns, we established certain goals as part of our ESG strategy.
Achievement of our goals is subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside of our control, and it is possible that we may fail to achieve these goals or
that our colleagues, customers, or stockholders might not be satisfied with our efforts. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: our ability to
execute our operational strategies and achieve our goals within the currently projected costs and the expected timeframes; the availability and cost of renewable
energy and other materials; compliance with, and changes or additions to, global and regional regulations, taxes, charges, mandates or requirements relating to
climate-related goals; labor-related regulations and requirements that restrict or prohibit our ability to impose requirements on third party contractors; the actions of
competitors and competitive pressures; an acquisition of or merger with another company that has not adopted similar goals or whose progress towards reaching its
goals is not as advanced as ours; and the pace of regional and global recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. A failure to meet our goals could adversely affect
public perception of our business, employee morale or customer or stockholder support.
Further, an increasing percentage of colleagues, customers, and stockholders considers sustainability factors in making employment, consumer health care and
investment decisions. If we are unable to meet our goals, we may lose colleagues, and have difficulty recruiting new colleagues, investors, customers, or partners,
our stock price may be negatively impacted, our reputation may be negatively affected, and it may be more difficult for us to compete effectively, all of which
would have an adverse effect on our business, operating results, and financial condition.
Risks From Changes in Public Policy and Other Legal and Regulatory Risks
We are subject to potential changes in public policy, laws and regulations, including reform of the U.S. health care system, which can adversely affect our
businesses. Entitlement program reform, if it occurs, could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operations and/or operating results.
The political environment in which we operate remains uncertain. It is reasonably possible that our business operations and operating results could be materially
adversely affected by legislative, regulatory and public policy changes at the federal or state level, increased government involvement in drug reimbursement,
pricing, purchasing and/or importation and/or increased regulation of PBMs, including: changes to the regulatory environment for health care and related benefits,
including Medicare, the ACA, and related Public Exchange regulations; changes to laws or regulations governing drug reimbursement and/or pricing; changes to
the laws and regulations governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care programs; changes to
laws and/or regulations governing drug manufacturers’ rebates; changes to laws and/or regulations governing reimbursements paid to pharmacists by and/or
reporting required by PBMs; changes to immigration policies and/or other public policy initiatives. It is not possible to predict whether or when any such changes
will occur or what form any such changes may take (including through the use of U.S. Presidential Executive Orders). Other significant changes to health care and
related benefits system legislation or regulation as well as changes with respect to tax and trade policies, tariffs and other government regulations affecting trade
between the United States and other countries also are possible and could adversely affect our businesses. If we fail to respond adequately to such changes,
including by implementing strategic and operational initiatives, or do not respond as effectively as our competitors, our businesses, operations and operating results
may be materially adversely affected.
Efforts to amend the ACA and related regulations are possible. It is also possible that federal and state governments will continue to enact and seriously consider
many broad-based legislative and regulatory proposals that will or could materially impact various aspects of the health care and related benefits system and our
businesses. Further changes to federal health care and related benefits laws, including the ACA, drug reimbursement and pricing laws, laws governing PBMs
and/or laws governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care programs, are probable. We
cannot predict the effect, if any, that new health care and related benefits legislation, future changes to the ACA or the implementation of or failure to implement
the outstanding provisions of ACA, may have on our Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and/or retail pharmacy, LTC pharmacy operations and/or operating
results. The federal and many
46

state governments also are considering changes in the interpretation, enforcement and/or application of existing programs, laws and regulations, including changes
to payments under and funding of Medicare and Medicaid programs and increased regulation of PBMs.
Further, changes in existing federal or state laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or regulations relating to additional regulation of PBMs (including
network restrictions, formulary management affiliate reimbursement, contractual guarantees and reconciliations, or other PBM services), drug pricing or
purchasing, patent term extensions and/or purchase discount and/or rebate arrangements with drug manufacturers also could reduce the discounts or rebates we
receive. Changes in existing federal or state laws or regulations or the adoption of new laws or regulations relating to claims processing and billing, including our
ability to use MAC lists and collect transmission fees, also could adversely affect our profitability. For example, on October 29, 2020, the HHS released a final rule
requiring health insurers to disclose drug pricing and cost-sharing information. The final rule requires group health plans and health insurance issuers in the
individual and group markets to disclose cost-sharing information upon request, to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee, which, unless otherwise indicated, for the
purpose of the final rules includes an authorized representative, and requires plans and issuers to disclose in-network provider rates, historical out-of-network
allowed amounts and the associated billed charges, and negotiated rates for prescription drugs. While the specific regulation requiring PBMs to disclose negotiated
price concessions was paused under federal guidance released in August 2021, if it resurfaces, the regulation may result in drug manufacturers lowering discounts
or rebates, resulting in higher drug costs for patients and impacting the ability of the Company to negotiate drug prices and provide competitive products and
services to consumers.
In addition, in November 2020, the HHS released the Rebate Rule, which eliminates the regulatory safe harbor from prosecution under the AKS for rebates from
pharmaceutical companies to PBMs in Medicare Part D and in Medicaid MCOs, replacing it with two far narrower safe harbors designed to directly benefit patients
with high out-of-pocket costs and to change the way PBMs are compensated. The new safe harbors are (i) for rebates which are passed on to the patient at the point
of sale and (ii) for flat service fee payments made to PBMs which cannot be tied to the list prices of drugs. The PCMA, which represents PBMs, has filed a suit in
an effort to block the Rebate Rule, claiming that the Rebate Rule would lead to higher premiums in Medicare Part D and was adopted in an unlawful manner. It is
unclear whether the Rebate Rule will be enforceable, whether pharmaceutical companies will respond by reducing list prices, whether list prices in the private
market may also be reduced, and what the resulting impact will be to PBMs or the Company. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Act of 2021 delays the effective date of
the rebate rule to January 2026, and pending Reconciliation legislation would fully repeal the Rebate Rule.
Additionally, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 was signed into law in December 2020 and contains transparency provisions requiring group health
plans and health insurance issuers to report certain prescription drug costs, overall spending on health services and prescription drugs, and information about
premiums and the impact of rebates and other remuneration on premiums and out-of-pocket costs to the Tri-Departments. No later than 18 months after the first
submission and bi-annually thereafter, the Tri-Departments will release a public report on drug pricing trends, drug reimbursement, and the impact of drug prices
on premiums. In August, the Tri-Departments deferred enforcement of both the December 2021 deadline for reporting 2020 plan year data and the June 2022
deadline for reporting 2021 plan year data to December 2022.
We cannot predict the enactment or content of new legislation or regulations or changes to existing laws or regulations or their enforcement, interpretation or
application, or the effect they will have on our business operations or operating results, which could be materially adverse. Even if we could predict such matters, it
is not possible to eliminate the adverse impact of public policy changes that would fundamentally change the dynamics of one or more of the industries in which
we compete. Examples of such changes include: the federal or one or more state governments fundamentally restructuring or reducing the funding available for
Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible or dual eligible special needs plan programs, increasing its involvement in drug reimbursement, pricing, purchasing and/or
importation, changing the laws and regulations governing PBMs’, PDPs’ and/or Managed Medicaid organizations’ interactions with government funded health care
programs, changing the tax treatment of health or related benefits, or significantly altering the ACA. The likelihood of adverse changes remains high due to state
and federal budgetary pressures, and our businesses and operating results could be materially and adversely affected by such changes, even if we correctly predict
their occurrence.
For more information on these matters, see “Government Regulation” included in Item 1 of this 10-K.
If we fail to comply with applicable laws and regulations, many of which are highly complex, we could be subject to significant adverse regulatory actions,
including monetary penalties, or suffer brand and reputational harm.
47

Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and oversight by state, federal and international governmental authorities. The laws and regulations governing
our operations and interpretations of those laws and regulations, including those related to human capital and climate change, are increasing in number and
complexity, change frequently and can be inconsistent or conflict with one another. In general, these laws and regulations are designed to benefit and protect
customers, members and providers rather than us or our investors. In addition, the governmental authorities that regulate our businesses have broad latitude to
make, interpret and enforce the laws and regulations that govern us and continue to interpret and enforce those laws and regulations more strictly and more
aggressively each year. We also must follow various restrictions on certain of our businesses and the payment of dividends by certain of our subsidiaries put in
place by certain state regulators.
Certain of our Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC operations, products and services are subject to:
•
the clinical quality, patient safety and other risks inherent in the dispensing, packaging and distribution of drugs and other health care products and services,
including claims related to purported dispensing and other operational errors (any failure by our Pharmacy Services and/or Retail/LTC operations to adhere to
the laws and regulations applicable to the dispensing of drugs could subject us to civil and criminal penalties);
•
federal and state anti-kickback and other laws that govern our relationship with drug manufacturers, customers and consumers;
•
compliance requirements under ERISA, including fiduciary obligations in connection with the development and implementation of items such as drug
formularies and preferred drug listings; and
•
federal and state legislative proposals and/or regulatory activity that could adversely affect pharmacy benefit industry practices.
Our Health Care Benefits products are highly regulated, particularly those that serve Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible, dual eligible special needs and small group
Commercial customers and members. The laws and regulations governing participation in Medicare Advantage (including dual eligible special needs plans),
Medicare Part D, Medicaid, and managed Medicaid plans are complex, are subject to interpretation and can expose us to penalties for non-compliance.
The scope of the practices and activities that are prohibited by federal and state false claims acts is the subject of pending litigation. Claims under federal and state
false claims acts can be brought by the government or by private individuals on behalf of the government through a qui tam or “whistleblower” suit, and we are a
defendant in a number of such proceedings. If we are convicted of fraud or other criminal conduct in the performance of a government program or if there is an
adverse decision against us under the False Claims Act, we may be temporarily or permanently suspended from participating in government health care programs,
including Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible special needs plan programs, and we also may be required to pay
significant fines and/or other monetary penalties. Whistleblower suits have resulted in significant settlements between governmental agencies and health care
companies. The significant incentives and protections provided to whistleblowers under applicable law increase the risk of whistleblower suits.
If we fail to comply with laws and regulations that apply to government programs, we could be subject to criminal fines, civil penalties, premium refunds,
prohibitions on marketing or active or passive enrollment of members, corrective actions, termination of our contracts or other sanctions which could have a
material adverse effect on our ability to participate in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, Medicaid, dual eligible, dual eligible special needs plan and other
programs and on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Our businesses, profitability and growth also may be adversely affected by (i) judicial and regulatory decisions that change and/or expand the interpretations of
existing statutes and regulations, impose medical or bad faith liability, increase our responsibilities under ERISA or the remedies available under ERISA, or reduce
the scope of ERISA pre-emption of state law claims or (ii) other legislation and regulations. For example, in December 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld an
Arkansas law that, among other things, mandates a particular pricing methodology, establishes an appeals process for a pharmacy when the reimbursement is below
the pharmacy’s acquisition cost, permits a pharmacy to reverse and rebill if they cannot procure the drug from its wholesaler at a price equal to or less than the
reimbursement rate, prohibits a PBM from reimbursing a pharmacy less than the amount it reimburses an affiliate on a per unit basis, and permits a pharmacy to
decline to dispense if the reimbursement is lower than the pharmacy’s acquisition cost. Also, in November 2021, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
upheld a North Dakota law that regulates employer-sponsored ERISA health plans and certain PBM practices within Medicare.
If our compliance or other systems and processes fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and become subject to regulatory
actions and/or litigation.
48

In addition to being subject to extensive and complex regulations, many of our contracts with customers include detailed requirements. In order to be eligible to
offer certain products or bid on certain contracts, we must demonstrate that we have robust systems and processes in place that are designed to maintain compliance
with all applicable legal, regulatory and contractual requirements. These systems and processes frequently are reviewed and audited by our customers and
regulators. If our systems and processes designed to maintain compliance with applicable legal and contractual requirements, and to prevent and detect instances
of, or the potential for, non-compliance fail or are deemed inadequate, we may suffer brand and reputational harm and be subject to regulatory actions, litigation
and other proceedings which may result in damages, fines, suspension or loss of licensure, suspension or exclusion from participation in government programs
and/or other penalties, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
We routinely are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings, including class actions and qui tam actions. Many of these proceedings seek
substantial damages which may not be covered by insurance. These proceedings are costly to defend, may result in changes in our business practices, harm our
brand and reputation and adversely affect our businesses and operating results.
PBM, retail pharmacy, mail order pharmacy, specialty pharmacy, LTC pharmacy and health care and related benefits are highly regulated industries whose
participants frequently are subject to litigation and other adverse legal proceedings. We are currently subject to various litigation and arbitration matters,
investigations, regulatory audits, inspections, government inquiries, and regulatory and other legal proceedings, both inside and outside the U.S. Outside the U.S.,
contractual rights, tax positions and applicable regulations may be subject to interpretation or uncertainty to a greater degree than in the U.S. Litigation related to
our provision of professional services in our medical clinics, pharmacies and LTC operations is increasing as we expand our services along the continuum of health
care.
Litigation, and particularly securities, derivative, collective or class action and qui tam litigation, is often expensive and disruptive. Many of the legal proceedings
against us seek substantial damages (including non-economic or punitive damages and treble damages), and certain of these proceedings also seek changes in our
business practices. While we currently have insurance coverage for some potential liabilities, other potential liabilities may not be covered by insurance, insurers
may dispute coverage and/or the amount of our insurance may not be enough to cover the damages awarded or costs incurred. In addition, some types of damages,
like punitive damages, may not be covered by insurance, and in some jurisdictions the coverage of punitive damages is prohibited. Insurance coverage for all or
some forms of liability also may become unavailable or prohibitively expensive in the future.
The outcome of litigation and other adverse legal proceedings is always uncertain, and outcomes that are not justifiable by the evidence or existing law or
regulation can and do occur, and the costs incurred frequently are substantial regardless of the outcome. Litigation and other adverse legal proceedings could
materially adversely affect our businesses, operating results and/or cash flows because of brand and reputational harm to us caused by such proceedings, the cost of
defending such proceedings, the cost of settlement or judgments against us, or the changes in our operations that could result from such proceedings. See Item 3 of
this 10-K for additional information.
We frequently are subject to regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews that could result in changes to our business practices and also
could result in material refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities and other sanctions.
As one of the largest national retail, mail order, specialty and LTC pharmacy, PBM and health care and related benefits providers, we frequently are subject to
regular and special governmental market conduct and other audits, investigations and reviews by, and we receive subpoenas and other requests for information
from, various federal and state agencies, regulatory authorities, attorneys general, committees, subcommittees and members of the U.S. Congress and other state,
federal and international governmental authorities. For example, we have received CIDs from, and provided documents and information to, the Civil Division of
the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of our patient chart review processes in connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D
of the Medicare program. CMS and the OIG also are auditing the risk adjustment-related data of certain of our Medicare Advantage plans, and the number of such
audits continues to increase. Several such audits, investigations and reviews by governmental authorities currently are pending, some of which may be resolved in
2022, the results of which may be adverse to us.
Federal and state governments have made investigating and prosecuting health care and other insurance fraud, waste and abuse a priority. Fraud, waste and abuse
prohibitions encompass a wide range of activities, including kickbacks for referral of members, billing for unnecessary medical and/or other covered services,
improper marketing and violations of patient privacy
49

rights. The regulations and contractual requirements applicable to us and other industry participants are complex and subject to change, making it necessary for us
to invest significant resources in complying with our regulatory and contractual requirements. Ongoing vigorous law enforcement and the highly technical
regulatory scheme mean that our compliance efforts in this area will continue to require significant resources. In addition, our medical costs and the medical
expenses of our Health Care Benefits ASC customers may be adversely affected if we do not prevent or detect fraudulent activity by providers and/or members.
Regular and special governmental audits, investigations and reviews by federal, state and international regulators could result in changes to our business practices,
and also could result in significant or material premium refunds, fines, penalties, civil liabilities, criminal liabilities or other sanctions, including suspension or
exclusion from participation in government programs and suspension or loss of licensure. Any of these audits, investigations or reviews could have a material
adverse effect on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition or result in significant liabilities and negative publicity for us.
See “Legal and Regulatory Proceedings” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Our litigation and regulatory risk profile are changing as we offer new products and services and expand in business areas beyond our historical core
businesses of Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC.
Historically, we focused primarily on providing Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC products and services. As a result of our transformation
program and other innovation initiatives, we are expanding our presence in the health care space and plan to offer new products and services (such as the home
hemodialysis device we are developing) which present a different litigation and regulatory risk profile than the products and services that we historically have
offered.
The increased volume of business in areas beyond our historical core businesses and new products and services subject us to litigation and regulatory risks that are
different from the risks of providing Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC products and services and increase significantly our exposure to
other risks.
We face unique regulatory and other challenges in our Medicare and Medicaid businesses.
We are seeking to substantially grow the Medicare and Medicaid membership in our Health Care Benefits segment in 2022 and over the next several years. We
face unique regulatory and other challenges that may inhibit the growth and profitability of those businesses.
•
In January 2021, CMS issued its final notice detailing final 2022 Medicare Advantage benchmark payment rates. Final 2022 Medicare Advantage rates
resulted in an increase in industry benchmark rates of approximately 4.1%. We cannot predict future Medicare funding levels, the impact of future federal
budget actions or ensure that such changes or actions will not have an adverse effect on our Medicare operating results.
•
The organic expansion of our Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D service area is subject to the ability of CMS to process our requests for service area
expansions and our ability to build cost competitive provider networks in the expanded service areas that meet applicable network adequacy requirements.
CMS’ decisions on our requests for service area expansions also may be affected adversely by compliance issues that arise each year in our Medicare
operations.
•
CMS regularly audits our performance to determine our compliance with CMS’s regulations and our contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of the
services we provide to our Medicare members. As a result of these audits, we may be subject to significant or material retroactive adjustments to and/or
withholding of certain premiums and fees, fines, criminal liability, civil monetary penalties, CMS imposed sanctions (including suspension or exclusion from
participation in government programs) or other restrictions on our Medicare, Medicaid and other businesses, including suspension or loss of licensure.
•
“Star ratings” from CMS for our Medicare Advantage plans will continue to have a significant effect on our plans’ operating results. Only Medicare
Advantage plans with a star rating of four or higher (out of five) are eligible for a quality bonus in their basic premium rates. CMS continues to change its
rating system to make achieving and maintaining a four or higher star rating more difficult. Our star ratings and past performance scores are adversely affected
by the compliance issues that arise each year in our Medicare operations. If our star ratings fall below four for a significant portion of our Medicare Advantage
membership or do not match the performance of our competitors or the star rating quality bonuses are reduced or eliminated, our revenues, operating results
and cash flows may be significantly adversely affected.
50

•
Payments we receive from CMS for our Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D businesses also are subject to risk adjustment based on the health status of
the individuals we enroll. Elements of that risk adjustment mechanism continue to be challenged by the DOJ, the OIG and CMS itself. Substantial changes in
the risk adjustment mechanism, including changes that result from enforcement or audit actions, could materially affect the amount of our Medicare
reimbursement, require us to raise prices or reduce the benefits we offer to Medicare beneficiaries, and potentially limit our (and the industry’s) participation
in the Medicare program.
•
Changes to the ability of PBMs to have pharmacy performance programs in place for clients and report payments via direct and indirect reporting mechanisms
could impact the Pharmacy Services business.
•
Medicare Part D has resulted in increased utilization of prescription medications and puts pressure on our pharmacy gross margin rates due to regulatory and
competitive pressures. Further, as a result of the ACA and changes to the retiree drug subsidy rules, clients of our PBM business could decide to discontinue
providing prescription drug benefits to their Medicare-eligible members. To the extent this phenomenon occurs, the adverse effects of increasing customer
migration into Medicare Part D may outweigh the benefits we realize from growth of our Medicare Part D products.
•
Our Medicare Part D operating results and our ability to expand our Medicare Part D business could be adversely affected if: the cost and complexity of
Medicare Part D exceed management’s expectations or prevent effective program implementation or administration; changes to the regulations regarding how
drug costs are reported for Medicare Part D are implemented in a manner that adversely affects the profitability of our Medicare Part D business; changes to
the applicable regulations impact our ability to retain fees from third parties including network pharmacies; the government alters Medicare Part D program
requirements or reduces funding because of the higher-than-anticipated cost to taxpayers of Medicare Part D or for other reasons; the government mandated
use of point-of-sale manufacturer’s rebates effective in 2022 continues; the government enacts price controls on certain pharmaceutical products in Medicare
Part D; the government makes changes to how pharmacy pay-for-performance is calculated; or reinsurance thresholds are reduced below their current levels.
•
We have experienced challenges in obtaining complete and accurate encounter data for our Medicaid products due to difficulties with providers and third-party
vendors submitting claims in a timely fashion in the proper format, and with state agencies in coordinating such submissions. As states increase their reliance
on encounter data, these difficulties could affect the Medicaid premium rates we receive and how Medicaid membership is assigned to us, which could have a
material adverse effect on our Medicaid operating results and cash flows and/or our ability to bid for, and continue to participate in, certain Medicaid
programs.
•
If we fail to report and correct errors discovered through our own auditing procedures or during a CMS audit or otherwise fail to comply with the applicable
laws and regulations, we could be subject to fines, civil monetary penalties or other sanctions, including fines and penalties under the False Claims Act, which
could have a material adverse effect on our ability to participate in Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D or other government programs, and on our operating
results, cash flows and financial condition.
•
Certain of our Medicaid contracts require the submission of complete and correct encounter data. The accurate and timely reporting of encounter data is
increasingly important to the success of our Medicaid programs because more states are using encounter data to determine compliance with performance
standards and, in part, to set premium rates. We have expended and may continue to expend additional effort and incur significant additional costs to collect
accurate, or to correct inaccurate or incomplete, encounter data and have been and could be exposed to premium withholding, operating sanctions and financial
fines and penalties for noncompliance. We have experienced challenges in obtaining complete and accurate encounter data due to difficulties with providers
and third-party vendors submitting claims in a timely fashion in the proper format, and with state agencies in coordinating such submissions. As states increase
their reliance on encounter data, these difficulties could affect the Medicaid premium rates we receive and how Medicaid membership is assigned to us, which
could have a material adverse effect on our Medicaid operating results and cash flows and/or our ability to successfully bid for, and continue to participate in,
certain Medicaid programs.
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to
increase.
Programs funded in whole or in part by the U.S. federal government account for a significant portion of our revenues, and we expect that percentage to increase. As
our government funded businesses grow, our exposure to changes in federal and state government policy with respect to and/or regulation of the various
government funded programs in which we participate also increases.
The laws and regulations governing participation in Medicare Advantage (including dual eligible special needs plans), Medicare Part D, Medicaid, and managed
Medicaid plans are complex, are subject to interpretation and can expose us to penalties for non-compliance. Federal, state and local governments have the right to
cancel or not to renew their contracts with
51

us on short notice without cause or if funds are not available. Funding for these programs is dependent on many factors outside our control, including general
economic conditions, continuing government efforts to contain health care costs and budgetary constraints at the federal or applicable state or local level and
general political issues and priorities.
The U.S. federal government and our other government customers also may reduce funding for health care or other programs, cancel or decline to renew contracts
with us, or make changes that adversely affect the number of persons eligible for certain programs, the services provided to enrollees in such programs, our
premiums and our administrative and health care and other benefit costs, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and
cash flows. When federal funding is delayed, suspended or curtailed, we continue to receive, and we remain liable for and are required to fund, claims from
providers for providing services to beneficiaries of federally funded health benefits programs in which we participate. An extended federal government shutdown
or a delay by Congress in raising the federal government’s debt ceiling also could lead to a delay, reduction, suspension or cancellation of federal government
spending and a significant increase in interest rates that could, in turn, have a material adverse effect on the value of our investment portfolio, our ability to access
the capital markets and our businesses, operating results, cash flows and liquidity.
Possible changes in industry pricing benchmarks and drug pricing generally can adversely affect our PBM and Retail/LTC businesses.
It is possible that the pharmaceutical industry, regulators, or federal policymakers may evaluate and/or develop an alternative pricing reference to replace AWP or
WAC, which are the pricing references used for many of our PBM and LTC client contracts, drug purchase agreements, retail network contracts, specialty payor
agreements and other contracts with third party payors in connection with the reimbursement of drug payments. In addition, many state Medicaid fee-for-service
programs have established pharmacy network payments on the basis of Actual Acquisition Cost (“AAC”). The use of an AAC basis in fee for service Medicaid
could have an impact on reimbursement practices in Health Care Benefits’ Commercial and other Government products. It is also possible that Congress may enact
some limited form of price negotiation for Medicare. In addition, CMS also publishes the National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (“NADAC”) for certain drugs;
NADAC pricing is being adopted in an increasing number of states.
Future changes to the use of AWP, WAC or to other published pricing benchmarks used to establish drug pricing, including changes in the basis for calculating
reimbursement by federal and state health care programs and/or other payors, could impact the reimbursement we receive from Medicare and Medicaid programs,
the reimbursement we receive from our PBM clients and other payors and/or our ability to negotiate rebates and/or discounts with drug manufacturers, wholesalers,
PBMs and retail pharmacies. A failure or inability to fully offset any increased prices or costs or to modify our operations to mitigate the impact of such increases
could have a material adverse effect on our operating results. Additionally, any future changes in drug prices could be significantly different than our projections.
We cannot predict the effect of these possible changes on our businesses.
We may not be able to obtain adequate premium rate increases in our Insured Health Care Benefits products, which would have an adverse effect on our
revenues, MBRs and operating results and could magnify the adverse impact of increases in health care and other benefit costs and of ACA assessments, fees
and taxes.
Premium rates for our Insured Health Care Benefits products generally must be filed with state insurance regulators and are subject to their approval, which creates
risk for us in the current political and regulatory environment. The ACA generally requires a review by HHS in conjunction with state regulators of premium rate
increases that exceed a federally specified threshold (or lower state-specific thresholds set by states determined by HHS to have adequate processes). Rate reviews
can magnify the adverse impact on our operating margins, MBRs and operating results of increases in health care and other benefit costs, increased utilization of
covered services, and ACA assessments, fees and taxes, by restricting our ability to reflect these increases and/or these assessments, fees and taxes in our pricing.
Further, our ability to reflect ACA assessments, fees and taxes in our Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP premium rates is limited.
Since 2013, HHS has issued determinations to health plans that their premium rate increases were “unreasonable,” and we continue to experience challenges to
appropriate premium rate increases in certain states. Regulators or legislatures in several states have implemented or are considering limits on premium rate
increases, either by enforcing existing legal requirements more stringently or proposing different regulatory standards. Regulators or legislatures in several states
also have conducted hearings on proposed premium rate increases, which can result, and in some instances have resulted, in substantial delays in implementing
proposed rate increases even if they ultimately are approved. Our plans can be excluded from participating in small group Public Exchanges if they are deemed to
have a history of “unreasonable” rate increases. Any significant rate increases we may request heighten the risks of adverse publicity, adverse regulatory action and
adverse selection and the
52

likelihood that our requested premium rate increases will be denied, reduced or delayed, which could adversely affect our MBRs and lead to operating margin
compression.
We anticipate continued regulatory and legislative action to increase regulation of premium rates in our Insured Health Care Benefits products. We may not be able
to obtain rates that are actuarially justified or that are sufficient to make our policies profitable in one or more product lines or geographies. If we are unable to
obtain adequate premium rates and/or premium rate increases, it could materially and adversely affect our operating margins and MBRs and our ability to earn
adequate returns on Insured Health Care Benefits products in one or more states or cause us to withdraw from certain geographies and/or products.
Minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in our Insured Health Care Benefits products while leaving us exposed to higher
than expected medical costs. Challenges to our minimum MLR rebate methodology and/or reports could adversely affect our operating results.
The ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements limit the level of margin we can earn in Health Care Benefits’ Commercial Insured and Medicare Insured
businesses. CMS minimum MLR rebate regulations limit the level of margin we can earn in our Medicaid Insured business. Certain portions of our Health Care
Benefits Medicaid and FEHB program business also are subject to minimum MLR rebate requirements in addition to but separate from those imposed by the ACA.
Minimum MLR rebate requirements leave us exposed to medical costs that are higher than those reflected in our pricing. The process supporting the management
and determination of the amount of MLR rebates payable is complex and requires judgment, and the minimum MLR reporting requirements are detailed. CMS has
also proposed, but not yet finalized, a definition of “prescription drug price concessions” for commercial MLR calculation purposes, which would make additional
PBM information available to plans and the HHS, potentially further complicating the MLR calculation process. Federal and state auditors are challenging our
Commercial Health Care Benefits business’ compliance with the ACA’s minimum MLR requirements as well as our FEHB plans’ compliance with OPM’s FEHB
program-specific minimum MLR requirements. Our Medicare and Medicaid contracts also are subject to minimum MLR audits. If a Medicare Advantage or
Medicare Part D contract pays minimum MLR rebates for three consecutive years, it will become ineligible to enroll new members. If a Medicare Advantage or
Medicare Part D contract pays such rebates for five consecutive years, it will be terminated by CMS. Additional challenges to our methodology and/or reports
relating to minimum MLR and related rebates by federal and state regulators and private litigants are reasonably possible. The outcome of these audits and
additional challenges could adversely affect our operating results.
Our operating results may be adversely affected by changes in laws and policies governing employers and by union organizing activity.
Congress and certain state legislatures continue to consider and pass legislation that increases our costs of doing business, including increased minimum wages and
requiring employers to provide paid sick leave or paid family leave. In addition, our employee-related operating costs may be increased by union organizing
activity and it is possible that the National Labor Relations Board may adopt regulatory changes through re-making or case law that could facilitate union
organizing. If we are unable to reflect these increased expenses in our pricing or otherwise modify our operations to mitigate the effects of such increases, our
operating results will be adversely affected.
We face international political, legal and compliance, operational, regulatory, economic and other risks that may be more significant than in our domestic
operations.
Our international operations present political, legal, compliance, operational, regulatory, economic and other risks that we do not face or that are more significant
than in our domestic operations. These risks vary widely by country and include varying regional and geopolitical business conditions and demands, government
intervention and censorship, discriminatory regulation, climate change regulation, nationalization or expropriation of assets and pricing constraints. Our
international products need to meet country-specific customer and member preferences as well as country-specific legal requirements, including those related to
licensing, data privacy, data storage and data protection.
Our international operations increase our exposure to, and require us to devote significant management resources to implement controls and systems to comply
with, the privacy and data protection laws of non-U.S. jurisdictions, such as the EU’s GDPR, and the anti-bribery, anti-corruption and anti-money laundering laws
of the United States (including the FCPA) and the United Kingdom (including the UK Bribery Act) and similar laws in other jurisdictions. Implementing our
compliance policies, internal controls and other systems upon our expansion into new countries and geographies may require the investment of considerable
management time and financial and other resources over several years before any significant revenues or profits are generated. Violations of these laws and
regulations could result in fines, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or employees, restrictions or outright prohibitions on the conduct of our business, and
significant brand and reputational harm. We
53

must regularly reassess the size, capability and location of our global infrastructure and make appropriate changes, and must have effective change management
processes and internal controls in place to address changes in our businesses and operations. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to anticipate these risks
and manage these difficulties, and the failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on our brand, reputation, businesses, operating results and/or financial
condition.
Our international operations require us to overcome logistical and other challenges based on differing languages, cultures, legal and regulatory schemes and time
zones. Our international operations encounter labor laws, standards and customs that can be difficult and make employee relationships less flexible than in our
domestic operations and expensive to modify or terminate. In some countries we are required to, or choose to, operate with local business associates, which
requires us to manage our relationships with these third parties and may reduce our operational flexibility and ability to quickly respond to business challenges.
In some countries we may be exposed to currency exchange controls or other restrictions that prevent us from transferring funds internationally or converting local
currencies into U.S. dollars or other currencies. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates may adversely affect our revenues, operating results and cash flows
from our international operations. Some of our operations are, and are increasingly likely to be, in emerging markets where these risks are heightened. Any
measures we may implement to reduce the effect of volatile currencies and other risks on our international operations may not be effective.
Risks Associated with Mergers, Acquisitions, and Divestitures
We may be unable to successfully integrate companies we acquire.
Upon the closing of any acquisition we complete, we will need to successfully integrate the products, services and related assets, as well as internal controls into
our business operations. If an acquisition is consummated, the integration of the acquired business, its products, services and related assets into our company also
may be complex and time-consuming and, if the integration is not fully successful, we may not achieve the anticipated benefits, operating and cost synergies and/or
growth opportunities of an acquisition. Potential difficulties that may be encountered in the integration process include the following:
•
Integrating personnel, operations and systems (including internal control environments and compliance policies), while maintaining focus on producing and
delivering consistent, high quality products and services;
•
Coordinating geographically dispersed organizations;
•
Disrupting management’s attention from our ongoing business operations;
•
Retaining existing customers and attracting new customers;
•
Managing inefficiencies associated with integrating our operations; and
•
Reconciling post-acquisition costs and liabilities between buyer and seller.
An inability to realize the full extent of the anticipated benefits, operating and cost synergies, innovations and operations efficiencies or growth opportunities of an
acquisition, as well as any delays or additional expenses encountered in the integration process, could have a material adverse effect on our businesses and
operating results. Furthermore, acquisitions, even if successfully integrated, may fail to further our business strategy as anticipated, expose us to increased
competition or challenges with respect to our products, services or service areas, and expose us to additional liabilities associated with an acquired business
including risks and liabilities associated with litigation involving the acquired business. Any one of these challenges or risks could impair our ability to realize any
benefit from our acquisitions after we have expended resources on them.
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities, which may be unsuccessful, cause us
to assume unanticipated liabilities, disrupt our existing businesses, be dilutive or lead us to assume significant debt, among other things.
We expect to continue to pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, strategic alliances and other inorganic growth opportunities as part of our growth strategy. In addition
to the integration risks noted above, some other risks we face with respect to acquisitions and other inorganic growth strategies include:
•
we frequently compete with other firms, some of which may have greater financial and other resources and a greater tolerance for risk, to acquire attractive
companies;
•
the acquired, alliance and/or joint venture businesses may not perform as projected;
54

•
the goodwill or other intangible assets established as a result of our acquisitions may be incorrectly valued or may become impaired;
•
we may assume unanticipated liabilities, including those that were not disclosed to us or which we underestimated;
•
the acquired businesses, or the pursuit of other inorganic growth strategies, could disrupt or compete with our existing businesses, distract management, result
in the loss of key employees, divert resources, result in tax costs or inefficiencies and make it difficult to maintain our current business standards, controls,
information technology systems, policies, procedures and performance;
•
we may finance future acquisitions and other inorganic growth strategies by issuing common stock for some or all of the purchase price, which would dilute
the ownership interests of our stockholders;
•
we may incur significant debt in connection with acquisitions (whether to finance acquisitions or by assuming debt from the businesses we acquire);
•
we may not have the expertise to manage and profitably grow the businesses we acquire, and we may need to rely on the retention of key personnel and other
suppliers of businesses we acquire, which may be difficult or impossible to accomplish;
•
we may enter into merger or purchase agreements but, due to reasons within or outside our control, fail to complete the related transactions, which could result
in termination fees or other penalties that could be material, cause material disruptions to our businesses and operations and adversely affect our brand and
reputation;
•
in order to complete a proposed acquisition, we may be required to divest certain portions of our business, for which we may not be able to obtain favorable
pricing;
•
we may be involved in litigation related to mergers or acquisitions, including for matters that occurred prior to the applicable closing, which may be costly to
defend and may result in adverse rulings against us that could be material; and
•
the integration into our businesses of the businesses and entities we acquire may affect the way in which existing laws and regulations apply to us, including
subjecting us to laws and regulations that did not previously apply to us.
In addition, joint ventures present risks that are different from acquisitions, including selection of appropriate joint venture parties, initial and ongoing governance
of the joint venture, joint venture compliance activities (including compliance with applicable CMS requirements), growing the joint venture’s business in a
manner acceptable to all the parties, including other providers in the networks that include joint ventures, maintaining positive relationships among the joint
venture parties and the joint venture’s customers, and member and business disruption that may occur upon joint venture termination.
Risks Related to Our Operations
Failure to meet customer expectations may harm our brand and reputation, our ability to retain and grow our customer base and membership and our
operating results and cash flows.
Our ability to attract and retain customers and members is dependent upon providing cost effective, quality customer service operations (such as call center
operations, PBM functions, retail pharmacy and LTC services, retail, mail order and specialty pharmacy prescription delivery, claims processing, customer case
installation and online access and tools) that meet or exceed our customers’ and members’ expectations, either directly or through vendors. As we seek to reduce
general and administrative expenses, we must balance the potential impact of cost-saving measures on our customers and other services and performances. If we
misjudge the effects of such measures, customers and other services may be adversely affected. We depend on third parties for certain of our customer service,
PBM and prescription delivery operations. If we or our vendors fail to provide service that meets our customers’ and members’ expectations, we may have
difficulty retaining or profitably growing our customer base and/or membership, which could adversely affect our operating results. For example, noncompliance
with any privacy or security laws or regulations or any security breach involving us or one of our third-party vendors could have a material adverse effect on our
businesses, operating results, brand and reputation.
We and our vendors have experienced and continue to experience cyber attacks. We can provide no assurance that we or our vendors will be able to detect,
prevent or contain the effects of such attacks or other information security (including cybersecurity) risks or threats in the future.
We and our vendors have experienced diverse cyber attacks and expect to continue to experience cyber attacks going forward. As examples, the Company and its
vendors have experienced attempts to gain access to systems, denial of service attacks, attempted malware infections, account takeovers, scanning activity, and
phishing emails. Attacks can originate from external criminals, terrorists, nation states, or internal actors. The Company is dedicating and will continue to dedicate
significant resources and incur significant expenses to maintain and update on an ongoing basis the systems and processes that are
55

designed to mitigate the information security risks it faces and protect the security of its computer systems, software, networks and other technology assets against
attempts by unauthorized parties to obtain access to confidential information, disrupt or degrade service, or cause other damage. The impact of cyber attacks has
not been material to the Company’s operations or operating results through December 31, 2021. The Board and its Audit Committee and Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee are regularly informed regarding the Company’s information security policies, practices and status.
A compromise of our information security controls or of those businesses with whom we interact, which results in confidential information being accessed,
obtained, damaged, or used by unauthorized or improper persons, could harm our reputation and expose us to regulatory actions and claims from customers and
clients, financial institutions, payment card associations and other persons, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results and financial
condition. Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable or degrade service, or sabotage systems change frequently and may not immediately
produce signs of intrusion, we may be unable to anticipate these techniques or to implement adequate preventative measures. Moreover, a data security breach
could require that we expend significant resources related to our information systems and infrastructure, and could distract management and other key personnel
from performing their primary operational duties. We also could be adversely affected by any significant disruption in the systems of third parties we interact with,
including key payors and vendors.
The costs of attempting to protect against the foregoing risks and the costs of responding to an information security incident are significant. Large scale data
breaches at other entities increase the challenge we and our vendors face in maintaining the security of our information technology systems and proprietary
information and of our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ sensitive information. Following an information security incident, our and/or our vendors’
remediation efforts may not be successful, and could result in interruptions, delays or cessation of service, and loss of existing or potential customers and members.
In addition, breaches of our and/or our vendors’ security measures and the unauthorized access to or dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary
information or confidential information about us, our customers, our members or other third-parties, could expose our customers’, members’ and other
constituents’ private information and our customers, members and other constituents to the risk of financial or medical identity theft, or expose us or other third
parties to a risk of loss or misuse of this information, and result in investigations, regulatory enforcement actions, material fines and penalties, loss of customers,
litigation or other actions which could have a material adverse effect on our brand, reputation, businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Data governance failures can adversely affect our reputation, businesses and prospects. Our use and disclosure of members’, customers’ and other
constituents’ sensitive information is subject to complex regulations at multiple levels. We would be adversely affected if we or our business associates or other
vendors fail to adequately protect members’, customers’ or other constituents’ sensitive information.
Our information systems are critical to the operation of our businesses. We collect, process, maintain, retain, evaluate, utilize and distribute large amounts of
personal health and financial information and other confidential and sensitive data about our customers, members and other constituents in the ordinary course of
our businesses. Some of our information systems rely upon third party systems, including cloud service providers, to accomplish these tasks. The use and
disclosure of such information is regulated at the federal, state and international levels, and these laws, rules and regulations are subject to change and increased
enforcement activity, such as the California Consumer Privacy Act which went into effect January 1, 2020, the EU’s GDPR which began to apply across the EU
during 2018 and the audit program implemented by HHS under HIPAA. In some cases, such laws, rules and regulations also apply to our vendors and/or may hold
us liable for any violations by our vendors. International laws, rules and regulations governing the use and disclosure of such information are generally more
stringent than U.S. laws and regulations, and they vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Noncompliance with any privacy or security laws or regulations, or any
security breach, information security incident, and any other incident involving the theft, misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of, or access to,
sensitive or confidential customer, member or other constituent information, whether by us, by one of our business associates or vendors or by another third party,
could require us to expend significant resources to remediate any damage, could interrupt our operations and could adversely affect our brand and reputation,
membership and operating results and also could expose and/or has exposed us to mandatory disclosure to the media, litigation (including class action litigation),
governmental investigations and enforcement proceedings, material fines, penalties and/or remediation costs, and compensatory, special, punitive and statutory
damages, consent orders, adverse actions against our licenses to do business and/or injunctive relief, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows or financial condition.
Our businesses depend on our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ willingness to entrust us with their health related and other sensitive personal
information. Events that adversely affect that trust, including inadequate disclosure to our members or customers of our uses of their information, failing to keep
our information technology systems and our customers’, members’
56

and other constituents’ sensitive information secure from significant attack, theft, damage, loss or unauthorized disclosure or access, whether as a result of our
action or inaction (including human error) or that of our business associates, vendors or other third parties, could adversely affect our brand and reputation,
membership and operating results and also could expose and/or has exposed us to mandatory disclosure to the media, litigation (including class action litigation),
governmental investigations and enforcement proceedings, material fines, penalties and/or remediation costs, and compensatory, special, punitive and statutory
damages, consent orders, adverse actions against our licenses to do business and/or injunctive relief, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating
results, cash flows or financial condition. Large scale data breaches at other entities increase the challenge we and our vendors face in maintaining the security of
our information technology systems and proprietary information and of our customers’, members’ and other constituents’ sensitive information. There can be no
assurance that additional such failures will not occur, or if any do occur, that we will detect them or that they can be sufficiently remediated.
Product liability, product recall or personal injury issues could damage our reputation and have a significant adverse effect on our businesses, operating
results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
The products that we sell could become subject to contamination, product tampering, mislabeling, recall or other damage. In addition, errors in the dispensing,
packaging or administration of drugs or other products and consuming drugs in a manner that is not prescribed could lead to serious injury or death. Product
liability or personal injury claims may be asserted against us with respect to any of the drugs or other products we sell or services we provide. For example, we are
a defendant in hundreds of litigation proceedings relating to opioids and the sale of products containing talc. Our businesses involve the provision of professional
services, including by pharmacists, physician assistants, nurses and nurse practitioners, which exposes us to professional liability claims. Should a product or other
liability issue arise, the coverage available under our insurance programs and the indemnification amounts available to us from third parties may not be adequate to
protect us against the financial impact of the related claims. We also may not be able to maintain our existing levels of insurance on acceptable terms in the future.
A product liability or personal injury issue or judgment against us or a product recall, tampering, or mislabeling could damage our reputation and have a significant
adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and/or financial condition.
We face significant competition in attracting and retaining talented employees. Further, managing succession for, and retention of, key executives is critical to
our success, and our failure to do so could adversely affect our businesses, operating results and/or future performance.
Our ability to attract and retain qualified and experienced employees is essential to meet our current and future goals and objectives. There is no guarantee we will
be able to attract and retain such employees or that competition among potential employers will not result in increased compensation and/or benefits costs. If we
are unable to retain existing employees or attract additional employees, or we experience an unexpected loss of leadership, we could experience a material adverse
effect on our businesses, operating results and/or future performance.
In addition, our failure to adequately plan for succession of senior management and other key management roles or the failure of key employees to successfully
transition into new roles could have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and/or future performance. The succession plans we have in place
and our employment arrangements with certain key executives do not guarantee the services of these executives will continue to be available to us.
Sales of our products and services are dependent on our ability to attract and motivate internal sales personnel and independent third-party brokers,
consultants and agents. New distribution channels create new disintermediation risk. We may be subject to penalties or other regulatory actions as a result of
the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling our products.
Our products are sold primarily through our sales personnel, who frequently work with independent brokers, consultants and agents who assist in the production
and servicing of business. The independent brokers, consultants and agents generally are not dedicated to us exclusively and may frequently recommend and/or
market health care benefits products of our competitors. Accordingly, we must compete intensely for their services and allegiance. Our sales could be adversely
affected if we are unable to attract, retain or motivate sales personnel and third-party brokers, consultants and agents, or if we do not adequately provide support,
training and education to this sales network regarding our complex product portfolio, or if our sales strategy is not appropriately aligned across distribution
channels. This risk is heightened as we develop, operate and expand our consumer-oriented products and services and we expand in the health care space and our
business model evolves to include a greater focus on consumers and direct-to-consumer sales, such as competing for sales on Insurance Exchanges.
57

New distribution channels for our products and services continue to emerge, including Private Exchanges operated by health care consultants and technology
companies. These channels may make it more difficult for us to directly engage consumers and other customers in the selection and management of their health
care benefits, in health care utilization and in the effective navigation of the health care system. We also may be challenged by new technologies and marketplace
entrants that could interfere with our existing relationships with customers and health plan members in these areas.
In addition, there have been several investigations regarding the marketing practices of brokers and agents selling health care and other insurance products and the
payments they receive. These investigations have resulted in enforcement actions against companies in our industry and brokers and agents marketing and selling
those companies’ products. For example, CMS and state departments of insurance have increased their scrutiny of the marketing practices of brokers and agents
who market Medicare products. These investigations and enforcement actions could result in penalties and the imposition of corrective action plans and/or changes
to industry practices, which could adversely affect our ability to market our products.
Failure of our businesses to effectively collaborate could prevent us from maximizing our operating results.
To maximize our overall enterprise value, our various businesses need to collaborate effectively. Our businesses need to be aligned in order to prioritize goals and
coordinate the design of new products intended to utilize the offerings of multiple businesses, including our transformation and enterprise modernization programs.
In addition, misaligned incentives, information siloes, ineffective product development and failure of our corporate governance policies or procedures, for example
significant financial decisions being made at an inappropriate level in our organization, also could prevent us from maximizing our operating results and/or
achieving our financial and other projections.
The failure or disruption of our information technology systems or the failure of our information technology infrastructure to support our businesses could
adversely affect our reputation, businesses, operating results and cash flows.
Our information systems are subject to damage or interruption from power outages, facility damage, computer and telecommunications failures, computer viruses,
security breaches (including credit card or personally identifiable information breaches), cyber attacks, vandalism, catastrophic events and human error. If our
information systems are damaged, fail to work properly or otherwise become unavailable, we may incur substantial costs to repair or replace them, and may
experience reputational damage, loss of critical information, customer disruption and interruptions or delays in our ability to perform essential functions and
implement new and innovative services. In addition, compliance with changes in U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including privacy and information security
laws and standards, may cause us to incur significant expense due to increased investment in technology and the development of new operational processes.
Our business success and operating results depend in part on effective information technology systems and on continuing to develop and implement
improvements in technology. Pursuing multiple initiatives simultaneously could make this continued development and implementation significantly more
challenging.
Many aspects of our operations are dependent on our information systems and the information collected, processed, stored, and handled by these systems. We rely
heavily on our computer systems to manage our ordering, pricing, point-of-sale, pharmacy fulfillment, inventory replenishment, claims processing, customer
loyalty and subscription programs, finance and other processes. Throughout our operations, we collect, process, maintain, retain, evaluate, utilize and distribute
large amounts of confidential and sensitive data and information, including personally identifiable information and protected health information, that our
customers, members and other constituents provide to purchase products or services, enroll in programs or services, register on our websites, interact with our
personnel, or otherwise communicate with us. In addition, for these operations, we depend in part on the secure transmission of confidential information over
public networks.
We have many different information and other technology systems supporting our businesses (including as a result of our acquisitions). Our businesses depend in
large part on these systems to adequately price our products and services; accurately establish reserves, process claims and report operating results; and interact
with providers, employer plan sponsors, customers, members, consumers and vendors in an efficient and uninterrupted fashion. In addition, recent trends toward
greater consumer engagement in health care require new and enhanced technologies, including more sophisticated applications for mobile devices. Certain of our
technology systems (including software) are older, legacy systems that are less flexible, less efficient and require a significant ongoing commitment of capital and
human resources to maintain, protect and enhance them and to integrate them with our other systems. We must re-engineer and reduce the number of these systems
to meet changing consumer and vendor preferences and needs, improve our productivity and reduce our operating expenses. We also need to develop or acquire
new technology systems, contract with new vendors or modify certain of our existing systems to support the consumer-oriented and transformation products and
services we are developing, operating and expanding and/or to meet current
58

and developing industry and regulatory standards, including to keep pace with continuing changes in information processing technology and emerging
cybersecurity risks and threats. If we fail to achieve these objectives, our ability to profitably grow our business and/or our operating results may be adversely
affected.
In addition, information technology and other technology and process improvement projects, including our transformation and enterprise modernization programs,
frequently are long-term in nature and may take longer to complete and cost more than we expect and may not deliver the benefits we project once they are
complete. If we do not effectively and efficiently secure, manage, integrate and enhance our technology portfolio (including vendor sourced systems), we could,
among other things, have problems determining health care and other benefit cost estimates and/or establishing appropriate pricing, meeting the needs of
customers, consumers, providers, members and vendors, developing and expanding our consumer-oriented products and services or keeping pace with industry and
regulatory standards, and our operating results may be adversely affected.
We are subject to payment-related risks that could increase our operating costs, expose us to fraud or theft, subject us to potential liability and disrupt our
business operations.
We accept payments using a variety of methods, including cash, checks, credit cards, debit cards, gift cards, mobile payments and potentially other technologies in
the future. Acceptance of these payment methods subjects us to rules, regulations, contractual obligations and compliance requirements, including payment
network rules and operating guidelines, data security standards and certification requirements, and rules governing electronic funds transfers. These requirements
may change in the future, which could make compliance more difficult or costly. For certain payment options, including credit and debit cards, we pay interchange
and other fees, which could increase periodically thereby raising our operating costs. We rely on third parties to provide payment processing services, including the
processing of credit cards, debit cards, and various other forms of electronic payment. If these vendors are unable to provide these services to us, or if their systems
are compromised, our operations could be disrupted. The payment methods that we offer also expose us to potential fraud and theft by persons seeking to obtain
unauthorized access to, or exploit any weaknesses in, the payment systems we use. If we fail to abide by applicable rules or requirements, or if data relating to our
payment systems is compromised due to a breach or misuse, we may be responsible for any costs incurred by payment card issuing banks and other third parties or
subject to fines and higher transaction fees. In addition, our reputation and ability to accept certain types of payments could each be harmed resulting in reduced
sales and adverse effects on our operating results.
Both our and our vendors’ operations are subject to a variety of business continuity hazards and risks, any of which could interrupt our operations or
otherwise adversely affect our performance and operating results.
We and our vendors are subject to business continuity hazards and other risks, including natural disasters, utility and other mechanical failures, acts of war or
terrorism, acts of civil unrest, disruption of communications, data security and preservation, disruption of supply or distribution, safety regulation and labor
difficulties. The occurrence of any of these or other events to us or our vendors might disrupt or shut down our operations or otherwise adversely affect our
operations. We also may be subject to certain liability claims in the event of an injury or loss of life, or damage to property, resulting from such events. Although
we have developed procedures for crisis management and disaster recovery and business continuity plans and maintain insurance policies that we believe are
customary and adequate for our size and industry, our insurance policies include limits and exclusions and, as a result, our coverage may be insufficient to protect
against all potential hazards and risks incident to our businesses. In addition, our crisis management and disaster recovery procedures and business continuity plans
may not be effective. Should any such hazards or risks occur, or should our insurance coverage be inadequate or unavailable, our businesses, operating results, cash
flows and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Financial Risks
We would be adversely affected if we do not effectively deploy our capital. Downgrades or potential downgrades in our credit ratings, should they occur, could
adversely affect our brand and reputation, businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Our operations generate significant capital, and we have the ability to raise additional capital. The manner in which we deploy our capital, including investments in
our businesses, our operations (such as information technology and other strategic and capital projects), dividends, acquisitions, share and/or debt repurchases,
repayment of debt, reinsurance or other capital uses, impacts our financial strength, claims paying ability and credit ratings issued by nationally-recognized
statistical rating organizations. Credit ratings issued by nationally-recognized statistical rating organizations are broadly distributed and generally used throughout
our industries. Our ratings reflect each rating organization’s opinion of our financial strength, operating performance and ability to meet our debt obligations or
obligations to our insureds. We believe our credit ratings and
59

the financial strength and claims paying ability of our principal insurance and HMO subsidiaries are important factors in marketing our Health Care Benefits
products to certain of our customers.
Each of the ratings organizations reviews our ratings periodically, and there can be no assurance that our current ratings will be maintained in the future.
Downgrades in our ratings could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Goodwill and other intangible assets could, in the future, become impaired.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $108.1 billion and $110.7 billion, respectively, of goodwill and other intangible assets. Goodwill and
indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may
not be recoverable. When evaluating goodwill for potential impairment, we compare the fair value of our reporting units to their respective carrying amounts. We
estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the carrying amount of a
reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess to the extent of the goodwill balance.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. The Company estimates the fair
value of its indefinite-lived trademarks using the relief from royalty method under the income approach. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds its estimated fair
value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. Definite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such an asset may not be recoverable. If indicators of impairment are present, the
Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group (undiscounted). If the estimated
future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment loss calculation is prepared. The impairment loss
calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted).
Estimated fair values could change if, for example, there are changes in the business climate, industry-wide changes, changes in the competitive environment,
adverse legal or regulatory actions or developments, changes in capital structure, cost of debt, interest rates, capital expenditure levels, operating cash flows or
market capitalization. Because of the significance of our goodwill and intangible assets, any future impairment of these assets could require material noncash
charges to our operating results, which also could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
Adverse conditions in the U.S. and global capital markets can significantly and adversely affect the value of our investments in debt and equity securities,
mortgage loans, alternative investments and other investments, and our operating results and/or our financial condition.
The global capital markets, including credit markets, continue to experience volatility and uncertainty. As an insurer, we have a substantial investment portfolio
that supports our policy liabilities and surplus and is comprised largely of debt securities of issuers located in the U.S. As a result, the income we earn from our
investment portfolio is largely driven by the level of interest rates in the U.S., and to a lesser extent the international financial markets; and volatility, uncertainty
and/or disruptions in the global capital markets, particularly the U.S. credit markets, and governments’ monetary policy, particularly U.S. monetary policy, can
significantly and adversely affect the value of our investment portfolio, our operating results and/or our financial condition by:
•
significantly reducing the value and/or liquidity of the debt securities we hold in our investment portfolio and creating realized capital losses that reduce our
operating results and/or unrealized capital losses that reduce our shareholders’ equity;
•
keeping interest rates low on high-quality short-term or medium-term debt securities (such as we have experienced during recent years) and thereby materially
reducing our net investment income and operating results as the proceeds from securities in our investment portfolio that mature or are otherwise disposed of
continue to be reinvested in lower yielding securities;
•
reducing the fair values of our investments if interest rates rise;
•
causing non-performance of or defaults on their obligations to us by third parties, including customers, issuers of securities in our investment portfolio,
mortgage borrowers and/or reinsurance and/or derivatives counterparties;
•
making it more difficult to value certain of our investment securities, for example if trading becomes less frequent, which could lead to significant period-to-
period changes in our estimates of the fair values of those securities and cause period-to-period volatility in our net income and shareholders’ equity;
60

•
reducing our ability to issue short-term debt securities at attractive interest rates, thereby increasing our interest expense and decreasing our operating results;
and
•
reducing our ability to issue other securities.
Although we seek, within guidelines we deem appropriate, to match the duration of our assets and liabilities and to manage our credit and counterparty exposures, a
failure adequately to do so could adversely affect our net income and our financial condition and, in extreme circumstances, our cash flows.
Risks Related to Our Relationships with Manufacturers, Providers, Suppliers and Vendors
We face risks relating to the market availability, pricing, suppliers and safety profiles of prescription drugs and other products that we purchase and sell.
Our Retail/LTC segment and our mail order and specialty pharmacy operations generate revenues in significant part by dispensing prescription drugs. Our PBM
business generates revenues primarily by contracting with clients to provide prescription drugs and related health care services to plan members. As a result, we are
dependent on our relationships with prescription drug manufacturers and suppliers. We acquire a substantial amount of our mail order and specialty pharmacies’
prescription drug supply from a limited number of suppliers. Certain of our agreements with such suppliers are short-term and cancelable by either party without
cause. In addition, these agreements may allow the supplier to distribute through channels other than us. Certain of these agreements also allow pricing and other
terms to be adjusted periodically for changing market conditions or required service levels. A termination or modification to any of these relationships could
adversely affect our prescription drug supply and have a material adverse effect on our businesses, operating results and financial condition. Moreover, many
products distributed by our pharmacies are manufactured with ingredients that are susceptible to supply shortages. In some cases, we depend upon a single source
of supply. Any such supply shortages or loss of any such single source of supply could adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
Much of the branded and generic drug product that we sell in our pharmacies, and much of the other merchandise we sell, is manufactured in whole or in
substantial part outside of the United States. In most cases, the products or merchandise are imported by others and sold to us. As a result, significant changes in tax
or trade policies, tariffs or trade relations between the United States and other countries, such as the imposition of unilateral tariffs on imported products, could
result in significant increases in our costs, restrict our access to suppliers, depress economic activity, and have a material adverse effect on our businesses,
operating results and cash flows. In addition, other countries may change their business and trade policies and such changes, as well as any negative sentiments
towards the United States in response to increased import tariffs and other changes in U.S. trade regulations, could adversely affect our businesses.
Our suppliers are independent entities subject to their own operational and financial risks that are outside our control. If our current suppliers were to stop selling
prescription drugs to us or delay delivery, including as a result of supply shortages, supplier production disruptions, supplier quality issues, closing or bankruptcies
of our suppliers, or for other reasons, we may be unable to procure alternatives from other suppliers in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at
all.
Our operating results may be adversely affected if we are unable to contract with providers on competitive terms and develop and maintain attractive networks
with high quality providers.
We are seeking to enhance our health care provider networks by entering into joint ventures and other collaborative risk-sharing arrangements with providers.
Providers’ willingness to enter these arrangements with us depends upon, among other things, our ability to provide them with up to date quality of care data to
support these value-based contracts. These arrangements are designed to give providers incentives to engage in population health management and optimize
delivery of health care to our members. These arrangements also may allow us to expand into new geographies, target new customer groups, increase membership
and reduce medical costs and, if we provide technology or other services to the relevant health system or provider organization, may contribute to our revenue and
earnings from alternative sources. If such arrangements do not result in the lower medical costs that we project or if we fail to attract providers to such
arrangements, or are less successful at implementing such arrangements than our competitors, our medical costs may not be competitive and may be higher than we
project, our attractiveness to customers may be reduced, we may lose or be unable to grow medical membership, and our ability to profitably grow our business
and/or our operating results may be adversely affected.
While we believe joint ventures, accountable care organizations (“ACOs”) and other non-traditional health care provider organizational structures present
opportunities for us, the implementation of our joint ventures and other non-traditional structure strategies may not achieve the intended results, which could
adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
61

Among other things, joint ventures require us to maintain collaborative relationships with our counterparties, continue to gain access to provider rates that make the
joint ventures economically sustainable and devote significant management time to the operation and management of the joint ventures. We may not be able to
achieve these objectives in one or more of our joint ventures, which could adversely affect our operating results and cash flows.
If our suppliers or service providers fail to meet their contractual obligations to us or to comply with applicable laws or regulations, we may be exposed to
brand and reputational harm, litigation and/or regulatory action. This risk is particularly high in our Medicare, Medicaid, dual eligible and dual eligible
special needs plan programs.
In addition to our suppliers, we contract with various third parties to perform certain functions and services and provide us with certain information technology
systems. Our arrangements with suppliers and these third parties may expose us to public scrutiny, adversely affect our brand and reputation, expose us to litigation
or regulatory action, and otherwise make our operations vulnerable if we fail to adequately oversee, monitor and regulate their performance or if they fail to meet
their contractual obligations to us or to comply with applicable laws or regulations, including those related to human capital and climate change. For example,
certain of our vendors have been responsible for releases of sensitive information of our members and employees, which has caused us to incur additional expenses
and given rise to regulatory actions and litigation against us.
These risks are particularly high in our in Medicare Advantage (including dual eligible special needs plans), Medicare Part D, Medicaid, and managed Medicaid
plans, where third parties may perform medical management and other member related services for us. Any failure of our or these third parties’ prevention,
detection or control systems related to regulatory compliance, compliance with our internal policies, data security and/or cybersecurity or any incident involving
the theft, misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, members’, customers’ or other constituents’ sensitive information could require
us to expend significant resources to remediate any damage, interrupt our operations and adversely affect our brand and reputation and also expose us to
whistleblower, class action and other litigation, other proceedings, prohibitions on marketing or active or passive enrollment of members, corrective actions, fines,
sanctions and/or penalties, any of which could adversely affect our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
We may experience increased medical and other benefit costs, litigation risk and customer and member dissatisfaction when providers that do not have
contracts with us render services to our Health Care Benefits members.
Some providers that render services to our Health Care Benefits members do not have contracts with us. In those cases, we do not have a pre-established
understanding with these providers as to the amount of compensation that is due to them for services rendered to our members. In some states, the amount of
compensation due to these nonparticipating providers is defined by law or regulation, but in most instances it is either not defined or it is established by a standard
that is not clearly translatable into dollar terms. In such instances providers may believe that they are underpaid for their services and may either litigate or arbitrate
their dispute with us or try to recover the difference between what we have paid them and the amount they charged us from our members, which may result in
customer and member dissatisfaction. For example, in October 2018, an arbitrator awarded certain claimant hospitals approximately $150 million in a proceeding
relating to Aetna’s out-of-network benefit payment and administration practices, and in March 2019 that award was reduced to approximately $86 million. Such
disputes may cause us to pay higher medical or other benefit costs than we projected.
Continuing consolidation and integration among providers and other suppliers may increase our medical and other covered benefits costs, make it difficult for
us to compete in certain geographies and create new competitors.
Hospitals and other providers and health systems continue to consolidate across the health care industry. While this consolidation could increase efficiency and has
the potential to improve the delivery of health care services, it also reduces competition and the number of potential contracting parties in certain geographies.
These health systems also are increasingly forming and considering forming health plans to directly offer health insurance in competition with us, a process that
has been accelerated by the ACA. In addition, ACOs (including Commercial and Medicaid-only ACOs developed as a result of state Medicaid laws), practice
management companies, consolidation among and by integrated health systems and other changes in the organizational structures that physicians, hospitals and
other providers adopt continues to change the way these providers interact with us and the competitive landscape in which we operate. These changes may increase
our medical and other covered benefits costs, may affect the way we price our products and services and estimate our medical and other covered benefits costs and
may require us to change our operations, including by withdrawing from certain geographies where we do not have a significant presence across our businesses or
are unable to collaborate or contract with providers on acceptable terms. Each of these changes may adversely affect our businesses and operating results.
62

Table of Contents
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
There are no unresolved SEC Staff Comments.
Item 2. Properties.
The Company’s principal office is an owned building complex located in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, which totals approximately one million square feet. The
Company also leases office space in other locations in the United States.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment’s principal office is an owned building complex located in Hartford, Connecticut, which totals approximately 1.7 million square
feet. The Health Care Benefits segment also owns or leases office space in other locations in the United States and several other countries.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment includes owned or leased mail service dispensing pharmacies, call centers, on-site pharmacy stores, retail specialty pharmacy
stores, specialty mail service pharmacies and branches for infusion and enteral services throughout the United States.
Retail/LTC Segment
As of December 31, 2021, the Retail/LTC segment operated the following properties:
•
Approximately 8,075 retail stores, of which approximately 5% were owned. Net selling space for retail stores was approximately 79.8 million square feet as of
December 31, 2021.
•
Approximately 1,865 retail pharmacies within retail chains, as well as approximately 80 clinics in Target Corporation (“Target”) stores;
•
Owned distribution centers and leased distribution facilities throughout the United States totaling approximately 10.7 million square feet; and
•
Owned and leased LTC pharmacies throughout the United States and an owned LTC repackaging facility.
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company continues to guarantee lease obligations for 72 former stores.
The Company is indemnified for these guarantee obligations by the respective initial purchasers. These guarantees generally remain in effect for the initial lease
term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. For additional information on these
guarantees, see “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
Management believes that the Company’s owned and leased facilities are suitable and adequate to meet the Company’s anticipated needs. At the end of the existing
lease terms, management believes the leases can be renewed or replaced by alternative space. For additional information on the right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities associated with the Company’s leases, see Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
The information contained in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures.
Not applicable.
63

Table of Contents
Information about our Executive Officers
The following sets forth the name, age and biographical information for each of the Registrant’s executive officers as of February 9, 2022. In each case the officer’s
term of office extends to the date of the meeting of the Board following the next annual meeting of stockholders of CVS Health Corporation. Previous positions
and responsibilities held by each of the executive officers over the past five years or more are indicated below:
    Troyen A. Brennan, M.D., age 67, Executive Vice President and Chief Medical Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2008; Executive Vice
President and Chief Medical Officer of Aetna Inc. from February 2006 through November 2008.
    James D. Clark, age 57, Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2018; Vice President -
Finance and Accounting of CVS Pharmacy, Inc. from September 2009 through October 2018.
    Daniel P. Finke, age 51, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of Health Care Benefits since February 2021; Executive Vice
President, Commercial Business and Markets of Aetna Inc. from February 2020 through January 2021; Executive Vice President, Consumer Health and Service of
Aetna Inc. from June 2018 through January 2020; Senior Vice President, Network and Clinical Services of Aetna Inc. from January 2016 through May 2018.
    Shawn M. Guertin, age 58, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CVS Health Corporation since May 2021; Executive Vice President, Chief
Financial Officer and Chief Enterprise Risk Officer of Aetna Inc. from February 2013 through May 2019; Senior Vice President, Finance of Aetna Inc. from April
2011 through January 2013.
    Laurie P. Havanec, age 61, Executive Vice President and Chief People Officer of CVS Health Corporation since February 2021; Executive Vice President and
Chief People Officer, Otis Worldwide Corporation, an elevator, escalator and moving walkway manufacturer, from October 2019 through January 2021; Corporate
Vice President, Talent of United Technologies Corporation, a multinational manufacturing conglomerate, from April 2017 through October 2019; Vice President -
Human Resources, Institution Businesses of Aetna Inc. from 2013 through March 2017.
    Alan M. Lotvin, M.D., age 60, Executive Vice President of CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark since March 2020; Executive Vice
President - Transformation of CVS Health Corporation from June 2018 through February 2020; Executive Vice President - Specialty Pharmacy, CVS Caremark
from November 2012 through May 2018.
    Karen S. Lynch, age 59, President and Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation since February 2021; Executive Vice President of CVS Health
Corporation from November 2018 through January 2021; President of Aetna Inc. from January 2015 through January 2021; and a director of CVS Health
Corporation since February 2021. Ms. Lynch is also a member of the board of directors of U.S. Bancorp, a banking and financial services company.
    Thomas M. Moriarty, age 58, Executive Vice President and General Counsel of CVS Health Corporation since October 2012; Chief Policy and External Affairs
Officer since March 2017; Chief Strategy Officer from March 2014 through February 2017.
    Michelle A. Peluso, age 49, Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer of CVS Health Corporation since January 2021 and Co-President of Retail
since January 2022; Senior Vice President, Digital Sales and Chief Marketing Officer, IBM, a multinational technology corporation, from February 2016 through
January 2021; Chief Executive Officer, Gilt Groupe, Inc., an online shopping destination, from 2013 through February 2016. Ms. Peluso is also a member of the
board of directors of Nike, Inc., an athletic footwear and clothing manufacturer.
    Jonathan C. Roberts, age 66, Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of CVS Health Corporation since March 2017; Executive Vice President of
CVS Health Corporation and President of CVS Caremark from September 2012 through February 2017.
    Prem Shah, age 42, Executive Vice President and Chief Pharmacy Officer of CVS Health Corporation since November 2021 and Co-President of Retail since
January 2022; Executive Vice President, Specialty and Product Innovation , CVS Caremark from August 2018 through November 2021; Vice President - Specialty
Pharmacy, CVS Caremark from February 2013 through July 2018.
64

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
Market Information
CVS Health Corporation’s common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CVS.”
Dividends
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the quarterly cash dividend was $0.50 per share. In December 2021, the Board authorized a 10% increase in the quarterly cash
dividend to $0.55 per share effective in 2022. CVS Health Corporation has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a public company. Future dividends
will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant by the Board.
See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for information regarding CVS Health Corporation’s dividends.
Holders of Common Stock
As of February 2, 2022, there were 24,946 registered holders of the registrant’s common stock according to the records maintained by the registrant’s transfer
agent.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following share repurchase programs have been authorized by the Board:
In billions
Authorization Date
Authorized
Remaining as of 
December 31, 2021
December 9, 2021 (“2021 Repurchase Program”)
$
10.0 
$
10.0 
November 2, 2016 (“2016 Repurchase Program”)
15.0 
— 
Each of the share Repurchase Programs was effective immediately. The 2016 Repurchase program was terminated effective December 9, 2021. The 2021
Repurchase Program permits the Company to effect repurchases from time to time through a combination of open market repurchases, privately negotiated
transactions, accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) transactions, and/or other derivative transactions. The 2021 Repurchase Program can be modified or terminated
by the Board at any time. During the three months ended December 31, 2021, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock.
Pursuant to the authorization under the 2021 Repurchase Program, the Company entered into a $1.5 billion fixed dollar ASR with Barclays Bank PLC
(“Barclays”). Upon payment of the $1.5 billion purchase price on January 4, 2022, the Company received a number of shares of CVS Health Corporation’s
common stock equal to 80% of the $1.5 billion notional amount of the ASR or approximately 11.6 million shares at a price of $103.34 per share, which were
placed into treasury stock in January 2022. At the conclusion of the ASR, the Company may receive additional shares equal to the remaining 20% of the
$1.5 billion notional amount. The ultimate number of shares the Company may receive will depend on the daily volume-weighted average price of the Company’s
stock over an averaging period, less a discount. It is also possible, depending on such weighted average price, that the Company will have an obligation to Barclays
which, at the Company’s option, could be settled in additional cash or by issuing shares. Under the terms of the ASR, the maximum number of shares that could be
delivered to the Company is 29.0 million.
See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the Company’s share repurchases.
65

Table of Contents
Stock Performance Graph
The following graph compares the cumulative total shareholder return on CVS Health Corporation’s common stock (assuming reinvestment of dividends) with the
cumulative total return on the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 500 Food and Staples Retailing Industry Group Index and the S&P 500 Healthcare Sector Group Index
from December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2021. The graph assumes a $100 investment in shares of CVS Health Corporation’s common stock on December
31, 2016.
December 31,
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
CVS Health Corporation
$
100 $
94 $
88 $
103 $
97 $
151 
S&P 500
100 
122 
116 
153 
181 
233 
S&P 500 Food & Staples Retailing Group Index 
100 
113 
115 
146 
170 
213 
S&P 500 Health Care Group Index 
100 
122 
130 
157 
178 
225 
(1)
Includes CVS Health Corporation.
(2)
Includes five companies (COST, KR, SYY, WBA, WMT).
(3)
Includes 64 companies.
The year-ended values of each investment shown in the preceding graph are based on share price appreciation plus dividends, with the dividends reinvested as of
the last business day of the month during which such dividends were ex-dividend. The calculations exclude trading commissions and taxes. Total shareholder
returns from each investment can be calculated from the year-end investment values shown beneath the graph.
Item 6. Reserved
Not applicable.
 (1)
(2)
(1) (3)
_____________________________________________
66

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. (“MD&A”)
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “10-K”), “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K and the “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking
Statements” in this 10-K.
Overview of Business
CVS Health Corporation, together with its subsidiaries (collectively, “CVS Health,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”), is a diversified health solutions
company united around a common purpose of helping people on their path to better health. In an increasingly connected and digital world, we are meeting people
wherever they are and changing health care to meet their needs. The Company has more than 9,900 retail locations, nearly 1,200 walk-in medical clinics, a leading
pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 110 million plan members with expanding specialty pharmacy solutions and a dedicated senior pharmacy care
business serving more than one million patients per year. The Company also serves an estimated 35 million people through traditional, voluntary and consumer-
directed health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone Medicare Part D prescription
drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall
health care costs.
The Company has four reportable segments: Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Corporate/Other, which are described below.
Overview of the Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment operates as one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers. The Health Care Benefits segment has the
information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals, make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health
Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including medical,
pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care
management services, and health information technology products and services. The Health Care Benefits segment also provided workers’ compensation
administrative services through its Coventry Health Care Workers’ Compensation business (“Workers’ Compensation business”) prior to the sale of this business
on July 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly workers, health
plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. The Company refers to insurance
products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services contract products (where the plan
sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” In addition, effective January 2022, the Company entered the individual
public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) in eight states through which it sells Insured plans directly to individual consumers.
Overview of the Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services and mail order pharmacy. In addition, through the Pharmacy Services segment, the
Company provides specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease management services, medical spend management and pharmacy and/or
other administrative services for providers and federal 340B drug pricing program covered entities (“Covered Entities”). The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients
are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care plans, plans offered on Public
Exchanges and private health insurance exchanges, other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States and Covered Entities. The Pharmacy
Services segment operates retail specialty pharmacy stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and
branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services.
Overview of the Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of health and wellness products and general merchandise, provides health care services
through its MinuteClinic  walk-in medical clinics, provides medical diagnostic testing, administers vaccinations for illnesses such as influenza, coronavirus disease
2019 (“COVID-19”) and shingles and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations, which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy
®
67

consulting and other ancillary services to long-term care facilities and other care settings. As of December 31, 2021, the Retail/LTC segment operated more than
9,900 retail locations, nearly 1,200 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and onsite pharmacies. For the year ended
December 31, 2021, the Company dispensed approximately 26.4% of the total retail pharmacy prescriptions in the United States.
Overview of the Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which primarily consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
68

COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic and its emerging new variants continue to impact the U.S. and other countries around the world. Our strong local presence and scale in
communities across the country has enabled us to continue to play an indispensable role in the national response to COVID-19, as well as provide seamless support
for our customers wherever they need us: in our CVS locations, in their homes, and virtually. The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on the Company’s
operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, primarily in the Company’s Health Care Benefits and Retail/LTC segments.
Health Care Benefits Segment
Beginning in mid-March 2020, the health system experienced a significant reduction in utilization of medical services (“utilization”) that is discretionary and the
cancellation of elective medical procedures. Utilization remained below historical levels through April 2020, began to recover in May and June 2020 and reached
more normal levels in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, with select geographies impacted by COVID-19 waves. In response to COVID-19, the Company
provided expanded benefit coverage to its members, including cost-sharing waivers for COVID-19 related treatments, as well as assistance to members through
premium credits, telehealth cost-sharing waivers and other investments. During 2020, COVID-19 also resulted in a shift in the Company’s medical membership.
The Company experienced declines in Commercial membership due to reductions in workforce at our existing customers, substantially offset by increases in
Medicaid membership primarily as a result of the suspension of eligibility redeterminations and increased unemployment.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, overall medical costs in the first quarter were generally consistent with historical baseline levels in the aggregate,
however the segment experienced increased COVID-19 testing and treatment costs and lower Medicare risk-adjusted revenue. During the second quarter, COVID-
19 testing and treatment costs persisted, however at levels significantly lower than those observed during the first quarter. Beginning in the third quarter of 2021,
medical costs once again increased primarily driven by the spread of emerging new variants of COVID-19, which resulted in increased testing and treatment costs
throughout the remainder of the year.
Retail/LTC Segment
During March 2020, the Company experienced increased prescription volume due to the greater use of 90-day prescriptions and early refills of maintenance
medications, as well as increased front store volume as consumers prepared for the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in the second quarter and continuing
throughout the remainder of the year, the Company experienced reduced customer traffic in its retail pharmacies and MinuteClinic locations due to shelter-in-place
orders as well as reduced new therapy prescriptions and decreased long-term care prescription volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the
Company incurred incremental operating expenses associated with the Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response efforts and waived fees associated with
prescription home delivery and associated front store products. During 2020, the Company also played a key role in supporting the local communities in which it
operates through the administration of diagnostic testing at its CVS Pharmacy  locations, as well as in long-term care facilities, at community-based testing sites in
underserved areas and through its Return Ready
solution. The Company also began administering COVID-19 vaccinations in long-term care facilities during
December 2020.
During the first quarter of 2021, the Company experienced reduced customer traffic in its retail pharmacies, which reflected the impact of a weak cough, cold and
flu season, while it administered the highest quarterly volume of COVID-19 diagnostic tests. The Company began administering COVID-19 vaccines in its retail
pharmacies during February 2021. During the second quarter, the segment generated earnings from COVID-19 vaccines and saw improved customer traffic as
vaccinated customers began more actively shopping in CVS locations. During the third and fourth quarters, emerging new variants drove the continued
administration of COVID-19 vaccinations (including boosters) and diagnostic testing, while the segment also generated earnings from the sale of over-the-counter
(“OTC”) test kits in the front store. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company administered more than 32 million COVID-19 tests and more than
59 million COVID-19 vaccines and sold more than 22 million OTC test kits.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. We believe COVID-19’s impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition
primarily will be driven by the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and
consumer behavior and health care utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and impact of stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and local
governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are beyond our knowledge and control. As a result, the impact COVID-19 will have on our
businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material.
®
SM 
69

Results of Operations
The following information summarizes the Company’s results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020. For discussion of the Company’s results of operations for
2020 compared to 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the Company’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 16, 2021.
Summary of Consolidated Financial Results
Change
Year Ended December 31, 
2021 vs. 2020
2020 vs. 2019
In millions
2021
2020
2019
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
203,738 $
190,688 $
185,236 $
13,050 
6.8 % $
5,452 
2.9 %
Premiums
76,132 
69,364 
63,122 
6,768 
9.8 %
6,242 
9.9 %
Services
11,042 
7,856 
7,407 
3,186 
40.6 %
449 
6.1 %
Net investment income
1,199 
798 
1,011 
401 
50.3 %
(213)
(21.1)%
Total revenues
292,111 
268,706 
256,776 
23,405 
8.7 %
11,930 
4.6 %
Operating costs:
Cost of products sold
175,803 
163,981 
158,719 
11,822 
7.2 %
5,262 
3.3 %
Benefit costs
64,260 
55,679 
52,529 
8,581 
15.4 %
3,150 
6.0 %
Store impairments
1,358 
— 
231 
1,358 
100.0 %
(231)
(100.0)%
Goodwill impairment
431 
— 
— 
431 
100.0 %
— 
— %
Operating expenses
37,066 
35,135 
33,310 
1,931 
5.5 %
1,825 
5.5 %
Total operating costs
278,918 
254,795 
244,789 
24,123 
9.5 %
10,006 
4.1 %
Operating income
13,193 
13,911 
11,987 
(718)
(5.2)%
1,924 
16.1 %
Interest expense
2,503 
2,907 
3,035 
(404)
(13.9)%
(128)
(4.2)%
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
452 
1,440 
79 
(988)
(68.6)%
1,361 
1,722.8 %
Other income
(182)
(206)
(124)
24 
11.7 %
(82)
(66.1)%
Income before income tax provision
10,420 
9,770 
8,997 
650 
6.7 %
773 
8.6 %
Income tax provision
2,522 
2,569 
2,366 
(47)
(1.8)%
203 
8.6 %
Income from continuing operations
7,898 
7,201 
6,631 
697 
9.7 %
570 
8.6 %
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
— 
(9)
— 
9 
100.0 %
(9)
(100.0)%
Net income
7,898 
7,192 
6,631 
706 
9.8 %
561 
8.5 %
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling
interests
12 
(13)
3 
25 
192.3 %
(16)
(533.3)%
Net income attributable to CVS Health
$
7,910 $
7,179 $
6,634 $
731 
10.2 % $
545 
8.2 %
Commentary - 2021 compared to 2020
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $23.4 billion or 8.7% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in total revenues was primarily driven by growth across all segments.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the revenues of the Company’s segments.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses increased $1.9 billion or 5.5% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to incremental costs
associated with growth in the business, including costs associated with the administration of COVID-19 vaccinations and diagnostic testing in the Retail/LTC
segment. The increase in operating expenses was partially offset by the repeal of the non-deductible health insurer fee (“HIF”) for 2021 and gains from anti-
trust legal settlements of $263 million recorded in 2021.
70

•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues decreased to 12.7% in 2021 compared to 13.1% in 2020. The decrease in operating expenses as a
percentage of total revenues was primarily due to the increases in total revenues referred to above.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the operating expenses of the Company’s segments.
Operating income
•
Operating income decreased $718 million or 5.2% in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in operating income was primarily due to:
•
A store impairment charge of approximately $1.4 billion recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021 related to planned retail store closures over the next
three years;
•
Decreased operating income in the Health Care Benefits segment, driven by higher COVID-19 related costs in 2021 compared to the prior year,
including the impact of the deferral of elective procedures and other discretionary utilization in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, as
well as the absence of pre-tax income of $307 million associated with the receipt of amounts owed to the Company under the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) risk corridor program (“ACA risk
corridor receipt”); and
•
A $431 million goodwill impairment charge associated with the LTC business in the Retail/LTC segment recorded during the third quarter of 2021,
partially offset by:
•
Increased prescription and front store volume and the administration of COVID-19 vaccinations and diagnostic testing in the Retail/LTC segment;
•
Improved purchasing economics and growth in specialty pharmacy in the Pharmacy Services segment;
•
Gains from anti-trust legal settlements of $263 million recorded in 2021; and
•
Lower acquisition-related integration costs in 2021 compared to the prior year.
•
Please see “Segment Analysis” later in this MD&A for additional information about the operating income of the Company’s segments.
Interest expense
•
Interest expense decreased $404 million in 2021 compared to 2020, due to lower debt in the year ended December 31, 2021. See “Liquidity and Capital
Resources” later in this report for additional information.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
•
During 2021, the loss on early extinguishment of debt relates to the Company’s repayment of approximately $2.3 billion of its outstanding senior notes in
December 2021 pursuant to its early redemption make-whole provision for such senior notes, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$89 million, and the repayment of approximately $2.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes pursuant to its tender offer for such notes in August 2021, which
resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $363 million. During 2020, the loss on early extinguishment of debt relates to the Company’s repayment
of $6.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes pursuant to its tender offers for such senior notes in August 2020, which resulted in a loss on early
extinguishment of debt of $766 million, and the repayment of $4.5 billion of its outstanding senior notes pursuant to its tender offers for such senior notes in
December 2020, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $674 million. See Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ included in Item
8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Income tax provision
•
The Company’s effective income tax rate decreased to 24.2% in 2021 compared to 26.3% in the prior year primarily due to the repeal of the non-deductible
HIF for 2021 and the favorable impact of a prior year refund claim approved by the Internal Revenue Service during the fourth quarter of 2021. The decrease
was partially offset by the absence of the favorable resolution of certain tax matters in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Loss from discontinued operations
•
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company retained guarantees on store lease obligations for a number
of former subsidiaries, including Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores, each of which subsequently filed for bankruptcy. The Company’s loss from discontinued
operations in 2020 primarily included lease-related costs required to satisfy these lease guarantees.
71

•
See “Discontinued Operations” in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ and “Lease Guarantees” in Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ included
in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about the Company’s discontinued operations and the Company’s lease guarantees, respectively.
72

Outlook for 2022
With respect to 2022, the Company believes you should consider the following important information:
•
The Health Care Benefits segment is expected to benefit from Medicare and Commercial membership growth, partially offset by membership declines in its
Medicaid products. The projected MBR is expected to decrease compared to 2021, reflecting a combination of expected improved pricing and a reduction in
COVID-19 related medical costs. While the Company still expects a net negative impact from COVID-19 in 2022 within the Health Care Benefits segment,
the expectation is the impact will be less adverse than what was experienced in 2021.
•
The Pharmacy Services segment is expected to benefit from the Company’s ability to drive further improvements in purchasing economics and continued
growth in specialty pharmacy, partially offset by continued price compression and state regulation of pharmacy pricing.
•
The Retail/LTC segment is expected to continue to benefit from increased prescription volume and improved generic drug purchasing, partially offset by
continued pharmacy reimbursement pressure and incremental operating expenses associated with the Company’s minimum wage investment. The Company
expects that COVID-19 vaccinations and diagnostic testing will continue in 2022, albeit at lower levels than those experienced during 2021. The Company
expects to see continued strength in Front Store sales, including sales of OTC test kits, in 2022. The extent of COVID-19 vaccinations, diagnostic testing and
OTC test kit sales will be dependent upon various factors including vaccine hesitancy, the emergence of new variants, government testing initiatives and the
availability and administration of pediatric and booster vaccinations.
•
The Company is expected to benefit from the continuation of its enterprise-wide cost savings initiatives, which aim to reduce the Company’s operating cost
structure in a way that improves the consumer experience and is sustainable. Key drivers include:
•
Investments in digital, technology and analytics capabilities that will streamline processes and improve outcomes,
•
Implementing workforce and workplace strategies, and
•
Deploying vendor and procurement strategies.
•
The Company expects changes to its business environment to continue as elected and other government officials at the national and state levels continue to
propose and enact significant modifications to public policy and existing laws and regulations that govern or impact the Company’s businesses.
•
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world. The Company believes COVID-19’s impact on
its businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition primarily will be driven by the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of
the pandemic, as well as the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies, global supply chain, consumer behavior, and health care utilization patterns.
In addition, as described in the “Government Regulation” section of this Form 10-K, federal, state and local governmental policies and initiatives designed to
reduce the transmission of COVID-19 and emerging new variants may not effectively combat the severity and/or duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, and
have resulted in a myriad of impacts on the Company’s businesses. Those primary drivers are beyond the Company’s knowledge and control. As a result, the
impact COVID-19 will have on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be
adverse and material.
The Company’s current expectations described above are forward-looking statements. Please see “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this 10-K and the
“Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” in this 10-K for information regarding important factors that may cause the Company’s actual
results to differ from those currently projected and/or otherwise materially affect the Company.
73

Segment Analysis
The following discussion of segment operating results is presented based on the Company’s reportable segments in accordance with the accounting guidance for
segment reporting and is consistent with the segment disclosure in Note 17 ‘‘Segment Reporting’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The Company has three operating segments, Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC, as well as a Corporate/Other segment. The Company’s
segments maintain separate financial information, and the Company’s chief operating decision maker (the “CODM”) evaluates the segments’ operating results on a
regular basis in deciding how to allocate resources among the segments and in assessing segment performance. The CODM evaluates the performance of the
Company’s segments based on adjusted operating income, which is defined as operating income (GAAP measure) excluding the impact of amortization of
intangible assets and other items, if any, that neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business
performance. See the reconciliations of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income below for further context regarding the items excluded
from operating income in determining adjusted operating income. The Company uses adjusted operating income as its principal measure of segment performance
as it enhances the Company’s ability to compare past financial performance with current performance and analyze underlying business performance and trends.
Non-GAAP financial measures the Company discloses, such as consolidated adjusted operating income, should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to,
financial measures determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP.
The following is a reconciliation of financial measures of the Company’s segments to the consolidated totals:
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy
Services 
Retail/ 
LTC
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations 
Consolidated 
Totals
2021
Total revenues
$
82,186 $
153,022 $
100,105 $
721 
$
(43,923)
$
292,111 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,012 
6,859 
7,623 
(1,471)
(711)
17,312 
2020
Total revenues
75,467 
141,938 
91,198 
426 
(40,323)
268,706 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
6,188 
5,688 
6,146 
(1,306)
(708)
16,008 
2019
Total revenues
69,604 
141,491 
86,608 
512 
(41,439)
256,776 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,202 
5,129 
6,705 
(1,000)
(697)
15,339 
(1) Total revenues of the Pharmacy Services segment include approximately $11.6 billion, $10.9 billion and $11.5 billion of retail co-payments for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note
1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about retail co-payments.
(2) Intersegment revenue eliminations relate to intersegment revenue generating activities that occur between the Health Care Benefits segment, the Pharmacy Services segment, and/or the
Retail/LTC segment. Intersegment adjusted operating income eliminations occur when members of Pharmacy Services Segment clients (“PSS members”) enrolled in Maintenance Choice
elect to pick up maintenance prescriptions at one of the Company’s retail pharmacies instead of receiving them through the mail. When this occurs, both the Pharmacy Services and
Retail/LTC segments record the adjusted operating income on a stand-alone basis.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
®
74

The following are reconciliations of consolidated operating income (GAAP measure) to consolidated adjusted operating income, as well as reconciliations of
segment GAAP operating income to segment adjusted operating income:
Year Ended December 31, 2021
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy  
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
3,521 
$
6,667 
$
5,322 $
(1,606)
$
(711)
$
13,193 
Amortization of intangible assets 
1,552 
192 
512 
3 
— 
2,259 
Acquisition-related integration costs 
— 
— 
— 
132 
— 
132 
Store impairments 
— 
— 
1,358 
— 
— 
1,358 
Goodwill impairment 
— 
— 
431 
— 
— 
431 
Acquisition purchase price adjustment outside of
measurement period
(61)
— 
— 
— 
— 
(61)
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
5,012 
$
6,859 
$
7,623 $
(1,471)
$
(711)
$
17,312 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy  
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
5,166 
$
5,454 
$
5,640 $
(1,641)
$
(708)
$
13,911 
Amortization of intangible assets 
1,598 
234 
506 
3 
— 
2,341 
Acquisition-related integration costs 
— 
— 
— 
332 
— 
332 
Gain on divestiture of subsidiary 
(269)
— 
— 
— 
— 
(269)
Receipt of fully reserved ACA risk corridor receivable
(307)
— 
— 
— 
— 
(307)
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
6,188 
$
5,688 
$
6,146 $
(1,306)
$
(708)
$
16,008 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy  
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
Operating income (loss) (GAAP measure)
$
3,639 
$
4,735 
$
5,793 $
(1,483)
$
(697)
$
11,987 
Amortization of intangible assets 
1,563 
394 
476 
3 
— 
2,436 
Acquisition-related integration costs 
— 
— 
— 
480 
— 
480 
Store impairments 
— 
— 
231 
— 
— 
231 
Loss on divestiture of subsidiary 
— 
— 
205 
— 
— 
205 
Adjusted operating income (loss)
$
5,202 
$
5,129 
$
6,705 $
(1,000)
$
(697)
$
15,339 
(1) The Company’s acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets as required under the acquisition method of accounting which consist primarily of trademarks,
customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology, provider networks and value of business acquired. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated
useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in the Company’s GAAP
consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within each segment. Although intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the amortization of intangible
assets does not directly relate to the underwriting of the Company’s insurance products, the services performed for the Company’s customers or the sale of the Company’s products or
services. Additionally, intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of the Company’s acquisition activity. Accordingly, the Company believes
excluding the amortization of intangible assets enhances the Company’s and investors’ ability to compare the Company’s past financial performance with its current performance and to
analyze underlying business performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within the
Company’s GAAP financial statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset
amortization is excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an
intangible asset becomes impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised.
(2) In 2021, 2020 and 2019, acquisition-related integration costs relate to the Company’s acquisition (“Aetna Acquisition”) of Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”). The acquisition-related integration costs are
reflected in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within the Corporate/Other segment.
(3) During the year ended December 31, 2021, the store impairment charge relates to the write down of operating lease right-of-use assets and property and equipment in connection with the
planned closure of approximately 900 retail stores between 2022 and 2024. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the store impairment charges related to the write down of operating
lease right-of-use assets in connection with the planned closure of 68 underperforming retail pharmacy stores in 2019 and 2020. The store impairment charges are reflected in the Company’s
GAAP consolidated statements of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
 (5)
(1)
(2)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(6)
_____________________________________________
75

(4) During the year ended December 31, 2021, the goodwill impairment charge relates to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment.
(5) In June 2021, the Company received $61 million related to a purchase price working capital adjustment for an acquisition completed during the first quarter of 2020. The resolution of this
matter occurred subsequent to the acquisition accounting measurement period and is reflected in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December
31, 2021 as a reduction of operating expenses within the Health Care Benefits segment.
(6) In 2020, the gain on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax gain on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business, which the Company sold on July 31, 2020 for approximately
$850 million. The gain on divestiture is reflected as a reduction of operating expenses in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits
segment. In 2019, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019. The loss on divestiture primarily relates to the
elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income and is reflected in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement of operations in
operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(7) In 2020, the Company received $313 million owed to it under the ACA’s risk corridor program that was previously fully reserved for as payment was uncertain. After considering offsetting
items such as the ACA’s minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rebate requirements and premium taxes, the Company recognized pre-tax income of $307 million in the Company’s GAAP
consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment.
76

Health Care Benefits Segment
The following table summarizes the Health Care Benefits segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2021 vs. 2020
2020 vs. 2019
In millions, except percentages and
basis points (“bps”)
2021
2020
2019
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Premiums
$
76,064
$
69,301
$
63,031
$
6,763
9.8 % $
6,270 
9.9 %
Services
5,536
5,683
5,974
(147)
(2.6)%
(291)
(4.9)%
Net investment income
586
483
599
103
21.3 %
(116)
(19.4)%
Total revenues
82,186
75,467
69,604
6,719
8.9 %
5,863 
8.4 %
Benefit costs
64,662
56,083
53,092
8,579
15.3 %
2,991 
5.6 %
MBR (Benefit costs as a % of
premium revenues)
85.0 
%
80.9 
%
84.2%
410 bps
(330) bps
Operating expenses
$
14,003
$
14,218
$
12,873
$
(215)
(1.5)% $
1,345 
10.4 %
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
17.0 
%
18.8 
%
18.5 
%
Operating income
$
3,521
$
5,166
$
3,639
$
(1,645)
(31.8)% $
1,527 
42.0 %
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
4.3 
%
6.8 
%
5.2 
%
Adjusted operating income 
$
5,012
$
6,188
$
5,202
$
(1,176)
(19.0)% $
986 
19.0 %
Adjusted operating income as a %
of total revenues
6.1 
%
8.2 
%
7.5 
%
Premium revenues (by business):
Government
$
55,739
$
48,928
$
41,818
$
6,811
13.9 % $
7,110
17.0 %
Commercial
20,325
20,373
21,213
(48)
(0.2)%
(840)
(4.0)%
(1)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Health Care Benefits segment, which
represents the Company’s principal measure of segment performance.
Commentary - 2021 compared to 2020
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $6.7 billion, or 8.9%, to $82.2 billion in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily driven by growth in the Government Services business,
partially offset by the unfavorable impact of the repeal of the HIF for 2021 and the absence of the ACA risk corridor receipt.
Medical Benefit Ratio (“MBR”)
•
Medical benefit ratio is calculated as benefit costs divided by premium revenues and represents the percentage of premium revenues spent on medical benefits
for the Company’s Insured members. Management uses MBR to assess the underlying business performance and underwriting of its insurance products,
understand variances between actual results and expected results and identify trends in period-over-period results. MBR provides management and investors
with information useful in assessing the operating results of the Company’s Insured Health Care Benefits products.
•
The MBR increased from 80.9% to 85.0% in 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by higher COVID-19 related costs in 2021
compared to the prior year, including the impact of the deferral of elective procedures and other discretionary utilization in response to the COVID-19
pandemic during 2020 and the repeal of the HIF for 2021, partially offset by improved underlying performance in the current year.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Health Care Benefits segment include selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization expenses.
•
Operating expenses decreased $215 million, or 1.5%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to the repeal of the
HIF for 2021, partially offset by incremental operating expenses to support the growth in the Government Services business described above and the net
impact of the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business sold on July 31, 2020.
(1)
_____________________________________________
77

Adjusted operating income
•
Adjusted operating income decreased $1.2 billion, or 19.0%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in adjusted operating income was primarily driven by
higher COVID-19 related costs in 2021 compared to the prior year, including the impact of the deferral of elective procedures and other discretionary
utilization in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020. The decrease was partially offset by improved performance in the underlying Government
Services business and higher favorable development of prior-years’ health care cost estimates in 2021 compared to the prior year.
The following table summarizes the Health Care Benefits segment’s medical membership as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
2021
2020
In thousands
Insured
ASC
Total
Insured
ASC
Total
Medical membership:
Commercial
3,258 
13,530 
16,788 
3,258 
13,644 
16,902 
Medicare Advantage
2,971 
— 
2,971 
2,705 
— 
2,705 
Medicare Supplement
1,285 
— 
1,285 
1,082 
— 
1,082 
Medicaid
2,333 
471 
2,804 
2,100 
623 
2,723 
Total medical membership
9,847 
14,001 
23,848 
9,145 
14,267 
23,412 
Supplemental membership information:
Medicare Prescription Drug Plan (standalone)
5,777 
5,490 
Medical Membership
•
Medical membership represents the number of members covered by the Company’s Insured and ASC medical products and related services at a specified point
in time. Management uses this metric to understand variances between actual medical membership and expected amounts as well as trends in period-over-
period results. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding the impact of medical membership on segment total
revenues and operating results.
•
Medical membership as of December 31, 2021 of 23.8 million increased 436,000 compared with December 31, 2020, primarily reflecting increases in
Medicare and Medicaid products, partially offset by declines in Commercial self-insured membership.
Medicare Update
On January 15, 2021, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) issued its final notice detailing final 2022 Medicare Advantage benchmark
payment rates. Final 2022 Medicare Advantage rates resulted in an increase in industry benchmark rates of approximately 4.1%.
The ACA ties a portion of each Medicare Advantage plan’s reimbursement to the plan’s “star ratings.” Plans must have a star rating of four or higher (out of five)
to qualify for bonus payments. CMS released the Company’s 2022 star ratings in October 2021. The Company’s 2022 star ratings will be used to determine which
of the Company’s Medicare Advantage plans have ratings of four stars or higher and qualify for bonus payments in 2023. Based on the Company’s membership at
December 31, 2021, 87% of the Company’s Medicare Advantage members were in plans with 2022 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars, compared to 83% of the
Company’s Medicare Advantage members being in plans with 2021 star ratings of at least 4.0 stars based on the Company’s membership at December 31, 2020.
78

Pharmacy Services Segment
The following table summarizes the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2021 vs. 2020
2020 vs. 2019
In millions, except percentages
2021
2020
2019
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
151,851
$
140,950
$
140,946
$
10,901 
7.7 % $
4 
— %
Services
1,171
988
545
183 
18.5 %
443 
81.3 %
Total revenues
153,022
141,938
141,491
11,084 
7.8 %
447 
0.3 %
Cost of products sold
144,894
135,045
135,245
9,849 
7.3 %
(200)
(0.1)%
Operating expenses
1,461
1,439
1,511
22 
1.5 %
(72)
(4.8)%
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
1.0 
%
1.0 
%
1.1 
%
Operating income
$
6,667
$
5,454
$
4,735
$
1,213 
22.2 % $
719 
15.2 %
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
4.4 
%
3.8 
%
3.3 
%
Adjusted operating income 
$
6,859
$
5,688
$
5,129
$
1,171 
20.6 % $
559 
10.9 %
Adjusted operating income as a %
of total revenues
4.5 
%
4.0 
%
3.6 
%
Revenues (by distribution channel):
Pharmacy network 
$
91,715
$
85,045
$
88,755
$
6,670 
7.8 % $
(3,710)
(4.2)%
Mail choice 
60,547
56,071
52,141
4,476 
8.0 %
3,930 
7.5 %
Other
760
822
595
(62)
(7.5)%
227 
38.2 %
Pharmacy claims processed:
Total
2,244.7
2,112.9
2,014.2
131.8 
6.2 %
98.7 
4.9 %
Pharmacy network 
1,914.0
1,790.1
1,704.0
123.9 
6.9 %
86.1 
5.1 %
Mail choice 
330.7
322.8
310.2
7.9 
2.4 %
12.6 
4.1 %
Generic dispensing rate: 
Total
86.8 
%
88.2 
%
88.2 
%
Pharmacy network 
87.0 
%
88.7 
%
88.7 
%
Mail choice 
85.6 
%
85.3 
%
85.1 
%
(1) See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Pharmacy Services segment, which represents
the Company’s principal measure of segment performance.
(2) Pharmacy network is defined as claims filled at retail and specialty retail pharmacies, including the Company’s retail pharmacies and LTC pharmacies, but excluding Maintenance Choice
activity, which is included within the mail choice category. Maintenance Choice permits eligible client plan members to fill their maintenance prescriptions through mail order delivery or at
a CVS Pharmacy retail store for the same price as mail order.
(3) Mail choice is defined as claims filled at a Pharmacy Services mail order facility, which includes specialty mail claims inclusive of Specialty Connect  claims picked up at a retail pharmacy,
as well as prescriptions filled at the Company’s retail pharmacies under the Maintenance Choice program.
(4) Includes an adjustment to convert 90-day prescriptions to the equivalent of three 30-day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects the fact that these prescriptions include approximately three
times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
Commentary - 2021 compared to 2020
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $11.1 billion, or 7.8%, to $153.0 billion in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased pharmacy claims
volume, growth in specialty pharmacy and brand inflation, partially offset by continued price compression.
(1)
(2)
(3)
 (4)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2)
(3)
_____________________________________________
®
®
79

Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Pharmacy Services segment include selling, general and administrative expenses; depreciation and amortization expense; and
expenses related to specialty retail pharmacies, which include store and administrative payroll, employee benefits and occupancy costs.
•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained consistent at 1.0% in both 2021 and 2020.
Adjusted operating income
•
Adjusted operating income increased $1.2 billion, or 20.6%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in adjusted operating income was primarily driven by
improved purchasing economics which reflected increased contributions from the products and services of the Company’s group purchasing organization and
specialty pharmacy (including pharmacy and/or administrative services for providers and Covered Entities). These increases were partially offset by continued
price compression.
•
As you review the Pharmacy Services segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The Company’s efforts to (i) retain existing clients, (ii) obtain new business and (iii) maintain or improve the rebates, fees and/or discounts the
Company receives from manufacturers, wholesalers and retail pharmacies continue to have an impact on adjusted operating income. In particular,
competitive pressures in the PBM industry have caused the Company and other PBMs to continue to share with clients a larger portion of rebates,
fees and/or discounts received from pharmaceutical manufacturers. In addition, marketplace dynamics and regulatory changes have limited the
Company’s ability to offer plan sponsors pricing that includes retail network “differential” or “spread,” and the Company expects these trends to
continue. The “differential” or “spread” is any difference between the drug price charged to plan sponsors, including Medicare Part D plan sponsors,
by a PBM and the price paid for the drug by the PBM to the dispensing provider.
Pharmacy claims processed
•
Total pharmacy claims processed represents the number of prescription claims processed through our pharmacy benefits manager and dispensed by either our
retail network pharmacies or our own mail and specialty pharmacies. Management uses this metric to understand variances between actual claims processed
and expected amounts as well as trends in period-over-period results. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding
the impact of pharmacy claim volume on segment total revenues and operating results.
•
The Company’s pharmacy network claims processed on a 30-day equivalent basis increased 6.9% to 1.9 billion claims in 2021 compared to 1.8 billion claims
in 2020. The increase in pharmacy network claims processed was primarily driven by net new business and COVID-19 vaccinations, as well as increased new
therapy prescriptions, which were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020.
•
The Company’s mail choice claims processed on a 30-day equivalent basis increased 2.4% to 330.7 million claims in 2021 compared to 322.8 million claims
in 2020. The increase in mail choice claims was primarily driven by net new business and the continued adoption of Maintenance Choice offerings.
•
Excluding the impact of COVID-19 vaccinations, total pharmacy claims processed increased 4.2%, on a 30-day equivalent basis, in 2021 compared to the prior
year.
Generic dispensing rate
•
Generic dispensing rate is calculated by dividing the Pharmacy Services segment’s generic drug prescriptions processed or filled by its total prescriptions
processed or filled. Management uses this metric to evaluate the effectiveness of the business at encouraging the use of generic drugs when they are available
and clinically appropriate, which aids in decreasing costs for client members and retail customers. This metric provides management and investors with
information useful in understanding trends in segment total revenues and operating results.
•
The Pharmacy Services segment’s total generic dispensing rate decreased to 86.8% in 2021 compared to 88.2% in the prior year. The decrease in the
segment’s generic dispensing rate was primarily driven by an increase in brand prescriptions, largely attributable to COVID-19 vaccinations in 2021.
Excluding the impact of COVID-19 vaccinations, the segment’s total generic dispensing rate increased to 88.5% in 2021.
80

Retail/LTC Segment
The following table summarizes the Retail/LTC segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2021 vs. 2020
2020 vs. 2019
In millions, except percentages
2021
2020
2019
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Products
$
95,652
$
89,944
$
85,729
$
5,708 
6.3 % $
4,215 
4.9 %
Services
4,436
1,254
879
3,182 
253.7 %
375 
42.7 %
Net investment income
17
—
—
17 
100.0 %
— 
— %
Total revenues
100,105
91,198
86,608
8,907 
9.8 %
4,590 
5.3 %
Cost of products sold
72,832
67,284
62,688
5,548 
8.2 %
4,596 
7.3 %
Store impairments
1,358
—
231
1,358 
100.0 %
(231)
(100.0)%
Goodwill impairment
431
—
—
431 
100.0 %
— 
— %
Operating expenses
20,162
18,274
17,896
1,888 
10.3 %
378 
2.1 %
Operating expenses as a % of total
revenues
20.1 
%
20.0 
%
20.7 
%
Operating income
$
5,322
$
5,640
$
5,793
$
(318)
(5.6)% $
(153)
(2.6)%
Operating income as a % of total
revenues
5.3 
%
6.2 
%
6.7 
%
Adjusted operating income 
$
7,623
$
6,146
$
6,705
$
1,477 
24.0 % $
(559)
(8.3)%
Adjusted operating income as a %
of total revenues
7.6 
%
6.7 
%
7.7 
%
Revenues (by major goods/service
lines):
Pharmacy
$
76,121
$
70,176
$
66,442
$
5,945 
8.5 % $
3,734 
5.6 %
Front Store
21,315
19,655
19,422
1,660 
8.4 %
233 
1.2 %
Other
2,652
1,367
744
1,285 
94.0 %
623 
83.7 %
Net investment income
17
—
—
17 
100.0 %
— 
— %
Prescriptions filled 
1,587.6
1,465.2
1,417.2
122.4 
8.4 %
48.0 
3.4 %
Same store sales increase: 
Total
8.9 
%
5.6 
%
3.7 
%
Pharmacy
9.3 
%
7.0 
%
4.5 
%
Front Store
7.6 
%
0.9 
%
1.1 
%
Prescription volume 
9.3 
%
4.7 
%
7.2 
%
Generic dispensing rate 
85.7 
%
88.3 
%
88.3 
%
(1)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of operating income (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating income for the Retail/LTC segment, which represents the
Company’s principal measure of segment performance.
(2)
Includes an adjustment to convert 90‑day prescriptions to the equivalent of three 30‑day prescriptions. This adjustment reflects the fact that these prescriptions include approximately
three times the amount of product days supplied compared to a normal prescription.
(3)
Same store sales and prescription volume represent the change in revenues and prescriptions filled in the Company’s retail pharmacy stores that have been operating for greater than one
year, expressed as a percentage that indicates the increase or decrease relative to the comparable prior period. Same store metrics exclude revenues from MinuteClinic, revenues and
prescriptions from LTC operations and, in 2019, revenues and prescriptions from stores in Brazil. Management uses these metrics to evaluate the performance of existing stores on a
comparable basis and to inform future decisions regarding existing stores and new locations. Same-store metrics provide management and investors with information useful in
understanding the portion of current revenues and prescriptions resulting from organic growth in existing locations versus the portion resulting from opening new stores.
Commentary - 2021 compared to 2020
Revenues
•
Total revenues increased $8.9 billion, or 9.8%, to $100.1 billion in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased prescription and
front store volume, the administration of COVID-19 vaccinations and diagnostic testing, as well as brand inflation. These increases were partially offset by
continued pharmacy reimbursement pressure and the impact of recent generic introductions. COVID-19 vaccinations, diagnostic testing and OTC test kit sales
contributed approximately 45% of the increase in the segment’s revenues in 2021 compared to the prior year. The prior year reflected
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
81

the ongoing expansion of the Company’s diagnostic testing program which began in April 2020, an immaterial impact from COVID-19 vaccinations which
began in December 2020 and no OTC test kit sales.
•
Pharmacy same store sales increased 9.3% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was driven by the 9.3% increase in pharmacy same store prescription
volume on a 30-day equivalent basis and brand inflation. These increases were partially offset by continued pharmacy reimbursement pressure and the impact
of recent generic introductions.
•
Front store same store sales increased 7.6% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to strength in consumer health, including the sale of
OTC test kits, as well as increased beauty and personal care sales in 2021.
•
Other revenues increased 94.0% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased COVID-19 diagnostic testing in 2021.
Store impairments
•
During 2021, the Company recorded a store impairment charge of approximately $1.4 billion related to the write-down of operating lease right-of-use assets
and property and equipment in connection with the planned closure of approximately 900 retail stores between 2022 and 2024. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included
in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Goodwill impairment
•
During 2021, the Company recorded a $431 million goodwill impairment charge related to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment. See Note 5
‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information.
Operating expenses
•
Operating expenses in the Retail/LTC segment include store payroll, store employee benefits, store occupancy costs, selling expenses, advertising expenses,
depreciation and amortization expense and certain administrative expenses.
•
Operating expenses increased $1.9 billion, or 10.3%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to incremental costs associated with increased
volume including COVID-19 vaccinations and diagnostic testing, as well as increased investments in the segment’s capabilities and colleague compensation
and benefits. These increases were partially offset by gains from anti-trust legal settlements of $231 million recorded in 2021, the absence of incremental
expenses associated with the Company’s initial COVID-19 pandemic mitigation efforts incurred in 2020 and the impact of cost savings initiatives in 2021.
•
Operating expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained relatively consistent at 20.1% and 20.0% in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Adjusted operating income
•
Adjusted operating income increased $1.5 billion, or 24.0%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in adjusted operating income was primarily driven by the
administration of COVID-19 vaccinations and diagnostic testing, the increased prescription and front store volume described above, improved generic drug
purchasing and gains from anti-trust legal settlements of $231 million recorded in 2021. These increases were partially offset by continued pharmacy
reimbursement pressure and increased investments in the segment’s capabilities and colleague compensation and benefits.
•
As you review the Retail/LTC segment’s performance in this area, you should consider the following important information about the business:
•
The segment’s adjusted operating income benefited from the administration of COVID-19 vaccinations, diagnostic testing and OTC test kit sales
which contributed approximately 30% of the segment’s adjusted operating income in 2021.
•
The segment’s adjusted operating income has been adversely affected by the efforts of managed care organizations, PBMs and governmental and
other third-party payors to reduce their prescription drug costs, including the use of restrictive networks, as well as changes in the mix of business
within the pharmacy portion of the Retail/LTC segment. If the pharmacy reimbursement pressure accelerates, the segment may not be able to grow
revenues, and its adjusted operating income could be adversely affected.
•
The increased use of generic drugs has positively impacted the segment’s adjusted operating income but has resulted in third-party payors
augmenting their efforts to reduce reimbursement payments to retail pharmacies for prescriptions. This trend, which the Company expects to
continue, reduces the benefit the segment realizes from brand-to-generic drug conversions.
Prescriptions filled
•
Prescriptions filled represents the number of prescriptions dispensed through the Retail/LTC segment’s pharmacies. Management uses this metric to
understand variances between actual prescriptions dispensed and expected amounts as well
82

as trends in period-over-period results. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding the impact of prescription
volume on segment total revenues and operating results.
•
Prescriptions filled increased 8.4%, on a 30-day equivalent basis, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily driven by COVID-19 vaccinations and the continued
adoption of patient care programs, as well as increased new therapy prescriptions, which were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Excluding the impact of COVID-19 vaccinations, prescriptions filled increased 4.3%, on a 30-day equivalent basis, in 2021 compared to the prior year.
Generic dispensing rate
•
Generic dispensing rate is calculated by dividing the Retail/LTC segment’s generic drug prescriptions filled by its total prescriptions filled. Management uses
this metric to evaluate the effectiveness of the business at encouraging the use of generic drugs when they are available and clinically appropriate, which aids
in decreasing costs for client members and retail customers. This metric provides management and investors with information useful in understanding trends in
segment total revenues and operating results.
•
The Retail/LTC segment’s generic dispensing rate decreased to 85.7% in 2021 compared to 88.3% in the prior year. The decrease in the segment’s generic
dispensing rate was primarily driven by an increase in brand prescriptions, largely attributable to COVID-19 vaccinations in 2021. Excluding the impact of
COVID-19 vaccinations, the segment’s total generic dispensing rate increased to 89.0% in 2021.
83

Corporate/Other Segment
The following table summarizes the Corporate/Other segment’s performance for the respective periods:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2021 vs. 2020
2020 vs. 2019
In millions, except percentages
2021
2020
2019
$
%
$
%
Revenues:
Premiums
$
68 $
63
$
91
$
5 
7.9 % $
(28)
(30.8)%
Services
57 
48
9
9 
18.8 %
39 
433.3 %
Net investment income
596 
315
412
281 
89.2 %
(97)
(23.5)%
Total revenues
721 
426
512
295 
69.2 %
(86)
(16.8)%
Cost of products sold
37 
—
—
37 
100.0 %
— 
— %
Benefit costs
212 
221
285
(9)
(4.1)%
(64)
(22.5)%
Operating expenses
2,078 
1,846
1,710
232 
12.6 %
136 
8.0 %
Operating loss
(1,606)
(1,641)
(1,483)
35 
2.1 %
(158)
(10.7)%
Adjusted operating loss
(1,471)
(1,306)
(1,000)
(165)
(12.6)%
(306)
(30.6)%
(1)
See “Segment Analysis” above in this MD&A for a reconciliation of Corporate/Other segment operating loss (GAAP measure) to adjusted operating loss, which represents the Company’s
principal measure of segment performance.
Commentary - 2021 compared to 2020
Revenues
•
Revenues primarily relate to products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers, such as large case pensions and long-term care
insurance products.
•
Total revenues increased $295 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher net investment income, primarily driven by
private equity investments and increased net realized capital gains in 2021 compared to 2020.
Adjusted operating loss
•
Adjusted operating loss increased $165 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher employee benefit costs and
incremental operating expenses associated with the Company’s investments in transformation, partially offset by the increase in net investment income in 2021
described above.
 (1)
_____________________________________________
84

Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The Company maintains a level of liquidity sufficient to allow it to meet its cash needs in the short-term. Over the long term, the Company manages its cash and
capital structure to maximize shareholder return, maintain its financial condition and maintain flexibility for future strategic initiatives. The Company continuously
assesses its regulatory capital requirements, working capital needs, debt and leverage levels, debt maturity schedule, capital expenditure requirements, dividend
payouts, potential share repurchases and future investments or acquisitions. The Company believes its operating cash flows, commercial paper program, credit
facilities, as well as any potential future borrowings, will be sufficient to fund these future payments and long-term initiatives. As of December 31, 2021, the
Company had approximately $9.4 billion in cash and cash equivalents, approximately $3.8 billion of which was held by the parent company or nonrestricted
subsidiaries.
The net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Change
Year Ended December 31,
2021 vs. 2020
2020 vs. 2019
In millions
2021
2020
2019
$
%
$
%
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
18,265 $
15,865 $
12,848 $
2,400 
15.1 % $
3,017 
23.5 %
Net cash used in investing activities
(5,261)
(5,534)
(3,339)
273 
4.9 %
(2,195)
(65.7)%
Net cash used in financing activities
(11,356)
(7,696)
(7,654)
(3,660)
(47.6)%
(42)
(0.5)%
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash $
1,648 $
2,635 $
1,855 $
(987)
(37.5)% $
780 
42.0 %
Commentary - 2021 compared to 2020
•
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $2.4 billion in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the timing of payments and higher operating
income in the Retail/LTC segment. The increase was partially offset by reduced benefit costs due to the deferral of elective procedures and other discretionary
utilization in the Health Care Benefits segment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which favorably impacted operating cash flows in 2020 and did not
recur during the current year.
•
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $273 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to increased proceeds from the sale and maturity of
investments and a decrease in cash used for acquisitions, partially offset by the absence of $840 million in proceeds from the sale of the Workers’
Compensation business in 2020 and increased purchases of investments during 2021 compared to the prior year. In addition, cash used in investing activities
reflected the following activity:
•
Gross capital expenditures remained relatively consistent at approximately $2.5 billion and $2.4 billion in 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2021,
approximately 64% of the Company’s total capital expenditures were for technology, digital and other strategic initiatives and 36% were for store,
fulfillment and support facilities expansion and improvements.
•
Net cash used in financing activities increased to $11.4 billion in 2021 compared to $7.7 billion in 2020. The increase in cash used in finance activities
primarily related to lower proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt, partially offset by lower repayments of long-term debt during 2021 compared to the
prior year.
Included in net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was the following store development activity: 
2021
2020
2019
Total stores (beginning of year)
9,962 
9,896 
9,921 
New and acquired stores 
58 
156 
102 
Closed stores 
(81)
(90)
(127)
Total stores (end of year)
9,939 
9,962 
9,896 
Relocated stores 
17 
18 
23 
(1)
Includes retail drugstores and pharmacies within retail chains, primarily in Target Corporation (“Target”) stores.
(1)
(2)
(2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
85

(2)
Relocated stores are not included in new and acquired stores or closed stores totals.
Short-term Borrowings
Commercial Paper and Back-up Credit Facilities
The Company did not have any commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2021 or 2020. In connection with its commercial paper program, the Company
maintains a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 17, 2023, a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up
revolving credit facility, which expires on May 16, 2024, and a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 11, 2026.
The credit facilities allow for borrowings at various rates that are dependent, in part, on the Company’s public debt ratings and require the Company to pay a
weighted average quarterly facility fee of approximately 0.03%, regardless of usage. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding
under any of the Company’s back-up credit facilities.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”)
A subsidiary of the Company is a member of the FHLBB. As a member, the subsidiary has the ability to obtain cash advances, subject to certain minimum
collateral requirements. The maximum borrowing capacity available from the FHLBB as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $995 million. At both
December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no outstanding advances from the FHLBB.
Long-term Borrowings
2021 Notes
On August 18, 2021, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.125% unsecured senior notes due September 15, 2031 for total proceeds of
$987 million, net of discounts, underwriting fees and offering expenses. The net proceeds of this offering were used for the purchase of senior notes in connection
with the Company’s cash tender offer in August 2021 as described below.
2020 Notes
On December 16, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027 and $1.25 billion
aggregate principal amount of 1.875% unsecured senior notes due February 28, 2031 for total proceeds of approximately $1.99 billion, net of discounts and
underwriting fees. The $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes represent a further issuance of the Company’s 1.3% unsecured
senior notes due August 21, 2027 initially issued in an aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion on August 21, 2020.
On August 21, 2020, the Company issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027, $1.25 billion aggregate
principal amount of 1.75% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2030 and $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.7% unsecured senior notes due August
21, 2040 (collectively, the “August 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.97 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
On March 31, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.625% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2027, $1.5 billion aggregate
principal amount of 3.75% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2030, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.125% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2040
and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2050 (collectively, the “March 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of
approximately $3.95 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
The net proceeds of these offerings were used for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, as well as the repurchase
and/or repayment of indebtedness.
During March 2020, the Company entered into several interest rate swap transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were designated as cash flow
hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the anticipated issuance of the
March 2020 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the March 2020 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The Company paid a net
amount of $7 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $5 million in accumulated other comprehensive
income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the March 2020 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ included in Item 8 of this
10-K for additional information.
86

Early Extinguishments of Debt
In December 2021, the Company redeemed for cash the remaining $2.3 billion of its outstanding 3.7% senior notes due 2023. In connection with the early
redemption of such senior notes, the Company paid a make-whole premium of $80 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
redeemed, wrote-off $8 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $1 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$89 million.
In August 2021, the Company purchased approximately $2.0 billion of its outstanding 4.3% senior notes due 2028 through a cash tender offer. In connection with
the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $332 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
purchased, wrote-off $26 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $5 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$363 million.
In December 2020, the Company purchased $4.5 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the
following: $113 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $1.4 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023, $1.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025 and
$2.0 billion of its 4.3% senior notes due 2028. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $619 million in excess of the
aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, wrote-off $45 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $10 million in fees,
for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of $674 million.
In August 2020, the Company purchased $6.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$723 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $2.3 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023 and $3.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025. In connection with
the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $706 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
purchased, wrote-off $47 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $13 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$766 million.
In August 2019, the Company purchased $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$1.3 billion of its 3.125% senior notes due 2020, $723 million of its floating rate notes due 2020, $328 million of its 4.125% senior notes due 2021, $297 million of
4.125% senior notes due 2021 issued by Aetna, $413 million of 5.45% senior notes due 2021 issued by Coventry Health Care, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Aetna, and $962 million of its 3.35% senior notes due 2021. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $76 million in
excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, incurred $8 million in fees and recognized a net gain of $5 million on the write-
off of net unamortized deferred financing premiums, for a net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million.
See Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ and Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information about debt
issuances, debt repayments, share repurchases and dividend payments.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments in order to manage interest rate and foreign exchange risk and credit exposure. The Company’s use of these
derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, forward contracts, futures contracts,
warrants, put options and credit default swaps.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s back-up revolving credit facilities, unsecured senior notes and unsecured floating rate notes (see Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K) contain customary restrictive financial and operating covenants. These covenants do not include an acceleration of the Company’s
debt maturities in the event of a downgrade in the Company’s credit ratings. The Company does not believe the restrictions contained in these covenants materially
affect its financial or operating flexibility. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants.
Debt Ratings 
As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s long-term debt was rated “Baa2” by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. (“Moody’s”) and “BBB” by Standard & Poor’s
Financial Services LLC (“S&P”), and its commercial paper program was rated “P-2” by Moody’s and “A-2” by S&P. The outlook on the Company’s long-term
debt is “Stable” by Moody’s and “Positive” by S&P. In assessing the Company’s credit strength, the Company believes that both Moody’s and S&P considered,
among other things, the Company’s capital structure and financial policies as well as its consolidated balance sheet, its historical acquisition activity
87

and other financial information. Although the Company currently believes its long-term debt ratings will remain investment grade, it cannot guarantee the future
actions of Moody’s and/or S&P. The Company’s debt ratings have a direct impact on its future borrowing costs, access to capital markets and new store operating
lease costs.
Share Repurchase Programs
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock. See Note 12 ‘‘Shareholders’ Equity’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on the Company’s share repurchase program.
Quarterly Cash Dividend
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the quarterly cash dividend was $0.50 per share. In December 2021, CVS Health Corporation’s Board of Directors (the “Board”)
authorized a 10% increase in the quarterly cash dividend to $0.55 per share effective in 2022. CVS Health Corporation has paid cash dividends every quarter since
becoming a public company. Future dividends will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered
relevant by the Board.
Future Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes certain estimated future cash requirements under the Company’s various contractual obligations at December 31, 2021, in total
and disaggregated into current and long-term obligations. The table below does not include future payments of claims to health care providers or pharmacies
because certain terms of these payments are not determinable at December 31, 2021 (for example, the timing and volume of future services provided under fee-for-
service arrangements and future membership levels for capitated arrangements).
In millions
Total
Current
Long-Term
Operating lease liabilities 
$
26,070 $
2,685 $
23,385 
Finance lease liabilities 
2,068 
122 
1,946 
Contractual lease obligations with Target 
2,419 
— 
2,419 
Long-term debt 
55,443 
4,154 
51,289 
Interest payments on long-term debt 
31,668 
2,196 
29,472 
Other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets 
Future policy benefits
5,553 
416 
5,137 
Unpaid claims
1,589 
324 
1,265 
Policyholders’ funds 
1,761 
1,266 
495 
Total
$
126,571 $
11,163 $
115,408 
(1)
Refer to Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the maturity of lease liabilities under operating and finance leases.
(2)
The Company leases pharmacy and clinic space from Target. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the lease arrangements with Target.
Amounts related to such operating and finance leases are reflected within the operating lease liabilities and finance lease liabilities in the table above. Pharmacy lease amounts due in excess
of the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings are reflected in the table above assuming equivalent stores continue to operate through the term of the arrangements.
(3)
Refer to Note 8 ‘‘Borrowings and Credit Agreements’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information regarding the maturities of debt principal. Interest payments on long-term
debt are calculated using outstanding balances and interest rates in effect on December 31, 2021.
(4)
Payments of other long-term liabilities exclude Separate Accounts liabilities of approximately $5.1 billion because these liabilities are supported by assets that are legally segregated and
are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business.
(5)
Total payments of future policy benefits, unpaid claims and policyholders’ funds include $728 million, $1.6 billion and $186 million, respectively, of reserves for contracts subject to
reinsurance. The Company expects the assuming reinsurance carrier to fund these obligations and has reflected these amounts as reinsurance recoverable assets on the consolidated balance
sheets.
(6)
Customer funds associated with group life and health contracts of approximately $3.0 billion have been excluded from the table above because such funds may be used primarily at the
customer’s discretion to offset future premiums and/or for refunds, and the timing of the related cash flows cannot be determined. Additionally, net unrealized capital gains on debt
securities supporting experience-rated products of $92 million, before tax, have been excluded from the table above.
Restrictions on Certain Payments
In addition to general state law restrictions on payments of dividends and other distributions to stockholders applicable to all corporations, health maintenance
organizations (“HMOs”) and insurance companies are subject to further regulations that, among other things, may require those companies to maintain certain
levels of equity (referred to as surplus) and restrict the
(1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(3)
(4)
 (5)
 (5)
(5) (6)
_____________________________________________
88

amount of dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their equity holders. These regulations are not directly applicable to CVS Health Corporation as a
holding company, since CVS Health Corporation is not an HMO or an insurance company. In addition, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company
made certain undertakings that require prior regulatory approval of dividends by certain of its HMOs and insurance companies. The additional regulations and
undertakings applicable to the Company’s HMO and insurance company subsidiaries are not expected to affect the Company’s ability to service the Company’s
debt, meet other financing obligations or pay dividends, or the ability of any of the Company’s subsidiaries to service their debt or other financing obligations.
Under applicable regulatory requirements and undertakings, at December 31, 2021, the maximum amount of dividends that may be paid by the Company’s
insurance and HMO subsidiaries without prior approval by regulatory authorities was $2.9 billion in the aggregate.
The Company maintains capital levels in its operating subsidiaries at or above targeted and/or required capital levels and dividends amounts in excess of these
levels to meet liquidity requirements, including the payment of interest on debt and stockholder dividends. In addition, at the Company’s discretion, it uses these
funds for other purposes such as funding share and debt repurchase programs, investments in new businesses and other purposes considered advisable.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company held investments of $450 million and $524 million, respectively, that are not accounted for as Separate Accounts
assets but are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business. See Note 3 ‘‘Investments’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K
for additional information on investments related to the 2012 conversion of an existing group annuity contract from a participating to a non-participating contract.
Solvency Regulation
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (the “NAIC”) utilizes risk-based capital (“RBC”) standards for insurance companies that are designed to
identify weakly-capitalized companies by comparing each company’s adjusted surplus to its required surplus (the “RBC Ratio”). The RBC Ratio is designed to
reflect the risk profile of insurance companies. Within certain ratio ranges, regulators have increasing authority to take action as the RBC Ratio decreases. There
are four levels of regulatory action, ranging from requiring an insurer to submit a comprehensive financial plan for increasing its RBC to the state insurance
commissioner to requiring the state insurance commissioner to place the insurer under regulatory control. At December 31, 2021, the RBC Ratio of each of the
Company’s primary insurance subsidiaries was above the level that would require regulatory action. The RBC framework described above for insurers has been
extended by the NAIC to health organizations, including HMOs. Although not all states had adopted these rules at December 31, 2021, at that date, each of the
Company’s active HMOs had a surplus that exceeded either the applicable state net worth requirements or, where adopted, the levels that would require regulatory
action under the NAIC’s RBC rules. External rating agencies use their own capital models and/or RBC standards when they determine a company’s rating.
89

Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares the consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, which require management to make
certain estimates and apply judgment. Estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be
important at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, the Company reviews its accounting policies and how they are applied
and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements. While the Company believes the historical experience, current trends and other factors considered by
management support the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, actual results could
differ from estimates, and such differences could be material.
Significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K. Management believes the following
accounting policies include a higher degree of judgment and/or complexity and, thus, are considered to be critical accounting policies. The Company has discussed
the development and selection of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board (the “Audit Committee”), and the Audit Committee has
reviewed the disclosures relating to them.
Revenue Recognition
Health Care Benefits Segment
Health Care Benefits revenue is principally derived from insurance premiums and fees billed to customers. Revenue is recognized based on customer billings,
which, in the Company’s Commercial business, reflect contracted rates per member and the number of covered members recorded in the Company’s records at the
time the billings are prepared. Billings are generally sent monthly for coverage during the following month. Revenue related to the Company’s Government
business is collected monthly from the U.S. federal government and various government agencies based on fixed payment rates and member eligibility.
The Company’s billings may be subsequently adjusted to reflect enrollment changes due to member terminations or other factors. These adjustments are known as
retroactivity adjustments. In each period, the Company estimates the amount of future retroactivity and adjusts the recorded revenue accordingly. As information
regarding actual retroactivity amounts becomes known, the Company refines its estimates and records any required adjustments to revenues in the period in which
they arise. A significant difference in the actual level of retroactivity compared to estimated levels would have a significant effect on the Company’s operating
results.
Premium Revenue
Premiums are recognized as revenue in the month in which the enrollee is entitled to receive health care services. Premiums are reported net of an allowance for
estimated terminations and uncollectible amounts. Additionally, premium revenue subject to the MLR rebate requirements of the ACA is recorded net of the
estimated minimum MLR rebates for the current calendar year. Premiums related to unexpired contractual coverage periods (unearned premiums) are reported as
other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue when earned.
Some of the Company’s contracts allow for premiums to be adjusted to reflect actual experience or the relative health status of Insured members. Such adjustments
are reasonably estimable at the outset of the contract, and adjustments to those estimates are made based on actual experience of the customer emerging under the
contract and the terms of the underlying contract.
Services Revenue
Services revenue relates to contracts that can include various combinations of services or series of services which generally are capable of being distinct and
accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Health Care Benefits segment’s services revenue primarily consists of ASC fees received in exchange for
performing certain claim processing and member services for ASC members. ASC fee revenue is recognized over the period the service is provided. Some of the
Company’s administrative services contracts include guarantees with respect to certain functions, such as customer service response time, claim processing
accuracy and claim processing turnaround time, as well as certain guarantees that a plan sponsor’s benefit claim experience will fall within a certain range. With
any of these guarantees, the Company is financially at risk if the conditions of the arrangements are not met, although the maximum amount at risk typically is
limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company by the customer involved. Each period the Company estimates its obligations under the terms
of these guarantees and records its estimate as an offset to services revenues.
90

Accounting for Medicare Part D
Revenues include insurance premiums earned by the Company’s PDPs, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements
with CMS. The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP member, and can be subsidized by CMS in the case of
low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially recorded within other insurance liabilities and are then
recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
Revenues also include a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design referred to as the risk corridor. The Company estimates variable consideration
in the form of amounts payable to, or receivable from, CMS under the risk corridor, and adjusts revenue based on calculations of additional subsidies to be received
from or owed to CMS at the end of the reporting year.
In addition to Medicare Part D premiums, the Company receives additional payments each month from CMS related to catastrophic reinsurance, low-income cost-
sharing subsidies and coverage gap benefits. If the subsidies received differ from the amounts earned from actual prescriptions transferred, the difference is
recorded in either accounts receivable, net or accrued expenses.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail
pharmacy network. The Company’s pharmacy benefit arrangements are accounted for in a manner consistent with a master supply arrangement as there are no
contractual minimum volumes and each prescription is considered a separate purchasing decision and distinct performance obligation transferred at a point in time.
PBM services performed in connection with each prescription claim are considered part of a single performance obligation which culminates in the dispensing of
prescription drugs.
The Company recognizes revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with its clients when the Company has concluded it controls the
prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. The Company controls prescriptions dispensed indirectly through its retail pharmacy network
because it has separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, has discretion in setting the price for the transaction and assumes primary responsibility
for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to its client plan members while also performing the related PBM services.
Revenues include (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Company, net of any discounts earned on brand name drugs or other discounts and
refunds paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” and “Guarantees” below), (ii) the price paid to the Company by client plan members for mail order
prescriptions and the price paid to retail network pharmacies by client plan members for retail prescriptions (“retail co-payments”), and (iii) claims based
administrative fees for retail pharmacy network contracts. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the prescription drugs is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company
expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those prescription drugs. The Company has established the following revenue recognition policies for the
Pharmacy Services segment:
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by mail service dispensing pharmacies are recognized when the prescription drug is delivered to the client
plan member. At the time of delivery, the Company has performed substantially all of its performance obligations under its client contracts and does not
experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Company’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are
recognized at the Company’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Company’s online claims processing system and the Company has
transferred control of the prescription drug and completed all of its performance obligations.
For contracts under which the Company acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client plan member, revenue is recognized
using the net method.
Drug Discounts
The Company records revenue net of manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients based on their plan members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. The
Company estimates these rebates at period-end based on actual and estimated claims data and its estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients. The
estimates are based on the best available data at period-end and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates due to the client. The
Company adjusts its rebates
91

payable to clients to the actual amounts paid when these rebates are paid or as significant events occur. Any cumulative effect of these adjustments is recorded
against revenues at the time it is identified. Adjustments generally result from contract changes with clients or manufacturers that have retroactive rebate
adjustments, differences between the estimated and actual product mix subject to rebates, or whether the brand name drug was included in the applicable
formulary. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual manufacturers’ rebate amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or
financial condition.
Guarantees
The Company also adjusts revenues for refunds owed to clients resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined service and performance
metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual pricing
and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Retail/LTC Segment
Retail Pharmacy
The Company’s retail drugstores recognize revenue at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. For pharmacy sales, each prescription claim is its
own arrangement with the customer and is a performance obligation, separate and distinct from other prescription claims under other retail network arrangements.
Revenues are adjusted for refunds owed to third party payers resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined value-based service and
performance metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and
actual pricing and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Revenue from Company gift cards purchased by customers is deferred as a contract liability until goods or services are transferred. Any amounts not expected to be
redeemed by customers (i.e., breakage) are recognized based on historical redemption patterns.
Customer returns are not material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
Loyalty and Other Programs
The Company’s customer loyalty program, ExtraCare , consists of two components, ExtraSavings
 and ExtraBucks  Rewards. ExtraSavings are coupons that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue when redeemed as the Company concluded that they do not represent a promise to the customer to deliver additional goods or
services at the time of issuance because they are not tied to a specific transaction or spending level.
ExtraBucks Rewards are accumulated by customers based on their historical spending levels. Thus, the Company has determined that there is an additional
performance obligation to those customers at the time of the initial transaction. The Company allocates the transaction price to the initial transaction and the
ExtraBucks Rewards transaction based upon the relative standalone selling price, which considers historical redemption patterns for the rewards. Revenue allocated
to ExtraBucks Rewards is recognized as those rewards are redeemed. At the end of each period, unredeemed ExtraBucks Rewards are reflected as a contract
liability.
The Company also offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass , under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course
of the subscription period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. Subscriptions are paid for on a monthly or annual
basis at the time of or in advance of the Company delivering the goods and services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as the performance
obligations are satisfied.
Long-term Care
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects
to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Each prescription claim represents a separate performance obligation of the Company, separate
and distinct from other prescription claims under customer arrangements. A significant portion of long-term care revenue from sales of pharmaceutical and medical
products is reimbursed by the federal Medicare Part D program and, to a lesser extent, state Medicaid programs. The Company monitors its revenues and
receivables from these reimbursement sources, as well as long-term care facilities and other third party insurance payors, and reduces revenue at the revenue
recognition date to properly account for the variable consideration due to anticipated differences between billed and reimbursed amounts. Accordingly, the total
revenues and receivables reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements are recorded at the amount expected to be ultimately received from these
payors.
®
TM
®
®
92

Patient co-payments associated with Medicare Part D, certain state Medicaid programs, Medicare Part B and certain third party payors typically are not collected at
the time products are delivered or services are rendered, but are billed to the individuals as part of normal billing procedures and subject to normal accounts
receivable collections procedures.
Walk-In Medical Clinics
For services provided by the Company’s walk-in medical clinics, revenue recognition occurs for completed services provided to patients, with adjustments taken
for third party payor contractual obligations and patient direct bill historical collection rates.
Impairments of Debt Securities
The Company regularly reviews its debt securities to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value has occurred. If a debt
security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company has the intent to sell the security, or it is more likely than not that the Company will have to sell the
security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost basis of the security is written down to its fair value and the difference is recognized in net
income. If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company does not have the intent to sell and it is more likely than not that the Company will not
have to sell such security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the Company bifurcates the impairment into credit-related and non-credit related components.
The amount of the credit-related component is recorded as an allowance for credit losses and recognized in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related
component is included in other comprehensive income. The Company analyzes all facts and circumstances believed to be relevant for each investment when
performing this analysis, in accordance with applicable accounting guidance.
In evaluating whether a credit related loss exists, the Company considers a variety of factors including: the extent to which the fair value is less than the amortized
cost basis; adverse conditions specifically related to the issuer of a security, an industry or geographic area; the payment structure of the security; the failure of the
issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principle payments; and any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded yield-related impairment losses on debt securities of $42 million and $49 million,
respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not record credit-related impairment losses on debt securities. During the year
ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) losses on debt securities of $24 million.
The risks inherent in assessing the impairment of a debt security include the risk that market factors may differ from projections and the risk that facts and
circumstances factored into the Company’s assessment may change with the passage of time. Unexpected changes to market factors and circumstances that were
not present in past reporting periods are among the factors that may result in a current period decision to sell debt securities that were not impaired in prior
reporting periods.
Vendor Allowances and Purchase Discounts
Vendor and manufacturer receivables were $10.6 billion and $9.8 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, the majority of which relate to purchase
discounts and vendor allowances as described below.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers
and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of
the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase, (ii) a discount for the prompt payment of invoices or (iii) when products are purchased indirectly
from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy), a discount (or rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recognized when
prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of
adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts billed and collected has not been material to the Company’s operating results or
financial condition. The Company accounts for the effect of any such differences as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed.
The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its wholesaler contracts if it exceeds contractually defined purchase volumes. In addition,
the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees
are recorded as a reduction of cost of products sold.
93

Retail/LTC Segment
Vendor allowances received by the Retail/LTC segment reduce the carrying cost of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related
inventory is sold, unless they are specifically identified as a reimbursement of incremental costs for promotional programs and/or other services provided. Amounts
that are directly linked to advertising commitments are recognized as a reduction of advertising expense (included in operating expenses) when the related
advertising commitment is satisfied. Any such allowances received in excess of the actual cost incurred also reduce the carrying cost of inventory. The total value
of any upfront payments received from vendors that are linked to purchase commitments is initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce
cost of products sold over the life of the contract based upon sales volume. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are not linked to
purchase commitments is also initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold on a straight-line basis over the life of the
related contract.
The Company establishes a receivable for vendor income that is earned but not yet received based on historical trends and data. The majority of vendor receivables
are collected within the following fiscal quarter. Historically, adjustments to the Company’s vendor receivables resulting from the reconciliation of receivables
recognized to the amounts collected have not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
There have not been any material changes in the way the Company accounts for vendor allowances or purchase discounts during the past three years.
Inventory
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method.
The value of ending inventory is reduced for estimated inventory losses that have occurred during the interim period between physical inventory counts. Physical
inventory counts are taken on a regular basis in each retail store and LTC pharmacy, and a continuous cycle count process is the primary procedure used to validate
the inventory balances on hand in each distribution center and mail facility to ensure that the amounts reflected in the consolidated financial statements are properly
stated. The Company’s accounting for inventory contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate the inventory losses that have occurred
during the interim period between physical inventory counts. When estimating these losses, a number of factors are considered which include historical physical
inventory results on a location-by-location basis and current physical inventory loss trends.
The total reserve for estimated inventory losses covered by this critical accounting policy was $522 million and $369 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020,
respectively. Although management believes there is sufficient current and historical information available to record reasonable estimates for estimated inventory
losses, it is possible that actual results could differ. In order to help investors assess the aggregate risk, if any, associated with the inventory-related uncertainties
discussed above, a ten percent (10%) pre-tax change in estimated inventory losses, which is a reasonably likely change, would increase or decrease the total reserve
for estimated inventory losses by approximately $52 million as of December 31, 2021.
Although management believes that the estimates discussed above are reasonable and the related calculations conform to generally accepted accounting principles,
actual results could differ from such estimates, and such differences could be material.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
The Company determines if an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of a contract. Right-of-use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying
asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of
the remaining future minimum lease payments. As the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its
incremental borrowing rate, determined by class of underlying asset, to discount the lease payments. The operating lease right-of-use assets also include lease
payments made before commencement and are reduced by lease incentives. The Company evaluates the recoverability of its right-of-use assets as described in
“Long-Lived Asset Impairment” below.
The Company’s real estate leases typically contain options that permit renewals for additional periods of up to five years each. For real estate leases, the options to
extend are not considered reasonably certain at lease commencement because the Company reevaluates each lease on a regular basis to consider the economic and
strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options and
94

regularly opens or closes stores to align with its operating strategy. Generally, the renewal option periods are not included within the lease term and the associated
payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability. Similarly, renewal options are not included in the lease term for non-real
estate leases because they are not considered reasonably certain of being exercised at lease commencement. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not
recorded on the balance sheets, and lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the short-term lease.
For real estate leases, the Company accounts for lease components and nonlease components as a single lease component. Certain real estate leases require
additional payments based on sales volume, as well as reimbursement for real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance, which are expensed as
incurred as variable lease costs. Other real estate leases contain one fixed lease payment that includes real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance.
These fixed payments are considered part of the lease payment and included in the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
Recoverability of Definite-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets, excluding goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are tested for impairment using
separate tests described below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such an asset may not be recoverable. The
Company groups and evaluates these long-lived assets for impairment at the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. If indicators of
impairment are present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group
(undiscounted). If the estimated future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment loss calculation is
prepared. The impairment loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted). If
required, an impairment loss is recorded for the portion of the asset group’s carrying value that exceeds the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted).
The long-lived asset impairment loss calculation contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate each asset group’s future sales, profitability
and cash flows. When preparing these estimates, the Company considers historical results and current operating trends and consolidated sales, profitability and cash
flow results and forecasts. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors including general economic and regulatory conditions, efforts of third party
organizations to reduce their prescription drug costs and/or increased member co-payments, the continued efforts of competitors to gain market share and consumer
spending patterns.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company completed a strategic review of its retail business and announced the creation of new formats for its stores to
continue to drive higher engagement with customers. As part of this review, the Company evaluated changes in population, consumer buying patterns and future
health needs to ensure it has the right kinds of stores in the right locations for consumers and for the business. In connection with this initiative, on November 17,
2021, the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation (the “Board”) authorized the closing of approximately 900 stores over the next three years. The Company
expects to close approximately 300 stores each year between 2022 and 2024. As a result, management determined that there were indicators of impairment with
respect to the impacted stores’ asset groups, including the associated operating lease right-of-use assets and property and equipment. A long-lived asset impairment
test was performed during the fourth quarter of 2021 and the results of the impairment test indicated that the fair value of certain retail store asset groups were
lower than their respective carrying values. Accordingly, in the three months ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a store impairment charge of
approximately $1.4 billion, consisting of a write down of approximately $1.1 billion related to operating lease right-of-use assets and $261 million related to
property and equipment, within the Retail/LTC segment.
There were no material impairment charges recognized on long-lived assets in the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the
Company recorded store impairment charges of $231 million, primarily related to operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges.
Recoverability of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid for acquisitions over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired. Goodwill is subject to annual impairment
reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment on a
reporting unit basis. The impairment test is performed by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value with its net book value (or carrying amount), including
goodwill. The fair value of the reporting units is estimated using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the net book
value (carrying amount) of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the reporting unit’s goodwill is considered to be impaired, and an impairment is recognized in
an amount equal to the excess.
95

The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires the Company to make significant assumptions and estimates. These assumptions and estimates
primarily include the selection of appropriate peer group companies; control premiums and valuation multiples appropriate for acquisitions in the industries in
which the Company competes; discount rates; terminal growth rates; and forecasts of revenue, operating income, depreciation and amortization, income taxes,
capital expenditures and future working capital requirements. When determining these assumptions and preparing these estimates, the Company considers each
reporting unit’s historical results and current operating trends; consolidated revenues, profitability and cash flow results and forecasts; and industry trends. The
Company’s estimates can be affected by a number of factors, including general economic and regulatory conditions; the risk-free interest rate environment; the
Company’s market capitalization; efforts of customers and payers to reduce costs, including their prescription drug costs, and/or increase member co-payments; the
continued efforts of competitors to gain market share, consumer spending patterns and the Company’s ability to achieve its revenue growth projections and execute
on its cost reduction initiatives.
2021 Goodwill Impairment Test
During the third quarter of 2021, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill. The results of the impairment tests indicated an
impairment of the goodwill associated with the LTC reporting unit, as the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeded its fair value as of the testing date. The results
of the impairment tests of the remaining reporting units indicated that there was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date. The fair values of the reporting
units with goodwill exceeded their carrying values by significant margins, with the exception of the Commercial Business reporting unit, which exceeded its
carrying value by approximately 3%.
As discussed in Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K, during 2021, the LTC reporting unit has continued to face challenges
that have impacted the Company’s ability to grow the LTC reporting unit’s business at the rate estimated when its 2020 goodwill impairment test was performed.
These challenges include lower net facility admissions, net long-term care facility customer losses and the prolonged adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
and the emerging new variants, which resulted in more significant declines in occupancy rates experienced by the Company’s long-term care facility customers
than previously anticipated. During the third quarter of 2021, LTC management updated their 2021 annual forecast and submitted their long-term plan which
showed deterioration in the financial results for the remainder of 2021 and beyond. The Company utilized these updated projections in performing its annual
impairment test, which indicated that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than its carrying value, resulting in a $431 million goodwill impairment
charge in the third quarter of 2021. The fair value of the LTC reporting unit was determined using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market
multiple method. Subsequent to the impairment charge recorded in the third quarter of 2021, there is no remaining goodwill balance in the LTC reporting unit.
The Company has experienced declines in its Commercial Insured medical membership subsequent to the closing date of the Aetna Acquisition and may continue
to do so for a number of reasons, including as a result of the competitive Commercial business environment. In addition, COVID-19 and the emerging new variants
have had and may continue to have an adverse impact on medical membership in the Commercial business due to reductions in workforce at existing customers
(including due to business failures) as well as reduced willingness to change benefit providers by prospective customers. The Company’s fair value estimate is
sensitive to significant assumptions including changes in medical membership, revenue growth rate, operating income and the discount rate. Although the
Company believes the financial projections used to determine the fair value of the Commercial Business reporting unit in the third quarter of 2021 were reasonable
and achievable, the challenges described above may affect the Company’s ability to increase medical membership or operating income in the Commercial Business
reporting unit at the rate estimated when such goodwill impairment test was performed and may continue to do so. As of December 31, 2021, the goodwill balance
in the Commercial Business reporting unit was $26.5 billion.
2020 Goodwill Impairment Test
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company performed its required annual impairment test of goodwill. The results of this impairment test indicated that there
was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date. The goodwill impairment test resulted in the fair values of all of the Company’s reporting units exceeding
their carrying values by significant margins, with the exception of the Commercial Business and LTC reporting units, which exceeded their carrying values by
approximately 6% and 12%, respectively.
2019 Goodwill Impairment Test
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company performed its required annual impairment test of goodwill. The results of this impairment test indicated that there
was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date. The goodwill impairment test resulted in the fair values of all of the Company’s reporting units exceeding
their carrying values by significant margins, with the exception of the Commercial Business and LTC reporting units, which exceeded their carrying values by
approximately 4% and 9%, respectively.
96

Recoverability of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to annual impairment reviews, or more frequent reviews if events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value
may not be recoverable. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. If the carrying value of
the asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value.
The indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment loss calculation contains uncertainty since management must use judgment to estimate fair value based on the
assumption that, in lieu of ownership of an intangible asset, the Company would be willing to pay a royalty in order to utilize the benefits of the asset. Fair value is
estimated by discounting the hypothetical royalty payments to their present value over the estimated economic life of the asset. These estimates can be affected by
a number of factors including general economic conditions, availability of market information and the profitability of the Company. There were no impairment
losses recognized on indefinite-lived intangible assets in any of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Health Care Costs Payable
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, 75% and 77% respectively, of health care costs payable are estimates of the ultimate cost of (i) services rendered to the
Company’s Insured members but not yet reported to the Company and (ii) claims which have been reported to the Company but not yet paid (collectively,
“IBNR”). Health care costs payable also include an estimate of the cost of services that will continue to be rendered after the financial statement date if the
Company is obligated to pay for such services in accordance with contractual or regulatory requirements. The remainder of health care costs payable is primarily
comprised of pharmacy and capitation payables, other amounts due to providers pursuant to risk sharing agreements and accruals for state assessments. The
Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions that consider numerous factors. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’
included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on the Company’s reserving methodology.
During 2021 and 2020, the Company observed an increase in completion factors relative to those assumed at the prior year end. After considering the claims paid
in 2021 and 2020 with dates of service prior to the fourth quarter of the previous year, the Company observed assumed incurred claim weighted average
completion factors that were 21 and 4 basis points higher, respectively, than previously estimated, resulting in a decrease of $207 million and $35 million in 2021
and 2020, respectively, in health care costs payable that related to the prior year. The Company has considered the pattern of changes in its completion factors
when determining the completion factors used in its estimates of IBNR as of December 31, 2021. However, based on historical claim experience, it is reasonably
possible that the Company’s estimated weighted average completion factors may vary by plus or minus 13 basis points from the Company’s assumed rates, which
could impact health care costs payable by approximately plus or minus $186 million pretax.
Also during 2021 and 2020, the Company observed that health care costs for claims with claim incurred dates of three months or less before the financial statement
date were lower than previously estimated. Specifically, after considering the claims paid in 2021 and 2020 with claim incurred dates for the fourth quarter of the
previous year, the Company observed health care costs that were 5.0% and 4.0% lower, respectively, for each fourth quarter than previously estimated, resulting in
a reduction of $581 million and $394 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, in health care costs payable that related to prior year.
Management considers historical health care cost trend rates together with its knowledge of recent events that may impact current trends when developing
estimates of current health care cost trend rates. When establishing reserves as of December 31, 2021, the Company increased its assumed health care cost trend
rates for the most recent three months by 1.8% from health care cost trend rates recently observed. Health care cost trend rates during the past two years have been
impacted by utilization changes driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact has not been uniform, with products and select geographies experiencing
utilization impacts due to COVID-19 waves. Based on historical claim experience, it is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimated health care cost trend
rates may vary by plus or minus 3.5% from the assumed rates, which could impact health care costs payable by plus or minus $450 million pretax.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for any temporary differences
between financial and tax reporting bases and are adjusted as needed to reflect changes in the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary
differences reverse. Such adjustments are recorded in the period
97

in which changes in tax laws are enacted, regardless of when they are effective. Deferred tax assets are reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance to the extent
future realization of those losses, deductions or other tax benefits is sufficiently uncertain.
Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes and the related taxes payable and deferred tax assets and liabilities since, in the
ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Additionally, the Company’s tax returns are
subject to audit by various domestic and foreign tax authorities that could result in material adjustments based on differing interpretations of the tax laws. Although
management believes that its estimates are reasonable and are based on the best available information at the time the provision is prepared, actual results could
differ from these estimates resulting in a final tax outcome that may be materially different from that which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
The tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing
authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such positions are then
measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with the related tax authority. Interest and/or
penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the income tax provision. Significant judgment is required in determining uncertain tax positions. The
Company has established accruals for uncertain tax positions using its judgment and adjusts these accruals, as warranted, due to changing facts and circumstances.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for a description of new accounting pronouncements applicable to the Company.
98

Table of Contents
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
The Company’s earnings and financial condition are exposed to interest rate risk, credit quality risk, market valuation risk, foreign currency risk, commodity risk
and operational risk.
Evaluation of Interest Rate and Credit Quality Risk
The Company manages interest rate risk by seeking to maintain a tight match between the durations of assets and liabilities when appropriate. The Company
manages credit quality risk by seeking to maintain high average credit quality ratings and diversified sector exposure within its debt securities portfolio. In
connection with its investment and risk management objectives, the Company also uses derivative financial instruments whose market value is at least partially
determined by, among other things, levels of or changes in interest rates (short-term or long-term), duration, prepayment rates, equity markets or credit
ratings/spreads. The Company’s use of these derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate
locks, forward contracts, futures contracts, warrants, put options and credit default swaps. These instruments, viewed separately, subject the Company to varying
degrees of interest rate, equity price and credit risk. However, when used for hedging, the Company expects these instruments to reduce overall risk.
Investments
The Company’s investment portfolio supported the following products at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
2021
2020
Experience-rated products
$
957 $
1,037 
Remaining products
25,185 
22,775 
Total investments
$
26,142 $
23,812 
Investment risks associated with experience-rated products generally do not impact the Company’s operating results. The risks associated with investments
supporting experience-rated pension and annuity products in the large case pensions business in the Company’s Corporate/Other segment are assumed by the
contract holders and not by the Company (subject to, among other things, certain minimum guarantees). Assets supporting experience-rated products may be
subject to contract holder or participant withdrawals.
The debt securities in the Company’s investment portfolio had an average credit quality rating of A at both December 31, 2021 and 2020, with a fair value of
approximately $6.7 billion and $6.3 billion rated AAA at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fair value of debt securities that were rated below
investment grade (that is, having a credit quality rating below BBB-/Baa3) was $2.3 billion and $1.9 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively (of which
2% at both December 31, 2021 and 2020 supported experience-rated products).
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company held $305 million and $321 million, respectively, of municipal debt securities that were guaranteed by third parties,
representing 1% of total investments at both December 31, 2021 and 2020. These securities had an average credit quality rating of AA at both December 31, 2021
and 2020 with the guarantee. These securities had an average credit quality rating of A at both December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, without the
guarantee. The Company does not have any significant concentration of investments with third party guarantors (either direct or indirect).
The Company generally classifies debt securities as available for sale, and carries them at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. At both December 31, 2021
and 2020, less than 1% of debt securities were valued using inputs that reflect the Company’s assumptions (categorized as Level 3 inputs in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America). See Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K for additional information on
the methodologies and key assumptions used to determine the fair value of investments. For additional information related to investments, see Note 3
‘‘Investments’’ included in Item 8 of this 10-K.
The Company regularly reviews debt securities in its portfolio to determine whether a decline in fair value below the cost basis or carrying value has occurred. If a
debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company has the intent to sell the security, or it is more likely than not that the Company will have to sell the
security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost basis of the security is written down to its fair value and the difference is recognized in net
income. If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company does not have the intent to sell and it is more likely than not that the Company will not
have to sell such security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the Company bifurcates the impairment into credit-related and non-credit related components.
The amount of the credit-related component is recorded as an allowance
99

for credit losses and recognized in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related component is included in other comprehensive income. The impairment of
debt securities is considered a critical accounting policy. See ‘‘Critical Accounting Policies - Impairments of Debt Securities” in the MD&A included in Item 7 of
this 10-K for additional information.
Evaluation of Market Valuation Risks
The Company regularly evaluates its risk from market-sensitive instruments by examining, among other things, levels of or changes in interest rates (short-term or
long-term), duration, prepayment rates, equity markets and/or credit ratings/spreads. The Company also regularly evaluates the appropriateness of investments
relative to management-approved investment guidelines (and operates within those guidelines) and the business objectives of its portfolios.
On a quarterly basis, the Company reviews the impact of hypothetical net losses in its investment portfolio on the Company’s consolidated near-term financial
condition, operating results and cash flows assuming the occurrence of certain reasonably possible changes in near-term market rates and prices. Interest rate
changes (whether resulting from changes in treasury yields or credit spreads or other factors) represent the most material risk exposure category for the
Company. The Company has estimated the impact on the fair value of market sensitive instruments based on the net present value of cash flows using a
representative set of likely future interest rate scenarios. The assumptions used were as follows: an immediate increase of 100 basis points in interest rates (which
the Company believes represents a moderately adverse scenario) for long-term debt issued by the Company, as well as its interest rate sensitive investments and an
immediate decrease of 15% in prices for publicly traded domestic equity securities in the Company’s investment portfolio.
Assuming an immediate increase of 100 basis points in interest rates, the theoretical decline in the fair values of market sensitive instruments at December 31, 2021
is as follows:
•
The fair value of long-term debt issued by the Company would decline by approximately $4.6 billion ($5.8 billion pretax). Changes in the fair value of long-
term debt do not impact the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
•
The theoretical reduction in the fair value of interest rate sensitive investments partially offset by the theoretical reduction in the fair value of interest rate
sensitive liabilities would result in a net decline in fair value of approximately $680 million ($860 million pretax) related to continuing non-experience-rated
products. Reductions in the fair value of investment securities would be reflected as an unrealized loss in equity, as the Company classifies these debt
securities as available for sale. The Company does not record liabilities at fair value.
If the value of the Company’s publicly traded domestic equity securities held within its investment portfolio were to decline by 15%, this would result in a net
decline in fair value of $14 million ($18 million pretax).
Based on overall exposure to interest rate risk and equity price risk, the Company believes that these changes in market rates and prices would not materially affect
consolidated near-term financial condition, operating results or cash flows as of December 31, 2021.
Evaluation of Foreign Currency and Commodity Risk
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any material foreign currency exchange rate or commodity derivative instruments in place and
believes its exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk is not material.
Evaluation of Operational Risks
The Company also faces certain operational risks. Those risks include risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic and risks related to information security, including
cybersecurity.
The spread of COVID-19, or actions taken to mitigate its spread, could have material and adverse effects on our ability to operate our businesses effectively,
including as a result of the complete or partial closure of facilities or labor shortages. Disruptions in our supply chains, our distribution chains and/or public and
private infrastructure, including communications, financial services and supply chains, could materially and adversely impact our business operations. We have
transitioned a significant subset of our colleagues to a remote work environment in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, as have a significant number of
our third-party service providers, which may amplify certain risks to our businesses, including an increased demand for information technology resources,
increased risk of phishing and other cyber attacks, increased risk of unauthorized dissemination of sensitive personal information or proprietary or confidential
information about us or our medical members or other third-parties and increased risk of business interruptions.
100

The Company and its vendors have experienced diverse cyber attacks and expect to continue to experience cyber attacks going forward. As examples, the
Company and its vendors have experienced attempts to gain access to systems, denial of service attacks, attempted malware infections, account takeovers, scanning
activity and phishing emails. Attacks can originate from external criminals, terrorists, nation states or internal actors. The Company is dedicating and will continue
to dedicate significant resources and incur significant expenses to maintain and update on an ongoing basis the systems and processes that are designed to mitigate
the information security risks it faces and protect the security of its computer systems, software, networks and other technology assets against attempts by
unauthorized parties to obtain access to confidential information, disrupt or degrade service or cause other damage. The impact of cyber attacks has not been
material to the Company’s operations or operating results through December 31, 2021. The Board and its Audit Committee and Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee are regularly informed regarding the Company’s information security policies, practices and status.
101

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
103
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
104
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020
105
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
106
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
108
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
109
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Public Company Accounting Oversight Board ID: 42)
172
102

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions, except per share amounts
2021
2020
2019
Revenues:
 
 
 
Products
$
203,738 $
190,688 $
185,236 
Premiums
76,132 
69,364 
63,122 
Services
11,042 
7,856 
7,407 
Net investment income
1,199 
798 
1,011 
Total revenues
292,111 
268,706 
256,776 
Operating costs:
Cost of products sold
175,803 
163,981 
158,719 
Benefit costs
64,260 
55,679 
52,529 
Store impairments
1,358 
— 
231 
Goodwill impairment
431 
— 
— 
Operating expenses
37,066 
35,135 
33,310 
Total operating costs
278,918 
254,795 
244,789 
Operating income
13,193 
13,911 
11,987 
Interest expense
2,503 
2,907 
3,035 
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
452 
1,440 
79 
Other income
(182)
(206)
(124)
Income before income tax provision
10,420 
9,770 
8,997 
Income tax provision
2,522 
2,569 
2,366 
Income from continuing operations
7,898 
7,201 
6,631 
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
— 
(9)
— 
Net income
7,898 
7,192 
6,631 
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
12 
(13)
3 
Net income attributable to CVS Health
$
7,910 $
7,179 $
6,634 
Basic earnings per share:
Income from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
6.00 $
5.49 $
5.10 
Loss from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
— $
(0.01) $
— 
Net income attributable to CVS Health
$
6.00 $
5.48 $
5.10 
Weighted average basic shares outstanding
1,319 
1,309 
1,301 
Diluted earnings per share:
Income from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
5.95 $
5.47 $
5.08 
Loss from discontinued operations attributable to CVS Health
$
— $
(0.01) $
— 
Net income attributable to CVS Health
$
5.95 $
5.46 $
5.08 
Weighted average diluted shares outstanding
1,329 
1,314 
1,305 
Dividends declared per share
$
2.00 $
2.00 $
2.00 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
103

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Net income
$
7,898 $
7,192 $
6,631 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
Net unrealized investment gains (losses)
(436)
440 
677 
Foreign currency translation adjustments
(7)
3 
162 
Net cash flow hedges
(26)
(31)
(33)
Pension and other postretirement benefits
20 
(17)
111 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
(449)
395 
917 
Comprehensive income
7,449 
7,587 
7,548 
Comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
12 
(13)
3 
Comprehensive income attributable to CVS Health
$
7,461 $
7,574 $
7,551 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
104

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Balance Sheets
At December 31,
In millions, except per share amounts
2021
2020
Assets:
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
9,408 $
7,854 
Investments
3,117 
3,000 
Accounts receivable, net
24,431 
21,742 
Inventories
17,760 
18,496 
Other current assets
5,292 
5,277 
Total current assets
60,008 
56,369 
Long-term investments
23,025 
20,812 
Property and equipment, net
12,896 
12,606 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
19,122 
20,729 
Goodwill
79,121 
79,552 
Intangible assets, net
29,026 
31,142 
Separate accounts assets
5,087 
4,881 
Other assets
4,714 
4,624 
Total assets
$
232,999 $
230,715 
Liabilities:
Accounts payable
$
12,544 $
11,138 
Pharmacy claims and discounts payable
17,330 
15,795 
Health care costs payable
8,808 
7,936 
Policyholders’ funds
4,301 
4,270 
Accrued expenses
17,670 
14,243 
Other insurance liabilities
1,303 
1,557 
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
1,646 
1,638 
Current portion of long-term debt
4,205 
5,440 
Total current liabilities
67,807 
62,017 
Long-term operating lease liabilities
18,177 
18,757 
Long-term debt
51,971 
59,207 
Deferred income taxes
6,270 
6,794 
Separate accounts liabilities
5,087 
4,881 
Other long-term insurance liabilities
6,402 
7,007 
Other long-term liabilities
1,904 
2,351 
Total liabilities
157,618 
161,014 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 16)
Shareholders’ equity:
Preferred stock, par value $0.01: 0.1 shares authorized; none issued or outstanding
— 
— 
Common stock, par value $0.01: 3,200 shares authorized; 1,744 shares issued and 1,322 shares outstanding at
December 31, 2021 and 1,733 shares issued and 1,310 shares outstanding at December 31, 2020 and capital surplus
47,377 
46,513 
Treasury stock, at cost: 422 and 423 shares at December 31, 2021 and 2020
(28,173)
(28,178)
Retained earnings
54,906 
49,640 
Accumulated other comprehensive income
965 
1,414 
Total CVS Health shareholders’ equity
75,075 
69,389 
Noncontrolling interests
306 
312 
Total shareholders’ equity
75,381 
69,701 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$
232,999 $
230,715 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
105

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Cash receipts from customers
$
284,219 $
264,327 $
248,393 
Cash paid for inventory and prescriptions dispensed by retail network pharmacies
(165,783)
(158,636)
(149,655)
Insurance benefits paid
(63,598)
(55,124)
(52,242)
Cash paid to other suppliers and employees
(31,652)
(29,763)
(28,932)
Interest and investment income received
743 
894 
955 
Interest paid
(2,469)
(2,904)
(2,954)
Income taxes paid
(3,195)
(2,929)
(2,717)
Net cash provided by operating activities
18,265 
15,865 
12,848 
Cash flows from investing activities:
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investments
7,246 
6,467 
7,049 
Purchases of investments
(9,963)
(9,639)
(7,534)
Purchases of property and equipment
(2,520)
(2,437)
(2,457)
Proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions
— 
101 
5 
Acquisitions (net of cash acquired)
(146)
(866)
(444)
Proceeds from sale of subsidiary
— 
840 
— 
Other
122 
— 
42 
Net cash used in investing activities
(5,261)
(5,534)
(3,339)
Cash flows from financing activities:
Net repayments of short-term debt
— 
— 
(720)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
987 
9,958 
3,736 
Repayments of long-term debt
(10,254)
(15,631)
(8,336)
Derivative settlements
— 
(7)
(25)
Dividends paid
(2,625)
(2,624)
(2,603)
Proceeds from exercise of stock options
549 
264 
210 
Payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards
(168)
(88)
(112)
Other
155 
432 
196 
Net cash used in financing activities
(11,356)
(7,696)
(7,654)
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
1,648 
2,635 
1,855 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the beginning of the period
11,043 
8,408 
6,553 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the end of the period
$
12,691 $
11,043 $
8,408 
106

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended December 31,
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Reconciliation of net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Net income
$
7,898 $
7,192 $
6,631 
Adjustments required to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
4,512 
4,441 
4,371 
Store impairments
1,358 
— 
231 
Goodwill impairment
431 
— 
— 
Stock-based compensation
484 
400 
453 
(Gain) loss on sale of subsidiaries
— 
(269)
205 
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
452 
1,440 
79 
Deferred income taxes
(428)
(570)
(654)
Other noncash items
(390)
72 
33 
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions:
Accounts receivable, net
(2,703)
(1,510)
(2,158)
Inventories
735 
(973)
(1,075)
Other assets
(3)
364 
(614)
Accounts payable and pharmacy claims and discounts payable
2,898 
2,769 
3,550 
Health care costs payable and other insurance liabilities
169 
(231)
320 
Other liabilities
2,852 
2,740 
1,476 
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
18,265 $
15,865 $
12,848 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
107

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
Attributable to CVS Health
Number of shares 
outstanding
Common
Stock and
Capital
Surplus 
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income
Total 
CVS Health 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
Total 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
In millions
Common 
Shares
Treasury
Shares 
Treasury
Stock 
Retained 
Earnings
Noncontrolling 
Interests
Balance at December 31, 2018
1,720 
(425)
$
45,440 $
(28,228) $
40,911 $
102 $
58,225 $
318 $
58,543 
Adoption of new accounting
standards
— 
— 
— 
— 
178 
— 
178 
— 
178 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
6,634 
— 
6,634 
(3)
6,631 
Other comprehensive income (Note
13)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
917 
917 
— 
917 
Stock option activity, stock awards
and other
7 
2 
532 
— 
— 
— 
532 
— 
532 
Purchase of treasury shares, net of
ESPP issuances
— 
(2)
— 
(7)
— 
— 
(7)
— 
(7)
Common stock dividends
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2,615)
— 
(2,615)
— 
(2,615)
Other decreases in noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(9)
(9)
Balance at December 31, 2019
1,727 
(425)
45,972 
(28,235)
45,108 
1,019 
63,864 
306 
64,170 
Adoption of new accounting
standard 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(3)
— 
(3)
— 
(3)
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
7,179 
— 
7,179 
13 
7,192 
Other comprehensive income (Note
13)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
395 
395 
— 
395 
Stock option activity, stock awards
and other
6 
— 
541 
— 
— 
— 
541 
— 
541 
ESPP issuances, net of purchase of
treasury shares
— 
2 
— 
57 
— 
— 
57 
— 
57 
Common stock dividends
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2,644)
— 
(2,644)
— 
(2,644)
Other decreases in noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(7)
(7)
Balance at December 31, 2020
1,733 
(423)
46,513 
(28,178)
49,640 
1,414 
69,389 
312 
69,701 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
— 
7,910 
— 
7,910 
(12)
7,898 
Other comprehensive loss (Note 13)
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(449)
(449)
— 
(449)
Stock option activity, stock awards
and other
11 
— 
864 
— 
— 
— 
864 
— 
864 
ESPP issuances, net of purchase of
treasury shares
— 
1 
— 
5 
— 
— 
5 
— 
5 
Common stock dividends
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2,644)
— 
(2,644)
— 
(2,644)
Other increases in noncontrolling
interests
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
6 
6 
Balance at December 31, 2021
1,744 
(422)
$
47,377 $
(28,173) $
54,906 $
965 $
75,075 $
306 $
75,381 
(1) Treasury shares include 1 million shares held in trust for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Treasury stock includes $29 million related to shares held in trust for
each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information.
(2) Common stock and capital surplus includes the par value of common stock of $17 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(3) Reflects the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which resulted in an increase to retained earnings of $178 million during the year ended
December 31, 2019.
(4) Reflects the adoption of ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), which resulted in a reduction to retained earnings of $3 million during the year ended December
31, 2020.
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
(2)
(1)
(1)
 (3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
108

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
1.
Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business 
CVS Health Corporation, together with its subsidiaries (collectively, “CVS Health” or the “Company”), has more than 9,900 retail locations, nearly 1,200 walk-in
medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with approximately 110 million plan members with expanding specialty pharmacy solutions and a dedicated
senior pharmacy care business serving more than one million patients per year. The Company also serves an estimated 35 million people through traditional,
voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including expanding Medicare Advantage offerings and a leading standalone
Medicare Part D prescription drug plan (“PDP”). The Company believes its innovative health care model increases access to quality care, delivers better health
outcomes and lowers overall health care costs.
The coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) and its emerging new variants continue to impact the economies of the U.S. and other countries around the world.
The impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and financial condition in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as
well as information regarding certain expected impacts of COVID-19 on the Company, is discussed throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company has four reportable segments: Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services, Retail/LTC and Corporate/Other, which are described below.
Health Care Benefits Segment
The Health Care Benefits segment operates as one of the nation’s leading diversified health care benefits providers. The Health Care Benefits segment has the
information and resources to help members, in consultation with their health care professionals, make more informed decisions about their health care. The Health
Care Benefits segment offers a broad range of traditional, voluntary and consumer-directed health insurance products and related services, including medical,
pharmacy, dental and behavioral health plans, medical management capabilities, Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement plans, PDPs, Medicaid health care
management services and health information technology products and services. The Health Care Benefits segment also provided workers’ compensation
administrative services through its Coventry Health Care Workers’ Compensation business (“Workers’ Compensation business”) prior to the sale of this business
on July 31, 2020. The Health Care Benefits segment’s customers include employer groups, individuals, college students, part-time and hourly workers, health
plans, health care providers (“providers”), governmental units, government-sponsored plans, labor groups and expatriates. The Company refers to insurance
products (where it assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “Insured” and administrative services contract products (where the plan
sponsor assumes all or a majority of the risk for medical and dental care costs) as “ASC.” In addition, effective January 2022, the Company entered the individual
public health insurance exchanges (“Public Exchanges”) in eight states through which it sells Insured plans directly to individual consumers.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment provides a full range of pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, including plan design offerings and administration,
formulary management, retail pharmacy network management services and mail order pharmacy. In addition, through the Pharmacy Services segment, the
Company provides specialty pharmacy and infusion services, clinical services, disease management services, medical spend management and pharmacy and/or
other administrative services for providers and federal 340B drug pricing program covered entities (“Covered Entities”). The Pharmacy Services segment’s clients
are primarily employers, insurance companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, PDPs, Medicaid managed care plans, plans offered on Public
Exchanges and private health insurance exchanges, other sponsors of health benefit plans throughout the United States and Covered Entities. The Pharmacy
Services segment operates retail specialty pharmacy stores, specialty mail order pharmacies, mail order dispensing pharmacies, compounding pharmacies and
branches for infusion and enteral nutrition services.
Retail/LTC Segment
The Retail/LTC segment sells prescription drugs and a wide assortment of health and wellness products and general merchandise, provides health care services
through its MinuteClinic
 walk-in medical clinics, provides medical diagnostic testing, administers vaccinations for illnesses such as influenza, COVID-19 and
shingles and conducts long-term care pharmacy (“LTC”) operations, which distribute prescription drugs and provide related pharmacy consulting and other
ancillary services to long-term care facilities and other care settings. As of December 31, 2021, the Retail/LTC segment operated more than 9,900 retail locations,
nearly 1,200 MinuteClinic locations as well as online retail pharmacy websites, LTC pharmacies and on-site pharmacies.
®
109

Corporate/Other Segment
The Company presents the remainder of its financial results in the Corporate/Other segment, which primarily consists of:
•
Management and administrative expenses to support the Company’s overall operations, which include certain aspects of executive management and the
corporate relations, legal, compliance, human resources, information technology and finance departments, expenses associated with the Company’s
investments in its transformation and enterprise modernization programs and acquisition-related transaction and integration costs; and
•
Products for which the Company no longer solicits or accepts new customers such as its large case pensions and long-term care insurance products.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of CVS Health and its subsidiaries have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its majority-owned
subsidiaries and variable interest entities (“VIEs”) for which the Company is the primary beneficiary. All material intercompany balances and transactions have
been eliminated.
Reclassifications
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the
consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and temporary investments with maturities of three months or less when purchased. The Company invests in short-term
money market funds, commercial paper and time deposits, as well as other debt securities that are classified as cash equivalents within the accompanying
consolidated balance sheets, as these funds are highly liquid and readily convertible to known amounts of cash.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash (included in other current assets) represents funds held on behalf of members, including health savings account (“HSA”) funds associated with high
deductible health plans. Beginning in 2021, the Company began presenting these funds held on behalf of members in restricted cash and, for statement of cash flow
purposes, retrospectively adjusted the 2020 and 2019 balances by the amounts shown in the table below in the line item “restricted cash (included in other current
assets)” to conform with the current year presentation. Restricted cash (included in other assets) represents amounts held in a trust in one of the Company’s captive
insurance companies to satisfy collateral requirements associated with the assignment of certain insurance policies. All restricted cash is invested in time deposits,
money market funds or commercial paper.
The following is a reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents on the consolidated balance sheets to total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash on the
consolidated statements of cash flows as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Cash and cash equivalents
$
9,408 $
7,854 $
5,683 
Restricted cash (included in other current assets)
3,065 
2,913 
2,454 
Restricted cash (included in other assets)
218 
276 
271 
Total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash in the consolidated statements of cash flows
$
12,691 $
11,043 $
8,408 
110

Investments
Debt Securities
Debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Treasury and agency securities, mortgage-backed securities, corporate and foreign bonds and other debt securities. Debt
securities are classified as either current or long-term investments based on their contractual maturities unless the Company intends to sell an investment within the
next twelve months, in which case it is classified as current on the consolidated balance sheets. Debt securities are classified as available for sale and are carried at
fair value. See Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value’’ for additional information on how the Company estimates the fair value of these investments.
If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company has the intent to sell the security, or it is more likely than not that the Company will have to sell
the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost basis of the security is written down to its fair value and the difference is recognized in
net income. If a debt security is in an unrealized loss position and the Company does not have the intent to sell and it is more likely than not that the Company will
not have to sell such security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the Company bifurcates the impairment into credit-related and non-credit related
components. In evaluating whether a credit related loss exists, the Company considers a variety of factors including: the extent to which the fair value is less than
the amortized cost basis; adverse conditions specifically related to the issuer of a security, an industry or geographic area; the payment structure of the security; the
failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principal payments; and any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency. The amount
of the credit-related component is recorded as an allowance for credit losses and recognized in net income, and the amount of the non-credit related component is
included in other comprehensive income. Interest is not accrued on debt securities when management believes the collection of interest is unlikely.
The credit-related component is determined by comparing the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security, considering all reasonably
available information relevant to the collectability of the security, with the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected to be
collected is less than the amortized cost basis of the security, the Company records an allowance for credit losses, which is limited by the amount that the fair value
is less than amortized cost basis.
For mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities, the Company recognizes income using an effective yield based on anticipated prepayments and the
estimated economic life of the securities. When estimates of prepayments change, the effective yield is recalculated to reflect actual payments to date and
anticipated future payments. The Company’s investment in the security is adjusted to the amount that would have existed had the new effective yield been applied
since the acquisition of the security, with adjustments recognized in net income.
Equity Securities
Equity securities with readily available fair values are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in net income (loss).
Mortgage Loans
Mortgage loan investments on the consolidated balance sheets are valued at the unpaid principal balance, net of an allowance for credit losses. Mortgage loans with
a maturity date or a committed prepayment date within twelve months are classified as current on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company assesses whether
its loans share similar risk characteristics and, if so, groups such loans in a risk pool when measuring expected credit losses. The Company considers the following
characteristics when evaluating whether its loans share similar risk characteristics: loan-to-value ratios, property type (e.g., office, retail, apartment, industrial),
geographic location, vacancy rates and property condition.
Credit loss reserves are determined using a loss rate method that multiplies the unpaid principal balance of each loan within a risk pool group by an estimated loss
rate percentage. The loss rate percentage considers both the expected loan loss severity and the probability of loan default. For periods where the Company is able
to make or obtain reasonable and supportable forecasts of expected economic conditions (e.g., gross domestic product, employment), the Company adjusts its
expected loss rates to reflect these forecasted economic conditions. For periods beyond which the Company is able to make or obtain reasonable and supportable
forecasts of expected economic conditions, the Company reverts to historical loss rates in determining expected credit losses.
Interest income on a potential problem loan (i.e., high probability of default) or restructured loan is accrued to the extent it is deemed to be collectible and the loan
continues to perform under its original or restructured terms. Interest income on problem loans (i.e., more than 60 days delinquent, in bankruptcy or in process of
foreclosure) is recognized on a cash basis. Cash payments on loans in the process of foreclosure are treated as a return of principal.
111

Other Investments
Other investments consist primarily of the following:
•
Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships, which are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. Under this method, the carrying value of
the investment is based on the value of the Company’s equity ownership of the underlying investment funds provided by the general partner or manager of the
investments, the financial statements of which generally are audited. As a result of the timing of the receipt of the valuation information provided by the fund
managers, these investments are generally reported on up to a three month lag. The Company reviews investments for impairment at least quarterly and
monitors their performance throughout the year through discussions with the administrators, managers and/or general partners. If the Company becomes aware
of an impairment of a limited partnership’s investments through its review or prior to receiving the limited partnership’s financial statements at the financial
statement date, an impairment will be recognized by recording a reduction in the carrying value of the limited partnership with a corresponding charge to net
investment income.
•
Investment real estate, which is carried on the consolidated balance sheets at depreciated cost, including capital additions, net of write-downs for other-than-
temporary declines in fair value. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful life of each asset. If any real estate
investment is considered held-for-sale, it is carried at the lower of its carrying value or fair value less estimated selling costs. The Company generally estimates
fair value using net operating income and applying a capitalization rate in conjunction with comparable sales information. At the time of the sale, the
difference between the sales price and the carrying value is recorded as a realized capital gain or loss.
•
Privately-placed equity securities, which are carried on the consolidated balance sheets at cost less impairments, plus or minus subsequent adjustments for
observable price changes. Additionally, as a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”), a subsidiary of the Company is required to
purchase and hold shares of the FHLBB. These shares are restricted and carried at cost.
Net Investment Income
Net investment income on the Company’s investments is recorded when earned and is reflected in the Company’s net income (other than net investment income on
assets supporting experience-rated products). Experience-rated products are products in the large case pensions business where the contract holder, not the
Company, assumes investment and other risks, subject to, among other things, minimum guarantees provided by the Company. The effect of investment
performance on experience-rated products is allocated to contract holders’ accounts daily, based on the underlying investment experience and, therefore, does not
impact the Company’s net income (as long as the contract’s minimum guarantees are not triggered). Net investment income on assets supporting large case
pensions’ experience-rated products is included in net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations and is credited to contract holders’ accounts
through a charge to benefit costs. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Realized capital gains and losses on investments (other than realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting experience-rated products) are included as
a component of net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations. Realized capital gains and losses are determined on a specific identification
basis. Purchases and sales of debt and equity securities and alternative investments are reflected on the trade date. Purchases and sales of mortgage loans and
investment real estate are reflected on the closing date.
Realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting large case pensions’ experience-rated products are not included in realized capital gains and losses in
the consolidated statements of operations and instead are credited directly to contract holders’ accounts. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in
policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Unrealized capital gains and losses on investments (other than unrealized capital gains and losses on investments supporting experience-rated products) are
reflected in shareholders’ equity, net of tax, as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. Unrealized capital gains and losses on investments
supporting large case pensions’ experience-rated products are credited directly to contract holders’ accounts. The contract holders’ accounts are reflected in
policyholders’ funds on the consolidated balance sheets.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments in order to manage interest rate and foreign exchange risk and credit exposure. The Company’s use of these
derivatives is generally limited to hedging risk and has principally consisted of using interest rate swaps, treasury rate locks, forward contracts, futures contracts,
warrants, put options and credit default swaps.
112

Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated net of allowances for credit losses, customer credit allowances, contractual allowances and estimated terminations. Accounts
receivable, net is composed of the following at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
2021
2020
Trade receivables
$
7,932 $
7,101 
Vendor and manufacturer receivables
10,573 
9,815 
Premium receivables
2,537 
2,628 
Other receivables
3,389 
2,198 
   Total accounts receivable, net
$
24,431 $
21,742 
The Company’s allowance for credit losses was $339 million and $358 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. When developing an estimate of
the Company’s expected credit losses, the Company considers all available relevant information regarding the collectability of cash flows, including historical
information, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions over the contractual life of the receivable. The Company’s
accounts receivable are short duration in nature and typically settle in less than 30 days.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method. Physical inventory counts are taken on a regular basis in
each retail store and LTC pharmacy, and a continuous cycle count process is the primary procedure used to validate the inventory balances on hand in each
distribution center and mail facility to ensure that the amounts reflected in the consolidated financial statements are properly stated. During the interim period
between physical inventory counts, the Company accrues for anticipated physical inventory losses on a location-by-location basis based on historical results and
current physical inventory trends.
Reinsurance Recoverables
The Company utilizes reinsurance agreements primarily to: (a) reduce required capital and (b) facilitate the acquisition or disposition of certain insurance contracts.
Ceded reinsurance agreements permit the Company to recover a portion of its losses from reinsurers, although they do not discharge the Company’s primary
liability as the direct insurer of the risks reinsured. Failure of reinsurers to indemnify the Company could result in losses; however, the Company does not expect
charges for unrecoverable reinsurance to have a material effect on its consolidated operating results or financial condition. The Company evaluates the financial
condition of its reinsurers and monitors concentrations of credit risk arising from similar geographic regions, activities or economic characteristics of its reinsurers.
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s reinsurance recoverables consisted primarily of amounts due from third parties that are rated consistent with companies that
are considered to have the ability to meet their obligations. Reinsurance recoverables are recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance
sheets.
Health Care Contract Acquisition Costs
Insurance products included in the Health Care Benefits segment are cancellable by either the customer or the member monthly upon written notice. Acquisition
costs related to prepaid health care and health indemnity contracts are generally expensed as incurred. Acquisition costs for certain long-duration insurance
contracts are deferred and are recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance sheets and are amortized over the estimated life of the
contracts. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs is recorded in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. At December 31, 2021 and
2020, the balance of deferred acquisition costs was $895 million and $546 million, respectively, comprised primarily of commissions paid on Medicare
Supplement products within the Health Care Benefits segment.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is reported at historical cost, net of accumulated depreciation. Property, equipment and improvements to leased premises are depreciated
using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, or when applicable, the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. Estimated useful lives
generally range from 1 to 40 years for buildings, building improvements and leasehold improvements and 3 to 10 years for fixtures, equipment and internally
developed software. Repair and maintenance costs are charged directly to expense as incurred. Major renewals or replacements that
113

substantially extend the useful life of an asset are capitalized and depreciated. Application development stage costs for significant internally developed software
projects are capitalized and depreciated.
Property and equipment consists of the following at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
2021
2020
Land
$
2,038 $
2,134 
Building and improvements
4,225 
3,950 
Fixtures and equipment
13,619 
13,125 
Leasehold improvements
6,242 
6,077 
Software
7,426 
6,020 
Total property and equipment
33,550 
31,306 
Accumulated depreciation and amortization
(20,654)
(18,700)
Property and equipment, net
$
12,896 $
12,606 
Depreciation expense (which includes the amortization of property and equipment under finance or capital leases) totaled $2.3 billion, $2.1 billion and $1.9 billion
for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an impairment on property
and equipment of $261 million in connection with the planned closure of certain retail stores. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about this
impairment charge as well as the Company’s finance leases.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
The Company determines if an arrangement contains a lease at the inception of a contract. Right-of-use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying
asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease
liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of
the remaining future minimum lease payments. As the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its
incremental borrowing rate, determined by class of underlying asset, to discount the lease payments. The operating lease right-of-use assets also include lease
payments made before commencement and are reduced by lease incentives.
The Company’s real estate leases typically contain options that permit renewals for additional periods of up to five years each. For real estate leases, the options to
extend are not considered reasonably certain at lease commencement because the Company reevaluates each lease on a regular basis to consider the economic and
strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options and regularly opens or closes stores to align with its operating strategy. Generally, the renewal option periods
are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability. Similarly,
renewal options are not included in the lease term for non-real estate leases because they are not considered reasonably certain of being exercised at lease
commencement. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheets, and lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the term of the short-term lease.
For real estate leases, the Company accounts for lease components and nonlease components as a single lease component. Certain real estate leases require
additional payments based on sales volume, as well as reimbursement for real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance, which are expensed as
incurred as variable lease costs. Other real estate leases contain one fixed lease payment that includes real estate taxes, common area maintenance and insurance.
These fixed payments are considered part of the lease payment and included in the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the excess cost of an acquisition over the fair value
of net assets acquired and identifiable intangible assets to be recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to impairment reviews annually, or
more frequently if necessary, as further described in “Long-Lived Asset Impairment” below. See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional
information about goodwill.
114

Intangible Assets
The Company’s identifiable intangible assets consist primarily of trademarks, trade names, customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology,
provider networks and value of business acquired (“VOBA”). These intangible assets arise primarily from the determination of their respective fair market values
at the date of acquisition. Amounts assigned to identifiable intangible assets, and their related useful lives, are derived from established valuation techniques and
management estimates.
The Company’s definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the pattern of future cash flows attributable to the asset.
Other than VOBA, definite-lived intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method. VOBA is amortized over the expected life of the acquired contracts
in proportion to estimated premiums. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if necessary, as
further described in “Long-Lived Asset Impairment” below.
See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about intangible assets.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets, excluding goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are tested for impairment using
separate tests described below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such asset may not be recoverable. The Company
groups and evaluates these long-lived assets for impairment at the lowest level at which individual cash flows can be identified. If indicators of impairment are
present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group (undiscounted). If the
estimated future cash flows used in this analysis are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment loss calculation is prepared. The impairment
loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset group to the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted). If required, an impairment loss is
recorded for the portion of the asset group’s carrying value that exceeds the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted). During the year ended
December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a store impairment charge of approximately $1.4 billion primarily related to the write down of operating lease right-of-
use assets and property and equipment in connection with the planned closure of approximately 900 retail stores between 2022 and 2024. There were no material
impairment charges recognized on long-lived assets in the year ended 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019 the Company recorded a store impairment
charge of $231 million primarily related to operating lease right-of-use assets. See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for additional information about the right-of-use asset
impairment charges.
When evaluating goodwill for potential impairment, the Company compares the fair value of its reporting units to their respective carrying amounts. The Company
estimates the fair value of its reporting units using a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. If the carrying amount of a
reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company
performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill, the results of which indicated an impairment of the goodwill associated with the LTC reporting unit.
Accordingly, during the third quarter of 2021, the Company recorded a $431 million goodwill impairment charge. The results of the impairment tests indicated that
there was no impairment of goodwill of the remaining reporting units as of the testing date or during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the third quarter of
both 2020 and 2019, the Company performed its required annual goodwill impairment tests and concluded there were no goodwill impairments as of the testing
dates or during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 5 ‘‘Goodwill and Other Intangibles’’ for additional information about the goodwill
impairment charge recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. The Company estimates the fair
value of its indefinite-lived trademarks using the relief from royalty method under the income approach. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds its estimated fair
value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. There were no impairment losses recognized on indefinite-lived
intangible assets in any of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Separate Accounts
Separate Accounts assets and liabilities related to large case pensions products represent funds maintained to meet specific objectives of contract holders who bear
the investment risk. These assets and liabilities are carried at fair value. Net investment income (including net realized capital gains and losses) accrue directly to
such contract holders. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims arising from the Company’s other businesses. Deposits,
withdrawals and net
115

investment income (including net realized and net unrealized capital gains and losses) on Separate Accounts assets are not reflected in the consolidated statements
of operations or cash flows. Management fees charged to contract holders are included in services revenue and recognized over the period earned.
Health Care Costs Payable
Health care costs payable consist principally of unpaid fee-for-service medical, dental and pharmacy claims, capitation costs, other amounts due to providers
pursuant to risk-sharing arrangements related to the Health Care Benefits segment’s Insured Commercial, Medicare and Medicaid products and accruals for state
assessments. Unpaid health care claims include an estimate of payments the Company will make for (i) services rendered to the Company’s Insured members but
not yet reported to the Company and (ii) claims which have been reported to the Company but not yet paid, each as of the financial statement date (collectively,
“IBNR”). Health care costs payable also include an estimate of the cost of services that will continue to be rendered after the financial statement date if the
Company is obligated to pay for such services in accordance with contractual or regulatory requirements. Such estimates are developed using actuarial principles
and assumptions which consider, among other things, historical and projected claim submission and processing patterns, assumed and historical medical cost
trends, historical utilization of medical services, claim inventory levels, changes in Insured membership and product mix, seasonality and other relevant factors.
The Company reflects changes in these estimates in benefit costs in the Company’s consolidated operating results in the period they are determined. Capitation
costs represent contractual monthly fees paid to participating physicians and other medical providers for providing medical care, regardless of the volume of
medical services provided to the Insured member. Amounts due under risk-sharing arrangements are based on the terms of the underlying contracts with the
providers and consider claims experience under the contracts through the financial statement date.
The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions that consider numerous factors. Of those factors, the Company considers
the analysis of historical and projected claim payment patterns (including claims submission and processing patterns) and the assumed health care cost trend rate
(the year-over-year change in per member per month health care costs) to be the most critical assumptions. In developing its IBNR estimate, the Company
consistently applies these actuarial principles and assumptions each period, with consideration to the variability of related factors. There have been no significant
changes to the methodologies or assumptions used to develop the Company’s estimate of IBNR in 2021.
The Company analyzes historical claim payment patterns by comparing claim incurred dates (i.e., the date services were provided) to claim payment dates to
estimate “completion factors.” The Company uses completion factors predominantly to estimate the ultimate cost of claims incurred more than three months before
the financial statement date. The Company estimates completion factors by aggregating claim data based on the month of service and month of claim payment and
estimating the percentage of claims incurred for a given month that are complete by each month thereafter. For any given month, substantially all claims are paid
within six months of the date of service, but it can take up to 48 months or longer after the date of service before all of the claims are completely resolved and paid.
These historically-derived completion factors are then applied to claims paid through the financial statement date to estimate the ultimate claim cost for a given
month’s incurred claim activity. The difference between the estimated ultimate claim cost and the claims paid through the financial statement date represents the
Company’s estimate of claims remaining to be paid as of the financial statement date and is included in the Company’s health care costs payable. The completion
factors the Company uses reflect judgments and possible adjustments based on data such as claim inventory levels, claim submission and processing patterns and,
to a lesser extent, other factors such as changes in health care cost trend rates, changes in Insured membership and changes in product mix. If claims are submitted
or processed on a faster (slower) pace than prior periods, the actual claims may be more (less) complete than originally estimated using the Company’s completion
factors, which may result in reserves that are higher (lower) than the ultimate cost of claims.
Because claims incurred within three months before the financial statement date are less mature, the Company uses a combination of historically-derived
completion factors and the assumed health care cost trend rate to estimate the ultimate cost of claims incurred for these months. The Company applies its actuarial
judgment and places a greater emphasis on the assumed health care cost trend rate for the most recent claim incurred dates as these months may be influenced by
seasonal patterns and changes in membership and product mix.
The Company’s health care cost trend rate is affected by changes in per member utilization of medical services as well as changes in the unit cost of such services.
Many factors influence the health care cost trend rate, including the Company’s ability to manage benefit costs through product design, negotiation of favorable
provider contracts and medical management programs, as well as the mix of the Company’s business. The health status of the Company’s Insured members, aging
of the population and other demographic characteristics, advances in medical technology and other factors continue to contribute to rising per member utilization
and unit costs. Changes in health care practices, inflation, new technologies, increases in the cost of
116

prescription drugs (including specialty pharmacy drugs), direct-to-consumer marketing by pharmaceutical companies, clusters of high-cost cases, claim intensity,
changes in the regulatory environment, health care provider or member fraud and numerous other factors also contribute to the cost of health care and the
Company’s health care cost trend rate.
For each reporting period, the Company uses an extensive degree of judgment in the process of estimating its health care costs payable. As a result, considerable
variability and uncertainty is inherent in such estimates, particularly with respect to claims with claim incurred dates of three months or less before the financial
statement date; and the adequacy of such estimates is highly sensitive to changes in assumed completion factors and the assumed health care cost trend rates. For
each reporting period the Company recognizes the actuarial best estimate of health care costs payable considering the potential volatility in assumed completion
factors and health care cost trend rates, as well as other factors. The Company believes its estimate of health care costs payable is reasonable and adequate to cover
its obligations at December 31, 2021; however, actual claim payments may differ from the Company’s estimates. A worsening (or improvement) of the Company’s
health care cost trend rates or changes in completion factors from those that the Company assumed in estimating health care costs payable at December 31, 2021
would cause these estimates to change in the near term, and such a change could be material.
Each quarter, the Company re-examines previously established health care costs payable estimates based on actual claim payments for prior periods and other
changes in facts and circumstances. Given the extensive degree of judgment in this estimate, it is possible that the Company’s estimates of health care costs
payable could develop either favorably (that is, its actual benefit costs for the period were less than estimated) or unfavorably. The changes in the Company’s
estimate of health care costs payable may relate to a prior quarter, prior year or earlier periods. For a roll forward of the Company’s health care costs payable, see
Note 7 ‘‘Health Care Costs Payable.’’ The Company’s reserving practice is to consistently recognize the actuarial best estimate of its ultimate liability for health
care costs payable.
Other Insurance Liabilities
Unpaid Claims
Unpaid claims consist primarily of reserves associated with certain short-duration group disability and term life insurance contracts, including an estimate for
IBNR as of the financial statement date. Reserves associated with certain short-duration group disability and term life insurance contracts are based upon the
Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits, which is based on assumed investment yields and assumptions regarding mortality, morbidity and
recoveries from the U.S. Social Security Administration. The Company develops its estimate of IBNR using actuarial principles and assumptions which consider,
among other things, contractual requirements, claim incidence rates, claim recovery rates, seasonality and other relevant factors. The Company discounts certain
claim liabilities related to group long-term disability and life insurance waiver of premium contracts. The discount rates generally reflect the Company’s expected
investment returns for the investments supporting all incurral years of these liabilities. The discount rates for retrospectively-rated contracts are set at contractually
specified levels. The Company’s estimates of unpaid claims are subject to change due to changes in the underlying experience of the insurance contracts, changes
in investment yields or other factors, and these changes are recorded in current and future benefits in the consolidated statements of operations in the period they
are determined. The Company estimates its reserve for claims IBNR for life products largely based on completion factors. The completion factors used are based
on the Company’s historical experience and reflect judgments and possible adjustments based on data such as claim inventory levels, claim payment patterns,
changes in business volume and other factors. If claims are submitted or processed on a faster (slower) pace than historical periods, the actual claims may be more
(less) complete than originally estimated using completion factors, which may result in reserves that are higher (lower) than required to cover future life benefit
payments. There have been no significant changes to the methodologies or assumptions used to develop the Company’s estimate of unpaid claims IBNR in 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, unpaid claims balances of $324 million and $1.3 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-term insurance
liabilities, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, unpaid claims balances of $532 million and $1.5 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other
long-term insurance liabilities, respectively.
Substantially all life and disability insurance liabilities have been fully ceded to unrelated third parties through indemnity reinsurance agreements; however, the
Company remains directly obligated to the policyholders.
Future Policy Benefits
Future policy benefits consist primarily of reserves for limited payment pension and annuity contracts and long-term care insurance contracts. Reserves for limited
payment pension and annuity contracts are computed using actuarial principles that consider, among other things, assumptions reflecting anticipated mortality,
retirement, expense and interest rate experience. Such assumptions generally vary by plan, year of issue and policy duration. Assumed interest rates on such
contracts ranged from 3.0% to 11.3% in the year ended December 31, 2021 and from 3.3% to 11.3% in the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company
periodically reviews mortality assumptions against both industry standards and its experience. Reserves for long-
117

duration long-term care contracts represent the Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits and essential maintenance expenses to be paid to or on
behalf of policyholders less the present value of future gross premiums. The assumed interest rate on such contracts was 5.1% in both the years ended December
31, 2021 and 2020. The Company’s estimate of the present value of future benefits under such contracts is based upon mortality, morbidity and interest rate
assumptions. As of December 31, 2021, future policy benefits balances of $416 million and $5.1 billion were recorded in other insurance liabilities and other long-
term insurance liabilities, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, future policy benefits balances of $462 million and $5.5 billion were recorded in other insurance
liabilities and other long-term insurance liabilities, respectively.
Premium Deficiency Reserves
The Company evaluates its insurance contracts to determine if it is probable that a loss will be incurred. A premium deficiency loss is recognized when it is
probable that expected future claims, including maintenance costs (for example, direct costs such as claim processing costs), will exceed existing reserves plus
anticipated future premiums and reinsurance recoveries. Anticipated investment income is not considered in the calculation of premium deficiency losses for short-
duration contracts. For purposes of determining premium deficiency losses, contracts are grouped consistent with the Company’s method of acquiring, servicing
and measuring the profitability of such contracts. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company established a premium deficiency reserve of $16 million and
$11 million, respectively, related to Medicaid products in the Health Care Benefits segment.
Policyholders’ Funds
Policyholders’ funds consist primarily of reserves for pension and annuity investment contracts and customer funds associated with certain health contracts.
Reserves for such contracts are equal to cumulative deposits less withdrawals and charges plus interest credited thereon, net of experience-rated adjustments. In
2021, interest rates for pension and annuity investment contracts ranged from 3.5% to 4.8%. In 2020, interest rates for pension and annuity investment contracts
ranged from 4.1% to 5.1%. Reserves for contracts subject to experience rating reflect the Company’s rights as well as the rights of policyholders and plan
participants. The Company also holds funds for HSAs on behalf of members associated with high deductible health plans. These amounts are held to pay for
qualified health care expenses incurred by these members. The HSA balances were approximately $2.9 billion and $2.7 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020,
respectively, and are reflected in other current assets with a corresponding liability in policyholders’ funds. These assets are considered restricted cash for cash
flow statement purposes.
Policyholders’ funds liabilities that are expected to be paid within twelve months from the balance sheet date are classified as current on the consolidated balance
sheets. Policyholders’ funds liabilities that are expected to be paid greater than twelve months from the balance sheet date are included in other long-term liabilities
on the consolidated balance sheets.
Self-Insurance Liabilities
The Company is self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, workers’ compensation and auto liability. The Company obtains third party insurance
coverage to limit exposure from these claims. The Company is also self-insured for certain losses related to health and medical liabilities. The Company’s self-
insurance accruals, which include reported claims and claims incurred but not reported, are calculated using standard insurance industry actuarial assumptions and
the Company’s historical claims experience. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, self-insurance liabilities totaled $1.1 billion and $927 million, respectively, and were
recorded as accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
For non-U.S. dollar functional currency locations, (i) assets and liabilities are translated at end-of-period exchange rates, (ii) revenues and expenses are translated at
average exchange rates in effect during the period and (iii) equity is translated at historical exchange rates. The resulting cumulative translation adjustments are
included as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income.
For U.S. dollar functional currency locations, foreign currency assets and liabilities are remeasured into U.S. dollars at end-of-period exchange rates, except for
nonmonetary balance sheet accounts which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Revenues and expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect
during each period, except for those expenses related to the nonmonetary balance sheet amounts which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Gains or losses
from foreign currency remeasurement are included in net income.
118

Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and the effects of foreign currency remeasurements were not material in the years ended December 31, 2021 or
2020. On July 1, 2019, the Company sold its Brazilian subsidiary, Drogaria Onofre Ltda. (“Onofre”) for an immaterial amount. The Company recorded a loss on
the divestiture, which included the elimination of the subsidiary’s $154 million cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income
during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue Recognition
Health Care Benefits Segment
Health Care Benefits revenue is principally derived from insurance premiums and fees billed to customers. Revenue is recognized based on customer billings,
which, in the Company’s Commercial business, reflect contracted rates per member and the number of covered members recorded in the Company’s records at the
time the billings are prepared. Billings are generally sent monthly for coverage during the following month. Revenue related to the Company’s Government
business is collected monthly from the U.S. federal government and various government agencies based on fixed payment rates and member eligibility.
The Company’s billings may be subsequently adjusted to reflect enrollment changes due to member terminations or other factors. These adjustments are known as
retroactivity adjustments. In each period, the Company estimates the amount of future retroactivity and adjusts the recorded revenue accordingly. As information
regarding actual retroactivity amounts becomes known, the Company refines its estimates and records any required adjustments to revenues in the period in which
they arise.
Premium Revenue
Premiums are recognized as revenue in the month in which the enrollee is entitled to receive health care services. Premiums are reported net of an allowance for
estimated terminations and uncollectible amounts. Additionally, premium revenue subject to the minimum medical loss ratio (“MLR”) rebate requirements of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (as amended, collectively, the “ACA”) is recorded net of
the estimated minimum MLR rebates for the current calendar year. Premiums related to unexpired contractual coverage periods (unearned premiums) are reported
as other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and recognized as revenue when earned.
Some of the Company’s contracts allow for premiums to be adjusted to reflect actual experience or the relative health status of Insured members. Such adjustments
are reasonably estimable at the outset of the contract, and adjustments to those estimates are made based on actual experience of the customer emerging under the
contract and the terms of the underlying contract.
Services Revenue
Services revenue relates to contracts that can include various combinations of services or series of services which generally are capable of being distinct and
accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Health Care Benefits segment’s services revenue primarily consists of ASC fees received in exchange for
performing certain claim processing and member services for ASC members. ASC fee revenue is recognized over the period the service is provided. Some of the
Company’s administrative services contracts include guarantees with respect to certain functions, such as customer service response time, claim processing
accuracy and claim processing turnaround time, as well as certain guarantees that a plan sponsor’s benefit claim experience will fall within a certain range. With
any of these guarantees, the Company is financially at risk if the conditions of the arrangements are not met, although the maximum amount at risk typically is
limited to a percentage of the fees otherwise payable to the Company by the customer involved. Each period the Company estimates its obligations under the terms
of these guarantees and records its estimate as an offset to services revenues.
Accounting for Medicare Part D
Revenues include insurance premiums earned by the Company’s PDPs, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements
with the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”). The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP
member, and can be subsidized by CMS in the case of low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially
recorded within other insurance liabilities and are then recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
Revenues also include a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design referred to as the risk corridor. The Company estimates variable consideration
in the form of amounts payable to, or receivable from, CMS under the risk corridor, and adjusts revenue based on calculations of additional subsidies to be received
from or owed to CMS at the end of the reporting year.
119

In addition to Medicare Part D premiums, the Company receives additional payments each month from CMS related to catastrophic reinsurance, low-income cost-
sharing subsidies and coverage gap benefits. If the subsidies received differ from the amounts earned from actual prescriptions transferred, the difference is
recorded in either accounts receivable, net or accrued expenses.
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail
pharmacy network. The Company’s pharmacy benefit arrangements are accounted for in a manner consistent with a master supply arrangement as there are no
contractual minimum volumes and each prescription is considered a separate purchasing decision and distinct performance obligation transferred at a point in time.
PBM services performed in connection with each prescription claim are considered part of a single performance obligation which culminates in the dispensing of
prescription drugs.
The Company recognizes revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with its clients when the Company has concluded it controls the
prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. The Company controls prescriptions dispensed indirectly through its retail pharmacy network
because it has separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, has discretion in setting the price for the transaction and assumes primary responsibility
for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to its client plan members while also performing the related PBM services.
Revenues include (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Company, net of any discounts earned on brand name drugs or other discounts and
refunds paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” and “Guarantees” below), (ii) the price paid to the Company by client plan members for mail order
prescriptions and the price paid to retail network pharmacies by client plan members for retail prescriptions (“retail co-payments”), and (iii) claims based
administrative fees for retail pharmacy network contracts. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the prescription drugs is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company
expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those prescription drugs. The Company has established the following revenue recognition policies for the
Pharmacy Services segment:
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by mail service dispensing pharmacies are recognized when the prescription drug is delivered to the client
plan member. At the time of delivery, the Company has performed substantially all of its performance obligations under its client contracts and does not
experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
•
Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Company’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are
recognized at the Company’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Company’s online claims processing system and the Company has
transferred control of the prescription drug and completed all of its performance obligations.
For contracts under which the Company acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client plan member, revenue is recognized
using the net method.
Drug Discounts
The Company records revenue net of manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients based on their plan members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. The
Company estimates these rebates at period-end based on actual and estimated claims data and its estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by its clients. The
estimates are based on the best available data at period-end and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates due to the client. The
Company adjusts its rebates payable to clients to the actual amounts paid when these rebates are paid or as significant events occur. Any cumulative effect of these
adjustments is recorded against revenues at the time it is identified. Adjustments generally result from contract changes with clients or manufacturers that have
retroactive rebate adjustments, differences between the estimated and actual product mix subject to rebates, or whether the brand name drug was included in the
applicable formulary. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual manufacturers’ rebate amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating
results or financial condition.
Guarantees
The Company also adjusts revenues for refunds owed to clients resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined service and performance
metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and actual pricing
and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
120

Retail/LTC Segment
Retail Pharmacy
The Company’s retail drugstores recognize revenue at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. For pharmacy sales, each prescription claim is its
own arrangement with the customer and is a performance obligation, separate and distinct from other prescription claims under other retail network arrangements.
Revenues are adjusted for refunds owed to third party payers resulting from pricing guarantees and performance against defined value-based service and
performance metrics. The inputs to these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility. The effect of adjustments between estimated and
actual pricing and performance refund amounts has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition.
Revenue from Company gift cards purchased by customers is deferred as a contract liability until goods or services are transferred. Any amounts not expected to be
redeemed by customers (i.e., breakage) are recognized based on historical redemption patterns.
Customer returns are not material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. Sales taxes are not included in revenues.
Loyalty and Other Programs
The Company’s customer loyalty program, ExtraCare , consists of two components, ExtraSavings
 and ExtraBucks  Rewards. ExtraSavings are coupons that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue when redeemed as the Company concluded that they do not represent a promise to the customer to deliver additional goods or
services at the time of issuance because they are not tied to a specific transaction or spending level.
ExtraBucks Rewards are accumulated by customers based on their historical spending levels. Thus, the Company has determined that there is an additional
performance obligation to those customers at the time of the initial transaction. The Company allocates the transaction price to the initial transaction and the
ExtraBucks Rewards transaction based upon the relative standalone selling price, which considers historical redemption patterns for the rewards. Revenue allocated
to ExtraBucks Rewards is recognized as those rewards are redeemed. At the end of each period, unredeemed ExtraBucks Rewards are reflected as a contract
liability.
The Company also offers a subscription-based membership program, CarePass , under which members are entitled to a suite of benefits delivered over the course
of the subscription period, as well as a promotional reward that can be redeemed for future goods and services. Subscriptions are paid for on a monthly or annual
basis at the time of or in advance of the Company delivering the goods and services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as the performance
obligations are satisfied.
Long-term Care
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects
to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Each prescription claim represents a separate performance obligation of the Company, separate
and distinct from other prescription claims under customer arrangements. A significant portion of long-term care revenue from sales of pharmaceutical and medical
products is reimbursed by the federal Medicare Part D program and, to a lesser extent, state Medicaid programs. The Company monitors its revenues and
receivables from these reimbursement sources, as well as long-term care facilities and other third party insurance payors, and reduces revenue at the revenue
recognition date to properly account for the variable consideration due to anticipated differences between billed and reimbursed amounts. Accordingly, the total
revenues and receivables reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements are recorded at the amount expected to be ultimately received from these
payors.
Patient co-payments associated with Medicare Part D, certain state Medicaid programs, Medicare Part B and certain third party payors typically are not collected at
the time products are delivered or services are rendered, but are billed to the individuals as part of normal billing procedures and subject to normal accounts
receivable collections procedures.
Walk-In Medical Clinics
For services provided by the Company’s walk-in medical clinics, revenue recognition occurs for completed services provided to patients, with adjustments taken
for third party payor contractual obligations and patient direct bill historical collection rates.
®
TM
®
®
121

Disaggregation of Revenue
The following table disaggregates the Company’s revenue by major source in each segment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment 
Eliminations
Consolidated 
Totals
2021
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
— $
152,262 $
76,121 $
— 
$
(43,765)
$
184,618 
Front Store
— 
— 
21,315 
— 
— 
21,315 
Premiums
76,064 
— 
— 
68 
— 
76,132 
Net investment income
586 
— 
17 
596 
— 
1,199 
Other
5,536 
760 
2,652 
57 
(158)
8,847 
Total
$
82,186 $
153,022 $
100,105 $
721 
$
(43,923)
$
292,111 
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network
$
91,715 
Mail choice 
60,547 
Other
760 
Total
$
153,022 
2020
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
— $
141,116 $
70,176 $
— 
$
(40,003)
$
171,289 
Front Store
— 
— 
19,655 
— 
— 
19,655 
Premiums
69,301 
— 
— 
63 
— 
69,364 
Net investment income
483 
— 
— 
315 
— 
798 
Other
5,683 
822 
1,367 
48 
(320)
7,600 
Total
$
75,467 $
141,938 $
91,198 $
426 
$
(40,323)
$
268,706 
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network
$
85,045 
Mail choice 
56,071 
Other
822 
Total
$
141,938 
2019
Major goods/services lines:
Pharmacy
$
— $
140,896 $
66,442 $
— 
$
(41,413)
$
165,925 
Front Store
— 
— 
19,422 
— 
— 
19,422 
Premiums
63,031 
— 
— 
91 
— 
63,122 
Net investment income
599 
— 
— 
412 
— 
1,011 
Other
5,974 
595 
744 
9 
(26)
7,296 
Total
$
69,604 $
141,491 $
86,608 $
512 
$
(41,439)
$
256,776 
Pharmacy Services distribution channel:
Pharmacy network
$
88,755 
Mail choice 
52,141 
Other
595 
Total
$
141,491 
 (1)
(2)
 (1)
(2)
 (1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
122

(1)
Pharmacy Services pharmacy network is defined as claims filled at retail and specialty retail pharmacies, including the Company’s retail pharmacies and LTC pharmacies, but excluding
Maintenance Choice  activity, which is included within the mail choice category. Maintenance Choice permits eligible client plan members to fill their maintenance prescriptions through
mail order delivery or at a CVS Pharmacy retail store for the same price as mail order.
(2)
Pharmacy Services mail choice is defined as claims filled at a Pharmacy Services mail order facility, which includes specialty mail claims inclusive of Specialty Connect  claims picked up
at a retail pharmacy, as well as prescriptions filled at the Company’s retail pharmacies under the Maintenance Choiceprogram.
Contract Balances
Contract liabilities primarily represent the Company’s obligation to transfer additional goods or services to a customer for which the Company has received
consideration, and include ExtraBucks Rewards and unredeemed Company gift cards. The consideration received remains a contract liability until goods or
services have been provided to the customer. In addition, the Company recognizes breakage on Company gift cards based on historical redemption patterns.
The following table provides information about receivables and contract liabilities from contracts with customers as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
2021
2020
Trade receivables (included in accounts receivable, net)
$
7,932 $
7,101 
Contract liabilities (included in accrued expenses)
87 
71 
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the contract liabilities balance includes increases related to customers’ earnings in ExtraBucks Rewards or
issuances of Company gift cards and decreases for revenues recognized during the period as a result of the redemption of ExtraBucks Rewards or Company gift
cards and breakage of Company gift cards. Below is a summary of such changes:
In millions
2021
2020
Contract liabilities, beginning of period
$
71 $
73 
Rewards earnings and gift card issuances
387 
357 
Redemption and breakage
(371)
(359)
Contract liabilities, end of period
$
87 $
71 
Cost of Products Sold
The Company accounts for cost of products sold as follows:
Pharmacy Services Segment
Cost of products sold includes: (i) the cost of prescription drugs sold during the reporting period directly through the Company’s mail service dispensing
pharmacies and indirectly through the Company’s retail pharmacy network, (ii) shipping and handling costs, and (iii) the operating costs of the Company’s mail
service dispensing pharmacies and client service operations and related information technology support costs including depreciation and amortization. The cost of
prescription drugs sold component of cost of products sold includes: (i) the cost of the prescription drugs purchased from manufacturers or distributors and shipped
to members in clients’ benefit plans from the Company’s mail service dispensing pharmacies, net of any volume-related or other discounts (see “Vendor
Allowances and Purchase Discounts” below) and (ii) the cost of prescription drugs sold (including retail co-payments) through the Company’s retail pharmacy
network under contracts where the Company is the principal, net of any volume-related or other discounts.
Retail/LTC Segment
Cost of products sold includes: the cost of merchandise sold during the reporting period, including prescription drug costs, and the related purchasing costs,
warehousing and delivery costs (including depreciation and amortization) and actual and estimated inventory losses.
Vendor Allowances and Purchase Discounts
The Company accounts for vendor allowances and purchase discounts as follows:
Pharmacy Services Segment
The Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers
and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive
®
®
 
 
123

purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase, (ii) a discount for the
prompt payment of invoices or (iii) when products are purchased indirectly from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy), a discount (or
rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recognized when prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers
within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts
billed and collected has not been material to the Company’s operating results or financial condition. The Company accounts for the effect of any such differences
as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed. The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its
wholesaler contracts if it exceeds contractually defined purchase volumes. In addition, the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical
manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees are recorded as a reduction of cost of products sold.
Retail/LTC Segment
Vendor allowances received by the Retail/LTC segment reduce the carrying cost of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related
inventory is sold, unless they are specifically identified as a reimbursement of incremental costs for promotional programs and/or other services provided. Amounts
that are directly linked to advertising commitments are recognized as a reduction of advertising expense (included in operating expenses) when the related
advertising commitment is satisfied. Any amounts received in excess of the actual cost incurred also reduce the carrying cost of inventory. The total value of any
upfront payments received from vendors that are linked to purchase commitments is initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of
products sold over the life of the contract based upon sales volume. The total value of any upfront payments received from vendors that are not linked to purchase
commitments is also initially deferred. The deferred amounts are then amortized to reduce cost of products sold on a straight-line basis over the life of the related
contract. The total amortization of these upfront payments was not material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements in any of the periods presented.
Health Care Reform
Health Insurer Fee
Since January 1, 2014, the ACA has imposed an annual premium-based health insurer fee (“HIF”) for each calendar year, payable in September, which was not
deductible for tax purposes. The Company has been required to estimate a liability for the HIF at the beginning of the calendar year in which the fee was payable
with a corresponding deferred asset that was amortized ratably to operating expenses over the calendar year. The Company recorded the liability for the HIF in
accrued expenses and recorded the deferred asset in other current assets. In December 2019, the HIF was repealed for calendar years after 2020, therefore there was
no expense related to the HIF in the year ended December 31, 2021. In the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses included $1.0 billion related to the
Company’s share of the HIF. There was no expense related to the HIF in 2019, since there was a one-year suspension of the HIF for 2019.
Risk Adjustment
The ACA established a permanent risk adjustment program to transfer funds from qualified individual and small group insurance plans with below average risk
scores to plans with above average risk scores. Based on the risk of the Company’s qualified plan members relative to the average risk of members of other
qualified plans in comparable markets, as defined by the ACA, the Company estimates its ultimate risk adjustment receivable (recorded in accounts receivable) or
payable (recorded in accrued expenses) for the current calendar year and reflects the pro-rata year-to-date impact as an adjustment to premium revenue.
Risk Corridor
The ACA established a temporary risk corridor program, which expired at the end of 2016, for qualified individual and small group health insurance plans. Under
this program, health insurance companies were to make payments to, or receive payments from, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”)
based on their ratio of allowable costs to target costs (as defined by the ACA).
The Company filed a lawsuit in August 2019 to recover the $313 million it was owed under the ACA’s risk corridor program, which had been stayed pending the
Supreme Court decision. In April 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that health insurance companies may sue the federal government for amounts owed as
calculated under the ACA’s temporary risk corridor program.
In October 2020, the Company received the $313 million it was owed under the ACA’s risk corridor program. The Company recorded the risk corridor payment as
an increase to premium revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020. After considering
124

offsetting items such as the ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements and premium taxes, the Company recorded pre-tax income of $307 million and after-tax
income of $223 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Advertising Costs
Advertising costs, which are reduced by the portion funded by vendors, are expensed when the related advertising takes place. Net advertising costs, which are
included in operating expenses, were $523 million, $461 million and $396 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the
stock award (generally three to five years) using the straight-line method.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected
future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are
determined on the basis of the differences between the consolidated financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for
the year or years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in the tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in
income in the period that includes the enactment date of such change.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that it believes these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, the
Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable
income, tax planning strategies, and the Company’s recent operating results. The Company establishes a valuation allowance when it does not consider it more
likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered.
The Company records uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process whereby (1) the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax
positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition
threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax
authority.
Interest and/or penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in the income tax provision.
Measurement of Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Employee Benefit Plans
The Company sponsors defined benefit pension plans (“pension plans”) and other postretirement employee benefit plans (“OPEB plans”) for its employees and
retirees. The Company recognizes the funded status of its pension and OPEB plans on the consolidated balance sheets based on the year-end measurements of plan
assets and benefit obligations. When the fair value of plan assets are in excess of the plan benefit obligations, the amounts are reported in other current assets and
other assets. When the fair value of plan benefit obligations are in excess of plan assets, the amounts are reported in accrued expenses and other long-term
liabilities based on the amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits payable in the next twelve months included in the benefit obligation exceeds the fair
value of plan assets. The net periodic benefit cost (income) for the Company’s pension and OPEB plans do not contain a service cost component as these plans
have been frozen for an extended period of time. Non-service cost components of pension and postretirement net periodic benefit cost (income) are included in
other income in the consolidated statements of operations.
Earnings per Share
Earnings per share is computed using the two-class method. The Company calculates basic earnings per share based on the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding for the period. See Note 14 ‘‘Earnings Per Share’’ for additional information.
125

Shares Held in Trust
The Company maintains grantor trusts, which held approximately one million shares of its common stock at both December 31, 2021 and 2020. These shares are
designated for use under various employee compensation plans. Since the Company holds these shares, they are excluded from the computation of basic and
diluted shares outstanding.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company has investments in (i) a generic pharmaceutical sourcing entity, (ii) certain hedge fund and private equity investments and (iii) certain real estate
partnerships that are considered VIEs. The Company does not have a future obligation to fund losses or debts on behalf of these investments; however, it may
voluntarily contribute funds. In evaluating whether the Company is the primary beneficiary of a VIE, the Company considers several factors, including whether the
Company has (a) the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses and the
right to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Variable Interest Entities - Primary Beneficiary
In 2014, the Company and Cardinal Health, Inc. (“Cardinal”) established Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (“Red Oak”), a generic pharmaceutical sourcing entity in which
the Company and Cardinal each own 50%. The Red Oak arrangement had an initial term of ten years. In 2021, the Red Oak arrangement was amended to extend
the initial term an additional five years, for a total term of 15 years. Under this arrangement, the Company and Cardinal contributed their sourcing and supply chain
expertise to Red Oak and agreed to source and negotiate generic pharmaceutical supply contracts for both companies through Red Oak; however, Red Oak does not
own or hold inventory on behalf of either company. No physical assets (e.g., property and equipment) were contributed to Red Oak by either company, and
minimal funding was provided to capitalize Red Oak. The Company has determined that it is the primary beneficiary of this VIE because it has the ability to direct
the activities of Red Oak. Consequently, the Company consolidates Red Oak in its consolidated financial statements within the Retail/LTC segment.
Cardinal is required to pay the Company quarterly payments, which began in October 2014 and will extend through June 2029. As milestones are met, the quarterly
payments increase. The Company received $183 million from Cardinal during each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The payments reduce
the Company’s carrying value of inventory and are recognized in cost of products sold when the related inventory is sold. Amounts reimbursed by Cardinal for the
years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, and amounts due to or due from Cardinal at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were immaterial.
Variable Interest Entities - Other Variable Interest Holder
The Company has invested in certain VIEs for which it has determined that it is not the primary beneficiary, consisting of the following:
•
Hedge fund and private equity investments - The Company invests in hedge fund and private equity investments in order to generate investment returns for its
investment portfolio supporting its insurance businesses.
•
Real estate partnerships - The Company invests in various real estate partnerships, including those that construct, own and manage low-income housing
developments. For the low income housing development investments, substantially all of the projected benefits to the Company are from tax credits and other
tax benefits.
The Company is not the primary beneficiary of these VIEs because the nature of the Company’s involvement with the activities of these VIEs does not give the
Company the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact their economic performance. The Company records the amount of its investment in these
VIEs as long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets and recognizes its share of each VIE’s income or losses in net income (loss). The Company’s
maximum exposure to loss from these VIEs is limited to its investment balances as disclosed below and the risk of recapture of previously recognized tax credits
related to the real estate partnerships, which the Company does not consider significant.
The total amount of other variable interest holder VIE assets included in long-term investments on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020
was as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
Hedge fund investments
$
463 $
342 
Private equity investments
601 
547 
Real estate partnerships
225 
200 
Total
$
1,289 $
1,089 
126

Related Party Transactions
The Company has an equity method investment in SureScripts, LLC (“SureScripts”), which operates a clinical health information network. The Company utilizes
this clinical health information network in providing services to its client plan members and retail customers. The Company expensed fees for the use of this
network of $52 million, $56 million and $32 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s investment in and equity
in the earnings of SureScripts for all periods presented is immaterial.
The Company has an equity method investment in Heartland Healthcare Services, LLC (“Heartland”). Heartland operates several LTC pharmacies in four states.
Heartland paid the Company $79 million, $77 million and $96 million for pharmaceutical inventory purchases during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020
and 2019, respectively. Additionally, the Company performs certain collection functions for Heartland and then transfers those customer cash collections to
Heartland. The Company’s investment in and equity in the earnings of Heartland for all periods presented is immaterial.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company made charitable contributions of $50 million, $50 million and $30 million,
respectively, to the CVS Health Foundation, a non-profit entity that focuses on health, education and community involvement programs. The charitable
contributions were recorded as operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations within the Corporate/Other segment for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Discontinued Operations
In connection with certain business dispositions completed between 1995 and 1997, the Company retained guarantees on store lease obligations for a number of
former subsidiaries, including Linens ‘n Things and Bob’s Stores, each of which subsequently filed for bankruptcy. The Company’s loss from discontinued
operations includes lease-related costs that the Company believes it will likely be required to satisfy pursuant to these lease guarantees. See “Lease Guarantees” in
Note 16 ‘‘Commitments and Contingencies’’ for additional information.
Below is a summary of the results of discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In millions
2020
Loss from discontinued operations
$
(12)
Income tax benefit
3 
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
$
(9)
Results from discontinued operations were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019.
New Accounting Pronouncements Recently Adopted
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740). This
standard simplifies the accounting for income taxes by eliminating certain exceptions to the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification 740 related to the
approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside
basis differences. The standard also simplifies aspects of the accounting for franchise taxes and enacted changes in tax laws or rates and clarifies the accounting for
transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill. The Company adopted this new accounting standard on January 1, 2021. The adoption of this
standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated operating results, cash flows, financial condition or related disclosures.
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Insurance Contracts
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-12, Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Contracts (Topic 944). This standard requires the
Company to review cash flow assumptions for its long-duration insurance contracts at least annually and recognize the effect of changes in future cash flow
assumptions in net income. This standard also requires the Company to update discount rate assumptions quarterly and recognize the effect of changes in these
assumptions in other comprehensive income. The rate used to discount the Company’s liability for future policy benefits will be based on an estimate of the yield
for an upper-medium grade fixed-income instrument with a duration profile matching that of the Company’s
127

liabilities. In addition, this standard changes the amortization method for deferred acquisition costs and requires additional disclosures regarding the long duration
insurance contract liabilities in the Company’s interim and annual financial statements. The standard is effective for public companies for fiscal years, and interim
periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company will adopt the new standard on January 1, 2023, using the modified
retrospective transition method as of the earliest period presented for changes to the liability for future policy benefits and deferred acquisition costs. While the
Company is still evaluating the impact of the new standard on its financial statements, the Company anticipates an increase to its liability for future policy benefits
with a corresponding change in accumulated other comprehensive income as a result of updating the rate used to discount the liabilities to reflect the yield for an
upper-medium grade fixed-income instrument compared to the Company’s expected investment yield under the existing guidance.
2.
Divestitures
Divestiture of Workers’ Compensation Business
On July 31, 2020, the Company sold its Workers’ Compensation business for approximately $850 million. The results of this business were reported within the
Health Care Benefits segment. The Company recorded a pre-tax gain on the divestiture of $269 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which is reflected as
a reduction in operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment.
Divestiture of Brazilian Subsidiary
On July 1, 2019, the Company sold its Brazilian subsidiary, Onofre, for an immaterial amount. Onofre operated 50 retail pharmacy stores, the results of which
historically had been reported within the Retail/LTC segment. The Company recorded a pre-tax loss on the divestiture of $205 million in the year ended December
31, 2019, which primarily relates to the elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income and is reflected in
operating expenses in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
3.
Investments
Total investments at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
2021
2020
In millions
Current
Long-term
Total
Current
Long-term
Total
Debt securities available for sale
$
3,009 
$
20,231 $
23,240 $
2,774 
$
18,414 $
21,188 
Mortgage loans
58 
844 
902 
226 
821 
1,047 
Other investments
50 
1,950 
2,000 
— 
1,577 
1,577 
Total investments
$
3,117 
$
23,025 $
26,142 $
3,000 
$
20,812 $
23,812 
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company held investments of $450 million and $524 million, respectively, related to the 2012 conversion of an existing
group annuity contract from a participating to a non-participating contract. These investments are included in the total investments of large case pensions
supporting non-experience-rated products. Although these investments are not accounted for as Separate Accounts assets, they are legally segregated and are not
subject to claims that arise out of the Company’s business and only support future policy benefits obligations under that group annuity contract.
128

Debt Securities
Debt securities available for sale at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
In millions
Amortized
Cost 
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
December 31, 2021
 
 
 
Debt securities:
 
 
 
U.S. government securities
$
2,349 
$
70 
$
(3)
$
2,416 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
2,947 
148 
(4)
3,091 
U.S. corporate securities
9,093 
682 
(40)
9,735 
Foreign securities
2,821 
196 
(24)
2,993 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
870 
15 
(10)
875 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
1,278 
44 
(12)
1,310 
Other asset-backed securities
2,791 
14 
(13)
2,792 
Redeemable preferred securities
25 
3 
— 
28 
Total debt securities 
$
22,174 
$
1,172 
$
(106)
$
23,240 
December 31, 2020
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
$
2,341 
$
128 
$
— 
$
2,469 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
2,556 
172 
— 
2,728 
U.S. corporate securities
7,879 
1,023 
(8)
8,894 
Foreign securities
2,595 
324 
(1)
2,918 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
673 
32 
— 
705 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
962 
84 
— 
1,046 
Other asset-backed securities
2,369 
36 
(2)
2,403 
Redeemable preferred securities
21 
4 
— 
25 
Total debt securities 
$
19,396 
$
1,803 
$
(11)
$
21,188 
(1)
There was no allowance for expected credit losses recorded on available-for-sale debt securities at December 31, 2021 or 2020.
(2)
Investment risks associated with the Company’s experience-rated products generally do not impact the Company’s consolidated operating results. At December 31, 2021, debt securities
with a fair value of $864 million, gross unrealized capital gains of $94 million and gross unrealized capital losses of $2 million and at December 31, 2020, debt securities with a fair value
of $919 million, gross unrealized capital gains of $135 million and no gross unrealized capital losses were included in total debt securities, but support experience-rated products. Changes
in net unrealized capital gains (losses) on these securities are not reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income.
(1)
(2)
(2)
_____________________________________________
129

The amortized cost and fair value of debt securities at December 31, 2021 are shown below by contractual maturity.  Actual maturities may differ from contractual
maturities because securities may be restructured, called or prepaid, or the Company intends to sell a security prior to maturity.
In millions
 Amortized 
Cost
Fair 
Value
Due to mature:
 
Less than one year
$
1,205 
$
1,218 
One year through five years
6,965 
7,142 
After five years through ten years
4,733 
4,910 
Greater than ten years
4,332 
4,993 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
870 
875 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
1,278 
1,310 
Other asset-backed securities
2,791 
2,792 
Total
$
22,174 
$
23,240 
Mortgage-Backed and Other Asset-Backed Securities
All of the Company’s residential mortgage-backed securities at December 31, 2021 were issued by the Government National Mortgage Association, the Federal
National Mortgage Association or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and carry agency guarantees and explicit or implicit guarantees by the U.S.
Government. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s residential mortgage-backed securities had an average credit quality rating of AAA and a weighted average
duration of 4.7 years.
The Company’s commercial mortgage-backed securities have underlying loans that are dispersed throughout the United States. Significant market observable
inputs used to value these securities include loss severity and probability of default. At December 31, 2021, these securities had an average credit quality rating of
AAA and a weighted average duration of 6.1 years.
The Company’s other asset-backed securities have a variety of underlying collateral (e.g., automobile loans, credit card receivables, home equity loans and
commercial loans). Significant market observable inputs used to value these securities include the unemployment rate, loss severity and probability of default. At
December 31, 2021, these securities had an average credit quality rating of AA and a weighted average duration of 1.0 year.
130

Summarized below are the debt securities the Company held at December 31, 2021 and 2020 that were in an unrealized capital loss position, aggregated by the
length of time the investments have been in that position:
Less than 12 months
Greater than 12 months
Total
In millions, except number of
securities
Number 
of 
 Securities
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Number 
of 
 Securities
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Number 
of 
 Securities
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
December 31, 2021
Debt securities:
 
 
U.S. government securities
43 
$
242 $
2 
10 
$
40 $
1 
53 
$
282 $
3 
States, municipalities and political
subdivisions
233 
428 
3 
13 
33 
1 
246 
461 
4 
U.S. corporate securities
1,610 
2,296 
31 
165 
238 
9 
1,775 
2,534 
40 
Foreign securities
449 
747 
20 
57 
91 
4 
506 
838 
24 
Residential mortgage-backed
securities
165 
593 
9 
10 
36 
1 
175 
629 
10 
Commercial mortgage-backed
securities
188 
462 
7 
35 
112 
5 
223 
574 
12 
Other asset-backed securities
1,011 
2,030 
12 
26 
31 
1 
1,037 
2,061 
13 
Redeemable preferred securities
1 
2 
— 
1 
3 
— 
2 
5 
— 
Total debt securities
3,700 
$
6,800 $
84 
317 
$
584 $
22 
4,017 
$
7,384 $
106 
December 31, 2020
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
32 
$
205 $
— 
— 
$
— $
— 
32 
$
205 $
— 
States, municipalities and political
subdivisions
49 
83 
— 
— 
— 
— 
49 
83 
— 
U.S. corporate securities
145 
155 
8 
2 
— 
— 
147 
155 
8 
Foreign securities
41 
69 
1 
5 
5 
— 
46 
74 
1 
Residential mortgage-backed
securities
23 
26 
— 
3 
— 
— 
26 
26 
— 
Commercial mortgage-backed
securities
22 
75 
— 
— 
— 
— 
22 
75 
— 
Other asset-backed securities
156 
256 
1 
49 
41 
1 
205 
297 
2 
Total debt securities
468 
$
869 $
10 
59 
$
46 $
1 
527 
$
915 $
11 
The Company reviewed the securities in the table above and concluded that they are performing assets generating investment income to support the needs of the
Company’s business. In performing this review, the Company considered factors such as the quality of the investment security based on research performed by the
Company’s internal credit analysts and external rating agencies and the prospects of realizing the carrying value of the security based on the investment’s current
prospects for recovery. Unrealized capital losses at December 31, 2021 were generally caused by interest rate increases and not by unfavorable changes in the
credit quality associated with these securities. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not intend to sell these securities, and did not believe it was more likely
than not that it would be required to sell these securities prior to the anticipated recovery of their amortized cost basis.
131

The maturity dates for debt securities in an unrealized capital loss position at December 31, 2021 were as follows:
 
Supporting experience- 
rated products
Supporting remaining 
products
Total
In millions
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Unrealized 
Losses
Due to mature:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less than one year
$
2 
$
— 
$
49 $
1 
$
51 $
1 
One year through five years
13 
1 
2,229 
32 
2,242 
33 
After five years through ten years
33 
1 
1,332 
26 
1,365 
27 
Greater than ten years
17 
— 
445 
10 
462 
10 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
4 
— 
625 
10 
629 
10 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
6 
— 
568 
12 
574 
12 
Other asset-backed securities
4 
— 
2,057 
13 
2,061 
13 
Total
$
79 
$
2 
$
7,305 $
104 
$
7,384 $
106 
Mortgage Loans
The Company’s mortgage loans are collateralized by commercial real estate. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had the following
activity in its mortgage loan portfolio:
In millions
2021
2020
New mortgage loans
$
262 $
63 
Mortgage loans fully repaid
373 
187 
Mortgage loans foreclosed
— 
— 
The Company assesses mortgage loans on a regular basis for credit impairments, and assigns a credit quality indicator to each loan. The Company’s credit quality
indicator is internally developed and categorizes each loan in its portfolio on a scale from 1 to 7. These indicators are based upon several factors, including current
loan-to-value ratios, current and future property cash flow, property condition, market trends, creditworthiness of the borrower and deal structure.
•
Category 1 - Represents loans of superior quality.
•
Categories 2 to 4 - Represent loans where credit risk is minimal to acceptable; however, these loans may display some susceptibility to economic changes.
•
Categories 5 and 6 - Represent loans where credit risk is not substantial, but these loans warrant management’s close attention.
•
Category 7 - Represents loans where collections are potentially at risk; if necessary, an impairment is recorded.
132

Based upon the Company’s assessments at December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amortized cost basis of the Company’s mortgage loans within each credit quality
indicator by year of origination was as follows:
Amortized Cost Basis by Year of Origination
In millions, except credit quality indicator
2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
Prior
Total
December 31, 2021
1
$
— $
— $
— $
— $
— $
28 $
28 
2 to 4
255 
48 
40 
72 
97 
349 
861 
5 and 6
— 
— 
— 
3 
4 
6 
13 
7
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Total
$
255 $
48 $
40 $
75 $
101 $
383 $
902 
December 31, 2020
1
$
— $
— $
— $
22 $
37 $
59 
2 to 4
46 
96 
91 
124 
595 
952 
5 and 6
— 
— 
3 
4 
29 
36 
7
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Total
$
46 $
96 $
94 $
150 $
661 $
1,047 
At December 31, 2021 scheduled mortgage loan principal repayments were as follows:
In millions
2022
$
58 
2023
100 
2024
210 
2025
76 
2026
177 
Thereafter
281 
Total
$
902 
Net Investment Income
Sources of net investment income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Debt securities
$
634 $
598 $
589 
Mortgage loans
55 
60 
71 
Other investments
381 
123 
194 
Gross investment income
1,070 
781 
854 
Investment expenses
(47)
(35)
(42)
Net investment income (excluding net realized capital gains or losses)
1,023 
746 
812 
Net realized capital gains 
176 
52 
199 
Net investment income 
$
1,199 $
798 $
1,011 
(1)
Net realized capital gains are net of yield-related impairment losses on debt securities of $42 million and $49 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There
were no credit-related losses on debt securities in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Net realized capital gains are net of other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) losses on
debt securities of $24 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(2)
Net investment income includes $38 million, $42 million and $44 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to investments supporting
experience-rated products.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
133

Capital gains and losses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to investments in equity securities held as of December 31, 2021 were not
material.
Excluding amounts related to experience-rated products, proceeds from the sale of available-for-sale debt securities and the related gross realized capital gains and
losses in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Proceeds from sales
$
3,572 $
3,913 $
4,773 
Gross realized capital gains
72 
80 
146 
Gross realized capital losses
14 
62 
17 
4.
Fair Value
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires certain assets and liabilities to be reflected at their fair
value and others to be reflected on another basis, such as an adjusted historical cost basis. In this note, the Company provides details on the fair value of financial
assets and liabilities and how it determines those fair values. The Company presents this information for those financial instruments that are measured at fair value
for which the change in fair value impacts net income attributable to CVS Health or other comprehensive income separately from other financial assets and
liabilities.
Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
Certain of the Company’s financial instruments are measured at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. The fair values of these instruments are based on
valuations that include inputs that can be classified within one of three levels of a hierarchy established by GAAP.  The following are the levels of the hierarchy
and a brief description of the type of valuation information (“valuation inputs”) that qualifies a financial asset or liability for each level:
•
Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
•
Level 2 – Valuation inputs other than Level 1 that are based on observable market data. These include: quoted prices for similar assets in active markets,
quoted prices for identical assets in inactive markets, valuation inputs that are observable that are not prices (such as interest rates and credit risks) and
valuation inputs that are derived from or corroborated by observable markets.
•
Level 3 – Developed from unobservable data, reflecting the Company’s assumptions.
Financial assets and liabilities are classified based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the valuation. When quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets and liabilities are available, the Company uses these quoted market prices to determine the fair value of financial assets and liabilities and classifies
these assets and liabilities in Level 1. In other cases where a quoted market price for identical assets and liabilities in an active market is either not available or not
observable, the Company estimates fair value using valuation methodologies based on available and observable market information or by using a matrix pricing
model. These financial assets and liabilities are classified in Level 2. If quoted market prices are not available, the Company determines fair value using broker
quotes or an internal analysis of each investment’s financial performance and cash flow projections. Thus, financial assets and liabilities may be classified in Level
3 even though there may be some significant inputs that may be observable.
The following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for the Company’s financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value, including the
general classification of such assets and liabilities pursuant to the valuation hierarchy.
Cash and Cash Equivalents – The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents approximates fair value as maturities are less than three months. When
quoted prices are available in an active market, cash equivalents are classified in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. Fair values of cash equivalent
instruments that do not trade on a regular basis in active markets are classified as Level 2.
Debt Securities – Where quoted prices are available in an active market, debt securities are classified in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. The
Company’s Level 1 debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Treasury securities.
The fair values of the Company’s Level 2 debt securities are obtained using models, such as matrix pricing, which use quoted market prices of debt
securities with similar characteristics or discounted cash flows to estimate fair value. The
134

Company reviews these prices to ensure they are based on observable market inputs that include quoted prices for similar assets in active markets, quoted
prices for identical assets in inactive markets and inputs that are observable that are not prices (such as interest rates and credit risks). The Company also
reviews the methodologies and the assumptions used to calculate prices from these observable inputs. On a quarterly basis, the Company selects a sample
of its Level 2 debt securities’ prices and compares them to prices provided by a secondary source. Variances over a specified threshold are identified and
reviewed to confirm the price provided by the primary source represents an appropriate estimate of fair value. In addition, the Company’s internal
investment team consistently compares the prices obtained for select Level 2 debt securities to the team’s own independent estimates of fair value for
those securities. The Company obtained one price for each of its Level 2 debt securities and did not adjust any of those prices at December 31, 2021 or
2020.
The Company also values certain debt securities using Level 3 inputs. For Level 3 debt securities, fair values are determined by outside brokers or, in the
case of certain private placement securities, are priced internally. Outside brokers determine the value of these debt securities through a combination of
their knowledge of the current pricing environment and market flows. The Company did not have any broker quoted debt securities for the years ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020. For some private placement securities, the Company’s internal staff determines the value of these debt securities by
analyzing spreads of corporate and sector indices as well as interest spreads of comparable public bonds. Examples of these private placement Level 3
debt securities include certain U.S. and foreign securities and certain tax-exempt municipal securities.
Equity Securities – The Company currently has two classifications of equity securities: those that are publicly traded and those that are privately
placed. Publicly-traded equity securities are classified in Level 1 because quoted prices are available for these securities in an active market. For privately
placed equity securities, there is no active market; therefore, these securities are classified in Level 3 because the Company prices these securities through
an internal analysis of each investment’s financial statements and cash flow projections. Significant unobservable inputs consist of earnings and revenue
multiples, discount for lack of marketability and comparability adjustments. An increase or decrease in any of these unobservable inputs would have
resulted in a change in the fair value measurement.
135

There were no financial liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2021 or 2020. Financial assets
measured at fair value on a recurring basis on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2021
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
4,954 $
4,454 $
— $
9,408 
Debt securities:
 
 
 
 
U.S. government securities
2,372 
44 
— 
2,416 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
3,086 
5 
3,091 
U.S. corporate securities
— 
9,697 
38 
9,735 
Foreign securities
— 
2,983 
10 
2,993 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
875 
— 
875 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
1,310 
— 
1,310 
Other asset-backed securities
— 
2,789 
3 
2,792 
Redeemable preferred securities
— 
28 
— 
28 
Total debt securities
2,372 
20,812 
56 
23,240 
Equity securities
114 
— 
55 
169 
Total
$
7,440 $
25,266 $
111 $
32,817 
December 31, 2020
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
3,985 $
3,869 $
— $
7,854 
Debt securities:
U.S. government securities
2,370 
99 
— 
2,469 
States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
2,727 
1 
2,728 
U.S. corporate securities
— 
8,842 
52 
8,894 
Foreign securities
— 
2,918 
— 
2,918 
Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
705 
— 
705 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
1,046 
— 
1,046 
Other asset-backed securities
— 
2,403 
— 
2,403 
Redeemable preferred securities
— 
24 
1 
25 
Total debt securities
2,370 
18,764 
54 
21,188 
Equity securities
17 
— 
30 
47 
Total
$
6,372 $
22,633 $
84 $
29,089 
136

The changes in the balances of Level 3 financial assets during the year ended December 31, 2021 were as follows:
In millions
States, 
municipalities 
 and political 
subdivisions
U.S. 
corporate 
securities
Foreign 
securities
Other asset- 
backed 
securities
Redeemable 
preferred 
securities
Equity 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
1 
$
52 
$
— 
$
— 
$
1 
$
30 
$
84 
Net realized and unrealized capital
gains (losses):
Included in earnings 
— 
(10)
— 
— 
2 
13 
5 
Included in other comprehensive
income
— 
(3)
— 
— 
(1)
— 
(4)
Purchases
— 
1 
— 
3 
— 
13 
17 
Sales
(1)
(1)
— 
— 
(2)
(1)
(5)
Settlements
— 
(1)
— 
— 
— 
— 
(1)
Transfers into Level 3, net
5 
— 
10 
— 
— 
— 
15 
Ending balance
$
5 
$
38 
$
10 
$
3 
$
— 
$
55 
$
111 
The change in unrealized capital losses included in other comprehensive income associated with Level 3 financial assets which were held as of December 31, 2021
was $4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The changes in the balances of Level 3 financial assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
In millions
States, 
municipalities 
 and political 
subdivisions
U.S. 
corporate 
securities
Redeemable 
preferred 
securities
Equity 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
— 
$
37 
$
12 
$
39 
$
88 
Net realized and unrealized capital gains (losses):
Included in earnings 
— 
(11)
18 
(3)
4 
Included in other comprehensive income
— 
— 
(5)
— 
(5)
Purchases
— 
27 
— 
3 
30 
Sales
— 
— 
(24)
(9)
(33)
Settlements
— 
(1)
— 
— 
(1)
Transfers into Level 3, net
1 
— 
— 
— 
1 
Ending balance
$
1 
$
52 
$
1 
$
30 
$
84 
The change in unrealized capital losses included in other comprehensive income associated with Level 3 financial assets which were held as of December 31, 2020
was $4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The total gross transfers into (out of) Level 3 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
Gross transfers into Level 3
$
15 $
1 
Gross transfers out of Level 3
— 
— 
Net transfers into Level 3
$
15 $
1 
137

Financial Instruments Not Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
The carrying value and estimated fair value classified by level of fair value hierarchy for financial instruments carried on the consolidated balance sheets at
adjusted cost or contract value at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Carrying 
Value
 Estimated Fair Value
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
December 31, 2021
Assets:
 
Mortgage loans
$
902 
$
— $
— 
$
907 $
907 
Equity securities 
126 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Liabilities:
Investment contract liabilities:
With a fixed maturity
5 
— 
— 
5 
5 
Without a fixed maturity
336 
— 
— 
373 
373 
Long-term debt
56,176 
64,157 
— 
— 
64,157 
December 31, 2020
Assets:
Mortgage loans
$
1,047 
$
— $
— 
$
1,070 $
1,070 
Equity securities 
145 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Liabilities:
Investment contract liabilities:
With a fixed maturity
5 
— 
— 
5 
5 
Without a fixed maturity
322 
— 
— 
371 
371 
Long-term debt
64,647 
75,940 
— 
— 
75,940 
(1)
It was not practical to estimate the fair value of these cost-method investments as it represents shares of unlisted companies. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional
information regarding the valuation of cost method investments.
Separate Accounts Measured at Fair Value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
Separate Accounts assets relate to the Company’s large case pensions products which represent funds maintained to meet specific objectives of contract
holders. Since contract holders bear the investment risk of these assets, a corresponding Separate Accounts liability has been established equal to the assets. These
assets and liabilities are carried at fair value. Net investment income and capital gains and losses on Separate Accounts assets accrue directly to such contract
holders. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims arising from the Company’s other businesses. Deposits, withdrawals, net
investment income and realized and unrealized capital gains and losses on Separate Accounts assets are not reflected in the consolidated statements of operations,
shareholders’ equity or cash flows.
Separate Accounts assets include debt and equity securities. The valuation methodologies used for these assets are similar to the methodologies described above in
this Note 4 ‘‘Fair Value.’’ Separate Accounts assets also include investments in common/collective trusts that are carried at fair value. Common/collective trusts
invest in other investment funds otherwise known as the underlying funds. The Separate Accounts’ interests in the common/collective trust funds are based on the
fair values of the investments of the underlying funds and therefore are classified in Level 2. The assets in the underlying funds primarily consist of equity
securities. Investments in common/collective trust funds are valued at their respective net asset value (“NAV”) per share/unit on the valuation date.
(1)
(1)
_____________________________________________
138

Separate Accounts financial assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
2 $
186 $
— 
$
188 $
2 $
186 $
— 
$
188 
Debt securities
1,233 
3,048 
— 
4,281 
1,465 
2,634 
— 
4,099 
Equity securities
— 
1 
— 
1 
— 
2 
— 
2 
Common/collective trusts
— 
547 
— 
547 
— 
563 
— 
563 
Total 
$
1,235 $
3,782 $
— 
$
5,017 $
1,467 $
3,385 $
— 
$
4,852 
(1)
Excludes $70 million and $29 million of other receivables at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had no gross transfers of Separate Accounts financial assets into or out of Level 3.
5.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Goodwill
Below is a summary of the changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy 
Services
Retail/ 
LTC
Total
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
45,361 $
23,581 
$
10,807 $
79,749 
Acquisitions
274 
34 
— 
308 
Divestiture of Workers’ Compensation business
(505)
— 
— 
(505)
Balance at December 31, 2020
45,130 
23,615 
10,807 
79,552 
Impairment
— 
— 
(431)
(431)
Balance at December 31, 2021
$
45,130 $
23,615 
$
10,376 $
79,121 
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in the carrying amount of goodwill was primarily driven by a goodwill impairment charge related to the
LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in the carrying amount of goodwill was primarily
driven by the divestiture of the Workers’ Compensation business, partially offset by goodwill associated with immaterial acquisitions. See Note 2 ‘‘Divestitures’’
for further discussion regarding the Workers’ Compensation business divestiture.
During the third quarter of 2021, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill. The results of the impairment tests indicated an
impairment of the goodwill associated with the LTC reporting unit, as the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeded its fair value as of the testing date. The results
of the impairment tests of the remaining reporting units indicated that there was no impairment of goodwill as of the testing date.
During 2021, the LTC reporting unit has continued to face challenges that have impacted the Company’s ability to grow the LTC reporting unit’s business at the
rate estimated when its 2020 goodwill impairment test was performed. These challenges include lower net facility admissions, net long-term care facility customer
losses and the prolonged adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the emerging new variants, which resulted in more significant declines in occupancy rates
experienced by the Company’s long-term care facility customers than previously anticipated. During the third quarter of 2021, LTC management updated their
2021 annual forecast and submitted their long-term plan which showed deterioration in the financial results for the remainder of 2021 and beyond. The Company
utilized these updated projections in performing its annual impairment test, which indicated that the fair value of the LTC reporting unit was lower than its carrying
value, resulting in a $431 million goodwill impairment charge in the third quarter of 2021. The fair value of the LTC reporting unit was determined using a
combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market multiple method. As of December 31, 2021, there was no remaining goodwill balance in the LTC
reporting unit. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company also performed an impairment test of the intangible assets of the LTC reporting unit and concluded
these assets were not impaired. As of December 31, 2021, there was $2.7 billion of intangible assets related to customer lists in the LTC reporting unit.
(1)
_____________________________________________
139

During the third quarter of 2020, the Company performed its required annual impairment tests of goodwill. The results of the impairment tests indicated that there
was no impairment of goodwill.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, cumulative goodwill impairments were $6.6 billion and $6.1 billion, respectively.
Intangible Assets
The following table is a summary of the Company’s intangible assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions, except weighted average life
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Weighted 
Average 
Life (years)
2021
Trademarks (indefinite-lived)
$
10,498 
$
— 
$
10,498 
N/A
Customer contracts/relationships and covenants not to compete
25,084 
(10,564)
14,520 
15.0
Technology
1,060 
(1,060)
— 
3.0
Provider networks
4,203 
(651)
3,552 
20.0
Value of Business Acquired
590 
(173)
417 
20.0
Other
318 
(279)
39 
8.4
Total
$
41,753 
$
(12,727)
$
29,026 
15.3
2020
Trademarks (indefinite-lived)
$
10,498 
$
— 
$
10,498 
N/A
Customer contracts/relationships and covenants not to compete
24,952 
(8,923)
16,029 
14.9
Technology
1,060 
(739)
321 
3.0
Provider networks
4,203 
(440)
3,763 
20.0
Value of Business Acquired
590 
(119)
471 
20.0
Other
320 
(260)
60 
7.7
Total
$
41,623 
$
(10,481)
$
31,142 
15.2
Amortization expense for intangible assets totaled $2.3 billion, $2.3 billion and $2.4 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The projected annual amortization expense for the Company’s intangible assets for the next five years is as follows:
In millions
2022
$
1,858 
2023
1,826 
2024
1,785 
2025
1,734 
2026
1,494 
6.
Leases
The Company leases most of its retail stores and mail order facilities and certain distribution centers and corporate offices under operating or finance leases,
typically with initial terms of 15 to 25 years. The Company also leases certain equipment and other assets under operating or finance leases, typically with initial
terms of 3 to 10 years.
In addition, the Company leases pharmacy space at the stores of another retail chain for which the noncancelable contractual term of the pharmacy lease
arrangement exceeds the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings. For these pharmacy lease arrangements, the Company concluded that for accounting
purposes the lease term was the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings. Consequently, most of these individual pharmacy leases are finance leases.
140

The following table is a summary of the components of net lease cost for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Operating lease cost
$
2,633 $
2,670 $
2,720 
Finance lease cost:
Amortization of right-of-use assets
62 
56 
38 
Interest on lease liabilities
62 
58 
44 
Total finance lease costs
124 
114 
82 
Short-term lease costs
25 
22 
24 
Variable lease costs
604 
599 
581 
Less: sublease income
59 
55 
50 
Net lease cost
$
3,327 $
3,350 $
3,357 
Supplemental cash flow information related to leases for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows paid for operating leases
$
2,714 $
2,724 $
2,701 
Operating cash flows paid for interest portion of finance leases
62 
58 
44 
Financing cash flows paid for principal portion of finance leases
50 
34 
26 
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for lease obligations:
Operating leases
1,254 
1,679 
1,824 
Finance leases
278 
313 
283 
141

Supplemental balance sheet information related to leases as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
In millions, except remaining lease term and discount rate
2021
2020
Operating leases:
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$
19,122
$
20,729
Current portion of operating lease liabilities
$
1,646
$
1,638
Long-term operating lease liabilities
18,177
18,757
Total operating lease liabilities
$
19,823
$
20,395
Finance leases:
Property and equipment, gross
$
1,375
$
1,107
Accumulated depreciation
(188)
(106)
Property and equipment, net
$
1,187
$
1,001
Current portion of long-term debt
$
50
$
33
Long-term debt
1,250
1,050
Total finance lease liabilities
$
1,300
$
1,083
Weighted average remaining lease term (in years)
Operating leases
12.8
13.3
Finance leases
20.0
20.3
Weighted average discount rate
Operating leases
4.4 
%
4.5 
%
Finance leases
5.0 
%
5.6 
%
The following table summarizes the maturity of lease liabilities under finance and operating leases as of December 31, 2021:
In millions
Finance 
Leases
Operating 
Leases 
Total
2022
$
122 $
2,685 
$
2,807 
2023
121 
2,613 
2,734 
2024
111 
2,398 
2,509 
2025
110 
2,217 
2,327 
2026
109 
2,054 
2,163 
Thereafter
1,495 
14,103 
15,598 
Total lease payments 
2,068 
26,070 
28,138 
Less: imputed interest
(768)
(6,247)
(7,015)
Total lease liabilities
$
1,300 $
19,823 
$
21,123 
(1)
Future operating lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of $311 million due in the future under noncancelable subleases.
(2)
The Company leases pharmacy and clinic space from Target Corporation. Amounts related to such finance and operating leases are reflected above. Pharmacy lease amounts due in excess
of the remaining estimated economic life of the buildings of approximately $2.4 billion are not reflected in this table since the estimated economic life of the buildings is shorter than the
contractual term of the pharmacy lease arrangement.
Sale-Leaseback Transactions
The Company finances a portion of its store development program through sale-leaseback transactions. The properties are generally sold at net book value, which
generally approximates fair value, and the resulting leases generally qualify and are accounted for as operating leases. The operating leases that resulted from these
transactions are included in the tables above. The Company does not have any retained or contingent interests in the stores and does not provide any guarantees,
other than a
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
142

guarantee of lease payments, in connection with the sale-leaseback transactions. There were no sale-leaseback transactions in 2021. Proceeds from sale-leaseback
transactions totaled $101 million and $5 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gains from sale-leaseback transactions totaled $3
million in the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no material gains from sale-leaseback transactions in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Store Impairment Charges
The Company evaluates its retail store right-of-use and property and equipment assets for impairment at the retail store level, which is the lowest level at which
cash flows can be identified. For retail stores where there is an indicator of impairment present, the Company first compares the carrying amount of the asset group
to the estimated future cash flows associated with the asset group (undiscounted). If the estimated undiscounted future cash flows used in the analysis are less than
the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment loss calculation is prepared. The impairment loss calculation compares the carrying amount of the asset
group to its estimated fair value which is the greater of the asset group’s estimated future cash flows (discounted), or the consideration of what a market participant
would pay to lease the assets, net of leasing costs. The Company’s estimate of fair value considers historical results, current operating trends, consolidated sales,
profitability and cash flow results and forecasts. For assets which the Company has determined it will be able to sublease, the estimated future cash flows include
the estimated sublease income, net of estimated leasing costs.
When the carrying value of an asset group exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recorded to reduce the value of the asset group to its estimated fair
value. As the impaired assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis primarily using unobservable inputs as of the measurement date, the assets are
classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company completed a strategic review of its retail business and announced the creation of new formats for its stores to
continue to drive higher engagement with customers. As part of this review, the Company evaluated changes in population, consumer buying patterns and future
health needs to ensure it has the right kinds of stores in the right locations for consumers and for the business. In connection with this initiative, on November 17,
2021, the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation (the “Board”) authorized the closing of approximately 900 retail stores over the next three years. The
Company expects to close approximately 300 stores each year between 2022 and 2024. As a result, management determined that there were indicators of
impairment with respect to the impacted stores’ asset groups, including the associated operating lease right-of-use assets and property and equipment. A long-lived
asset impairment test was performed during the fourth quarter of 2021 and the results of the impairment test indicated that the fair value of certain retail store asset
groups was lower than their respective carrying values. Accordingly, in the three months ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a store impairment
charge of approximately $1.4 billion, consisting of a write down of approximately $1.1 billion related to operating lease right-of-use assets and $261 million related
to property and equipment, within the Retail/LTC segment. Subsequent to the impairment loss, the fair value of the associated operating lease right-of use assets
and property and equipment were $356 million and $185 million, respectively.
During 2019, the Company performed reviews of its retail stores and determined it would close 68 underperforming retail pharmacy stores. As a result,
management determined that there were indicators of impairment with respect to the impacted stores, including the associated operating lease right-of-use assets.
Long-lived asset impairment tests were performed and the results indicated that the fair value of those underperforming retail stores were lower than their
respective carrying values. Accordingly, the Company recorded store impairment charges of $231 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily
related to these operating lease right-of-use asset impairment charges, within the Retail/LTC segment.
143

7.
Health Care Costs Payable
The following is information about incurred and cumulative paid health care claims development as of December 31, 2021, net of reinsurance, and the total IBNR
liabilities plus expected development on reported claims included within the net incurred claims amounts. See Note 1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for
information on how the Company estimates IBNR reserves and health care costs payable as well as changes to those methodologies, if any. The Company’s
estimate of IBNR liabilities is primarily based on trend and completion factors. Claim frequency is not used in the calculation of the Company’s liability. In
addition, it is impracticable to disclose claim frequency information for health care claims due to the Company’s inability to gather consistent claim frequency
information across its multiple claims processing systems. Any claim frequency count disclosure would not be comparable across the Company’s different claim
processing systems and would not be consistent from period to period based on the volume of claims processed through each system. As a result, health care claim
count frequency is not included in the disclosures below.
The information about incurred and paid health care claims development for the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented as required unaudited supplemental
information.
In millions
Incurred Health Care Claims, 
Net of Reinsurance 
For the Years Ended December 31,
Date of Service
2020
2021
(Unaudited)
2020
$
54,529 
$
53,804 
2021
62,830 
Total $
116,634 
In millions
Cumulative Paid Health Care Claims, 
Net of Reinsurance 
For the Years Ended December 31,
Date of Service
2020
2021
(Unaudited)
2020
$
47,567 
$
53,590 
2021
54,600 
Total $
108,190 
All outstanding liabilities for health care costs payable prior to 2020, net of reinsurance
130 
Total outstanding liabilities for health care costs payable, net of reinsurance $
8,574 
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s liabilities for IBNR plus expected development on reported claims totaled approximately $6.6 billion. Substantially all of
the Company’s liabilities for IBNR plus expected development on reported claims at December 31, 2021 related to the current calendar year.
The reconciliation of the December 31, 2021 health care net incurred and paid claims development tables to the health care costs payable liability on the
consolidated balance sheet is as follows:
In millions
December 31, 2021
Short-duration health care costs payable, net of reinsurance
$
8,574 
Reinsurance recoverables
8 
Premium deficiency reserve
16 
Insurance lines other than short duration
210 
Total health care costs payable
$
8,808 
144

The following table shows the components of the change in health care costs payable during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Health care costs payable, beginning of period
$
7,936 $
6,879 $
6,147 
Less: Reinsurance recoverables
10 
5 
4 
Health care costs payable, beginning of period, net
7,926 
6,874 
6,143 
Acquisitions, net
— 
414 
— 
Add: Components of incurred health care costs
  Current year
64,761 
55,835 
52,723 
  Prior years
(788)
(429)
(524)
Total incurred health care costs 
63,973 
55,406 
52,199 
Less: Claims paid
  Current year
56,323 
48,770 
46,158 
  Prior years
6,792 
6,009 
5,314 
Total claims paid
63,115 
54,779 
51,472 
Add: Premium deficiency reserve
16 
11 
4 
Health care costs payable, end of period, net
8,800 
7,926 
6,874 
Add: Reinsurance recoverables
8 
10 
5 
Health care costs payable, end of period
$
8,808 $
7,936 $
6,879 
(1)
Total incurred health care costs for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 in the table above exclude (i) $16 million, $11 million and $4 million, respectively, for a premium
deficiency reserve related to the Company’s Medicaid products, (ii) $59 million, $41 million and $41 million, respectively, of benefit costs recorded in the Health Care Benefits segment
that are included in other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and (iii) $212 million, $221 million and $285 million, respectively, of benefit costs recorded in the
Corporate/Other segment that are included in other insurance liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company’s estimates of prior years’ health care costs payable decreased by $788 million, $429 million and $524 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively,
because claims were settled for amounts less than originally estimated (i.e., the amount of claims incurred was lower than originally estimated), primarily due to
lower health care cost trends as well as the actual claim submission time being faster than originally assumed (i.e., the Company’s completion factors were higher
than originally assumed) in estimating health care costs payable at the end of the prior year. This development does not directly correspond to an increase in the
Company’s operating results as these reductions were offset by estimated current period health care costs when the Company established the estimate of the current
year health care costs payable.
(1)
_____________________________________________
145

8.
Borrowings and Credit Agreements
The following table is a summary of the Company’s borrowings as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
2021
2020
Long-term debt
3.35% senior notes due March 2021
$
— 
$
2,038 
Floating rate notes due March 2021 (0.950% at December 31, 2020)
— 
1,000 
4.125% senior notes due May 2021
— 
222 
2.125% senior notes due June 2021
— 
1,750 
4.125% senior notes due June 2021
— 
203 
5.45% senior notes due June 2021
— 
187 
3.5% senior notes due July 2022
1,500 
1,500 
2.75% senior notes due November 2022
1,000 
1,000 
2.75% senior notes due December 2022
1,250 
1,250 
4.75% senior notes due December 2022
399 
399 
3.7% senior notes due March 2023
— 
2,336 
2.8% senior notes due June 2023
1,300 
1,300 
4% senior notes due December 2023
414 
414 
3.375% senior notes due August 2024
650 
650 
2.625% senior notes due August 2024
1,000 
1,000 
3.5% senior notes due November 2024
750 
750 
5% senior notes due December 2024
299 
299 
4.1% senior notes due March 2025
950 
950 
3.875% senior notes due July 2025
2,828 
2,828 
2.875% senior notes due June 2026
1,750 
1,750 
3% senior notes due August 2026
750 
750 
3.625% senior notes due April 2027
750 
750 
6.25% senior notes due June 2027
372 
372 
1.3% senior notes due August 2027
2,250 
2,250 
4.3% senior notes due March 2028
5,000 
7,050 
3.25% senior notes due August 2029
1,750 
1,750 
3.75% senior notes due April 2030
1,500 
1,500 
1.75% senior notes due August 2030
1,250 
1,250 
1.875% senior notes due February 2031
1,250 
1,250 
2.125% senior notes due September 2031
1,000 
— 
4.875% senior notes due July 2035
652 
652 
6.625% senior notes due June 2036
771 
771 
6.75% senior notes due December 2037
533 
533 
4.78% senior notes due March 2038
5,000 
5,000 
6.125% senior notes due September 2039
447 
447 
4.125% senior notes due April 2040
1,000 
1,000 
2.7% senior notes due August 2040
1,250 
1,250 
5.75% senior notes due May 2041
133 
133 
4.5% senior notes due May 2042
500 
500 
4.125% senior notes due November 2042
500 
500 
5.3% senior notes due December 2043
750 
750 
4.75% senior notes due March 2044
375 
375 
5.125% senior notes due July 2045
3,500 
3,500 
3.875% senior notes due August 2047
1,000 
1,000 
5.05% senior notes due March 2048
8,000 
8,000 
4.25% senior notes due April 2050
750 
750 
Finance lease liabilities
1,300 
1,083 
Other
320 
326 
Total debt principal
56,743 
65,318 
Debt premiums
219 
238 
Debt discounts and deferred financing costs
(786)
(909)
56,176 
64,647 
Less:
Current portion of long-term debt
(4,205)
(5,440)
Long-term debt
$
51,971 
$
59,207 
146

The following is a summary of the Company’s required repayments of debt principal due during each of the next five years and thereafter, as of December 31,
2021:
In millions
2022
$
4,154 
2023
1,719 
2024
2,706 
2025
3,785 
2026
2,507 
Thereafter
40,572 
Subtotal
55,443 
Finance lease liabilities 
1,300 
Total debt principal
$
56,743 
(1)
See Note 6 ‘‘Leases’’ for a summary of maturities of the Company’s finance lease liabilities.
Short-term Borrowings
Commercial Paper and Back-up Credit Facilities
The Company did not have any commercial paper outstanding as of December 31, 2021 or 2020. In connection with its commercial paper program, the Company
maintains a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 17, 2023, a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up
revolving credit facility, which expires on May 16, 2024, and a $2.0 billion, five-year unsecured back-up revolving credit facility, which expires on May 11, 2026.
The credit facilities allow for borrowings at various rates that are dependent, in part, on the Company’s public debt ratings and require the Company to pay a
weighted average quarterly facility fee of approximately 0.03%, regardless of usage. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding
under any of the Company’s back-up credit facilities.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”)
A subsidiary of the Company is a member of the FHLBB. As a member, the subsidiary has the ability to obtain cash advances, subject to certain minimum
collateral requirements. The maximum borrowing capacity available from the FHLBB as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $995 million. At both
December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no outstanding advances from the FHLBB.
Long-term Borrowings
2021 Notes
On August 18, 2021, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.125% unsecured senior notes due September 15, 2031 for total proceeds of
$987 million, net of discounts, underwriting fees and offering expenses. The net proceeds of this offering were used for the purchase of senior notes in connection
with the Company’s cash tender offer in August 2021 as described below.
2020 Notes
On December 16, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027 and $1.25 billion
aggregate principal amount of 1.875% unsecured senior notes due February 28, 2031 for total proceeds of approximately $1.99 billion, net of discounts and
underwriting fees. The $750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes represent a further issuance of the Company’s 1.3% unsecured
senior notes due August 21, 2027 initially issued in an aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion on August 21, 2020.
On August 21, 2020, the Company issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.3% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2027, $1.25 billion aggregate
principal amount of 1.75% unsecured senior notes due August 21, 2030 and $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.7% unsecured senior notes due August
21, 2040 (collectively, the “August 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.97 billion, net of discounts and underwriting fees.
On March 31, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.625% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2027, $1.5 billion aggregate
principal amount of 3.75% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2030, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.125% unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2040
and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25%
(1)
_____________________________________________
147

unsecured senior notes due April 1, 2050 (collectively, the “March 2020 Notes”) for total proceeds of approximately $3.95 billion, net of discounts and
underwriting fees.
The net proceeds of these offerings were used for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, as well as the repurchase
and/or repayment of indebtedness.
During March 2020, the Company entered into several interest rate swap transactions to manage interest rate risk. These agreements were designated as cash flow
hedges and were used to hedge the exposure to variability in future cash flows resulting from changes in interest rates related to the anticipated issuance of the
March 2020 Notes. In connection with the issuance of the March 2020 Notes, the Company terminated all outstanding cash flow hedges. The Company paid a net
amount of $7 million to the hedge counterparties upon termination, which was recorded as a loss, net of tax, of $5 million in accumulated other comprehensive
income and will be reclassified as interest expense over the life of the March 2020 Notes. See Note 13 ‘‘Other Comprehensive Income’’ for additional information.
Early Extinguishments of Debt
In December 2021, the Company redeemed for cash the remaining $2.3 billion of its outstanding 3.7% senior notes due 2023. In connection with the early
redemption of such senior notes, the Company paid a make-whole premium of $80 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
redeemed, wrote-off $8 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $1 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$89 million.
In August 2021, the Company purchased approximately $2.0 billion of its outstanding 4.3% senior notes due 2028 through a cash tender offer. In connection with
the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $332 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
purchased, wrote-off $26 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $5 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$363 million.
In December 2020, the Company purchased $4.5 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the
following: $113 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $1.4 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023, $1.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025 and
$2.0 billion of its 4.3% senior notes due 2028. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $619 million in excess of the
aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, wrote-off $45 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $10 million in fees,
for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of $674 million.
In August 2020, the Company purchased $6.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$723 million of its 4.0% senior notes due 2023, $2.3 billion of its 3.7% senior notes due 2023 and $3.0 billion of its 4.1% senior notes due 2025. In connection with
the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of $706 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were
purchased, wrote-off $47 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and incurred $13 million in fees, for a total loss on early extinguishment of debt of
$766 million.
In August 2019, the Company purchased $4.0 billion of its outstanding senior notes through cash tender offers. The senior notes purchased included the following:
$1.3 billion of its 3.125% senior notes due 2020, $723 million of its floating rate notes due 2020, $328 million of its 4.125% senior notes due 2021, $297 million of
4.125% senior notes due 2021 issued by Aetna Inc. (“Aetna”), $413 million of 5.45% senior notes due 2021 issued by Coventry Health Care, Inc., a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Aetna, and $962 million of its 3.35% senior notes due 2021. In connection with the purchase of such senior notes, the Company paid a premium of
$76 million in excess of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes that were purchased, incurred $8 million in fees and recognized a net gain of $5 million
on the write-off of net unamortized deferred financing premiums, for a net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $79 million.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s back-up revolving credit facilities, unsecured senior notes and unsecured floating rate notes contain customary restrictive financial and operating
covenants. These covenants do not include an acceleration of the Company’s debt maturities in the event of a downgrade in the Company’s credit ratings. The
Company does not believe the restrictions contained in these covenants materially affect its financial or operating flexibility. As of December 31, 2021, the
Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants.
148

9.
Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits
Defined Contribution Plans
As of December 31, 2021, the Company sponsors several active 401(k) savings plans that cover all employees who meet plan eligibility requirements.
The Company makes matching contributions consistent with the provisions of the respective plans. At the participant’s option, account balances, including the
Company’s matching contribution, can be invested among various investment options under each plan. The CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan offers CVS
Health Corporation’s common stock fund as an investment option. The Company also maintains nonqualified, unfunded deferred compensation plans for certain
key employees. The plans provide participants the opportunity to defer portions of their eligible compensation and for certain nonqualified plans, participants
receive matching contributions equivalent to what they could have received under the CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan absent certain restrictions and
limitations under the Internal Revenue Code. The Company’s contributions under its defined contribution plans were $552 million, $520 million and $550 million
in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s contributions for the year ended December 31, 2019 include contributions to
the Aetna 401(k) Plan, which was merged into the CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan on January 1, 2020.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
The Company sponsors a tax-qualified defined benefit pension plan that was frozen in 2010 and a nonqualified supplemental pension plan that was frozen in 2007.
The Company also sponsors several other defined benefit pension plans that are unfunded nonqualified supplemental retirement plans.
Pension Benefit Obligation and Plan Assets
The following tables outline the change in pension benefit obligation and plan assets over the specified periods:
In millions
2021
2020
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation, beginning of year
$
6,462 $
6,239 
Interest cost
110 
168 
Actuarial (gain) loss
(102)
413 
Benefit payments
(408)
(358)
Settlements
(53)
— 
Benefit obligation, end of year
6,009 
6,462 
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets, beginning of year
6,845 
6,395 
Actual return on plan assets
215 
783 
Employer contributions
78 
25 
Benefit payments
(408)
(358)
Settlements
(53)
— 
Fair value of plan assets, end of year
6,677 
6,845 
Funded status
$
668 $
383 
The change in the pension benefit obligation during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was primarily driven by the change in the discount rate during
each respective period.
149

The assets (liabilities) recognized on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the defined benefit pension plans consisted of the
following:
In millions
2021
2020
Noncurrent assets reflected in other assets
$
946 $
744 
Current liabilities reflected in accrued expenses
(28)
(76)
Noncurrent liabilities reflected in other long-term liabilities
(250)
(285)
Net assets
$
668 $
383 
Net Periodic Benefit Cost (Income)
The components of net periodic benefit cost (income) for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are shown below:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Components of net periodic benefit cost (income):
Interest cost
$
110 $
168 $
225 
Expected return on plan assets
(317)
(388)
(357)
Amortization of net actuarial loss
5 
2 
1 
Settlement losses
16 
— 
— 
Net periodic benefit cost (income)
$
(186) $
(218) $
(131)
Pension Plan Assumptions
The Company uses a series of actuarial assumptions to determine its benefit obligation and net periodic benefit cost (income), the most significant of which include
discount rates and expected return on plan assets assumptions.
Discount Rates - The discount rate is determined using a yield curve as of the annual measurement date. The yield curve consists of a series of individual
discount rates, with each discount rate corresponding to a single point in time, based on high-quality bonds. Projected benefit payments are discounted to
the measurement date using the corresponding rate from the yield curve that is consistent with the maturity profile of the expected liability cash flows.
Expected Return on Plan Assets - The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by using the plan’s target allocation and return
expectations based on many factors including forecasted long-term capital market real returns and the inflationary outlook on a plan by plan basis. See
“Pension Plan Assets” below for additional details regarding the pension plan assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company also considers other assumptions including mortality, interest crediting rate, termination and retirement rates and cost of living adjustments.
The Company determined its benefit obligation based on the following weighted average assumptions as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
2021
2020
Discount rate
2.8 %
2.5 %
The Company determined its net periodic benefit cost (income) based on the following weighted average assumptions for the years ended December 31, 2021,
2020 and 2019:
2021
2020
2019
Discount rate
1.8 %
2.9 %
4.0 %
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
4.8 %
6.3 %
6.5 %
150

Pension Plan Assets
The Company’s pension plan assets primarily include debt and equity securities held in separate accounts, common/collective trusts and real estate investments.
The valuation methodologies used to value these debt and equity securities and common/collective trusts are similar to the methodologies described in Note 4 “Fair
Value.” Pension plan assets also include investments in other assets that are carried at fair value. The following is a description of the valuation methodologies used
to value real estate investments and these additional investments, including the general classification pursuant to the fair value hierarchy.
Real Estate - Real estate investments are valued by independent third party appraisers. The appraisals comply with the Uniform Standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice, which include, among other things, the income, cost, and sales comparison approaches to estimating property value. Therefore, these
investments are classified in Level 3.
Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships - Private equity and hedge fund limited partnerships are carried at fair value which is estimated using
the NAV per unit as reported by the administrator of the underlying investment fund as a practical expedient to fair value. Therefore, these investments
have been excluded from the fair value table below.
Pension plan assets with changes in fair value measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2021 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
60 $
97 $
— $
157 
Debt securities:
    U.S. government securities
1,223 
1 
— 
1,224 
    States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
150 
— 
150 
    U.S. corporate securities
— 
2,458 
— 
2,458 
    Foreign securities
— 
202 
— 
202 
    Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
277 
— 
277 
    Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
76 
— 
76 
    Other asset-backed securities
— 
162 
— 
162 
    Redeemable preferred securities
— 
4 
— 
4 
Total debt securities
1,223 
3,330 
— 
4,553 
Equity securities:
    U.S. domestic
201 
— 
— 
201 
    International
81 
— 
— 
81 
    Domestic real estate
1 
— 
— 
1 
Total equity securities
283 
— 
— 
283 
Other investments:
    Real estate
— 
— 
378 
378 
    Common/collective trusts 
— 
410 
— 
410 
Total other investments
— 
410 
378 
788 
Total pension investments 
$
1,566 $
3,837 $
378 $
5,781 
(1)
The assets in the underlying funds of common/collective trusts consist of $261 million of equity securities and $149 million of debt securities.
(2)
Excludes $76 million of other receivables as well as $583 million of private equity limited partnership investments and $237 million of hedge fund limited partnership investments as these
amounts are measured at NAV per share or an equivalent and are not subject to leveling within the fair value hierarchy.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
151

Pension plan assets with changes in fair value measured on a recurring basis at December 31, 2020 were as follows:
In millions
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Cash and cash equivalents
$
118 $
81 $
— $
199 
Debt securities:
    U.S. government securities
575 
36 
— 
611 
    States, municipalities and political subdivisions
— 
170 
— 
170 
    U.S. corporate securities
— 
2,006 
— 
2,006 
    Foreign securities
— 
167 
— 
167 
    Residential mortgage-backed securities
— 
287 
— 
287 
    Commercial mortgage-backed securities
— 
83 
— 
83 
    Other asset-backed securities
— 
133 
— 
133 
    Redeemable preferred securities
— 
5 
— 
5 
Total debt securities
575 
2,887 
— 
3,462 
Equity securities:
    U.S. domestic
1,046 
— 
— 
1,046 
    International
537 
— 
— 
537 
    Domestic real estate
15 
— 
— 
15 
Total equity securities
1,598 
— 
— 
1,598 
Other investments:
    Real estate
— 
— 
343 
343 
    Common/collective trusts 
— 
266 
— 
266 
    Derivatives
— 
(3)
— 
(3)
Total other investments
— 
263 
343 
606 
Total pension investments 
$
2,291 $
3,231 $
343 $
5,865 
(1)
The assets in the underlying funds of common/collective trusts consist of $84 million of equity securities and $182 million of debt securities.
(2)
Excludes $142 million of other receivables as well as $624 million of private equity limited partnership investments and $214 million of hedge fund limited partnership investments as
these amounts are measured at NAV per share or an equivalent and are not subject to leveling within the fair value hierarchy.
The changes in the balances of Level 3 pension plan assets during the year ended December 31, 2021 were as follows:
In millions
Real estate
Total
Beginning balance
$
343 $
343 
Actual return on plan assets
43 
43 
Purchases, sales and settlements
(8)
(8)
Transfers out of Level 3
— 
— 
Ending balance
$
378 $
378 
The changes in the balances of Level 3 pension plan assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
In millions
Real estate
U.S. corporate 
securities
Total
Beginning balance
$
353 $
1 
$
354 
Actual return on plan assets
(2)
— 
(2)
Purchases, sales and settlements
(8)
— 
(8)
Transfers out of Level 3
— 
(1)
(1)
Ending balance
$
343 $
— 
$
343 
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
152

The Company’s pension plan invests in a diversified mix of assets designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its future benefit obligations. The
risk of unexpected investment and actuarial outcomes is regularly evaluated. This evaluation is performed through forecasting and assessing ranges of investment
outcomes over short- and long-term horizons and by assessing the pension plan’s liability characteristics. Complementary investment styles and strategies are
utilized by professional investment management firms to further improve portfolio and operational risk characteristics. Public and private equity investments are
used primarily to increase overall plan returns. Real estate investments are viewed favorably for their diversification benefits and above-average dividend
generation. Fixed income investments provide diversification benefits and liability hedging attributes that are desirable, especially in falling interest rate
environments.
At December 31, 2021, target investment allocations for the Company’s pension plan were: 12% in equity securities, 77% in fixed income and debt securities, 5%
in real estate, 3% in private equity limited partnerships and 3% in hedge funds. Actual asset allocations may differ from target allocations due to tactical decisions
to overweight or underweight certain assets or as a result of normal fluctuations in asset values. Asset allocations are consistent with stated investment policies and,
as a general rule, periodically rebalanced back to target asset allocations. Asset allocations and investment performance are formally reviewed periodically
throughout the year by the pension plan’s Investment Subcommittee. Forecasting of asset and liability growth is performed at least annually.
Cash Flows
The Company generally contributes to its tax-qualified pension plan based on minimum funding requirements determined under applicable federal laws and
regulations. Employer contributions related to the nonqualified supplemental pension plans generally represent payments to retirees for current benefits. The
Company contributed $78 million, $25 million and $25 million to its pension plans during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. No contributions are required for the
tax-qualified pension plan in 2022. The Company expects to make an immaterial amount of contributions for all other pension plans in 2022.
The Company estimates the following future benefit payments, which are calculated using the same actuarial assumptions used to measure the pension benefit
obligation as of December 31, 2021:
In millions
2022
$
371 
2023
371 
2024
371 
2025
371 
2026
368 
2027-2031
1,776 
Multiemployer Pension Plans
The Company also contributes to a number of multiemployer pension plans under the terms of collective-bargaining agreements that cover its union-represented
employees. The risks of participating in these multiemployer plans are different from single-employer pension plans in the following respects: (i) assets contributed
to the multiemployer plan by one employer may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers, (ii) if a participating employer stops
contributing to the plan, the unfunded obligations of the plan may be borne by the remaining participating employers, and (iii) if the Company chooses to stop
participating in some of its multiemployer plans, the Company may be required to pay those plans an amount based on the underfunded status of the applicable
plan, which is referred to as a withdrawal liability.
None of the multiemployer pension plans in which the Company participates are individually significant to the Company. The Company’s contributions to
multiemployer pension plans were $19 million, $19 million and $18 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Other Postretirement Benefits
The Company provides postretirement health care and life insurance benefits to certain retirees who meet eligibility requirements. The Company’s funding policy
is generally to pay covered expenses as they are incurred. For retiree medical plan accounting, the Company reviews external data and its own historical trends for
health care costs to determine the health care cost trend rates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company’s other postretirement benefits had an accumulated
postretirement benefit obligation of $207 million and $226 million, respectively. Net periodic benefit costs related to these other postretirement benefits were $4
million, $12 million and $7 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
153

The Company estimates the following future benefit payments, which are calculated using the same actuarial assumptions used to measure the accumulated other
postretirement benefit obligation as of December 31, 2021:
In millions
2022
$
12 
2023
12 
2024
12 
2025
12 
2026
12 
2027-2031
60 
Pursuant to various collective bargaining agreements, the Company also contributes to multiemployer health and welfare plans that cover certain union-represented
employees. The plans provide postretirement health care and life insurance benefits to certain employees who meet eligibility requirements. The Company’s
contributions to multiemployer health and welfare plans totaled $60 million, $54 million and $57 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
10.
Income Taxes
The income tax provision for continuing operations consisted of the following for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Current:
Federal
$
2,285 $
2,615 $
2,450 
State
665 
518 
565 
2,950 
3,133 
3,015 
Deferred:
Federal
(306)
(450)
(535)
State
(122)
(114)
(114)
(428)
(564)
(649)
Total
$
2,522 $
2,569 $
2,366 
The following table is a reconciliation of the statutory income tax rate to the Company’s effective income tax rate for continuing operations for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
2021
2020
2019
Statutory income tax rate
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
State income taxes, net of federal tax benefit
4.1 
3.2 
4.0 
Health insurer fee
— 
2.2 
— 
Basis difference upon disposition of subsidiary
— 
(1.2)
— 
Prior year refund claim
(1.2)
— 
— 
Other
0.3 
1.1 
1.3 
Effective income tax rate
24.2 %
26.3 %
26.3 %
154

The following table is a summary of the components of the Company’s deferred income tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
In millions
2021
2020
Deferred income tax assets:
Lease and rents
$
5,563 $
5,742 
Inventory
99 
80 
Employee benefits
193 
238 
Bad debts and other allowances
489 
395 
Net operating loss and capital loss carryforwards
416 
568 
Deferred income
78 
43 
Insurance reserves
501 
489 
Payroll tax deferral
87 
173 
Other
396 
500 
Valuation allowance
(325)
(454)
Total deferred income tax assets
7,497 
7,774 
Deferred income tax liabilities:
Retirement benefits
(105)
(29)
Investments
(334)
(421)
Lease and rents
(4,947)
(5,368)
Depreciation and amortization
(8,381)
(8,750)
Total deferred income tax liabilities
(13,767)
(14,568)
Net deferred income tax liabilities
$
(6,270) $
(6,794)
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had net operating and capital loss carryovers of $416 million, which expire between 2022 and 2041. The Company
considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax
planning strategies and the Company’s recent operating results. The Company established a valuation allowance of $325 million as of December 31, 2021 because
it does not consider it more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will be recovered.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of unrecognized tax benefits in 2021, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Beginning balance
$
768 $
655 $
661 
Additions based on tax positions related to the current year
3 
3 
4 
Additions based on tax positions related to prior years
52 
182 
115 
Reductions for tax positions of prior years
(33)
(56)
(111)
Expiration of statutes of limitation
(1)
(2)
(7)
Settlements
(7)
(14)
(7)
Ending balance
$
782 $
768 $
655 
CVS Health Corporation and most of its subsidiaries are subject to U.S. federal income tax as well as income tax of numerous state and local jurisdictions. CVS
Health Corporation participated in the Compliance Assurance Process through 2019, which is a program made available by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service
(“IRS”) to certain qualifying large taxpayers, under which participants work collaboratively with the IRS to identify and resolve potential tax issues through open,
cooperative and transparent interaction prior to the annual filing of their federal income tax returns. The IRS has completed its examinations of the Company’s
consolidated U.S. federal income tax returns for tax years through and including 2013 and 2018. The IRS has substantially completed its examinations of the
Company’s consolidated U.S. federal income tax returns for tax years 2014 through 2017 and 2019.
155

CVS Health Corporation and its subsidiaries are also currently under income tax examinations by a number of state and local tax authorities. As of December 31,
2021, no examination has resulted in any proposed adjustments that would result in a material change to the Company’s operating results, financial condition or
liquidity.
Substantially all material state and local income tax matters have been concluded for fiscal years through 2014. Certain state exams are likely to be concluded and
certain state statutes of limitations will lapse in 2022, but the change in the balance of the Company’s uncertain tax positions is projected to be immaterial. In
addition, it is reasonably possible that the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits could change within the next twelve months due to the anticipated conclusion of
various examinations with the IRS for various years. An estimate of the range of the possible change cannot be made at this time.
The Company records interest expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and penalties in the income tax provision. The Company accrued interest expense of
approximately $40 million, $34 million and $49 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company had approximately $151 million and $121 million
accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the Company’s effective income tax rate is approximately
$669 million, after considering the federal benefit of state income taxes.
11.
Stock Incentive Plans
The terms of the CVS Health 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan (“ICP”) provide for grants of annual incentive and long-term performance awards to executive
officers and other officers and employees of the Company or any subsidiary of the Company, as well as equity compensation to outside directors of CVS Health
Corporation. Payment of such annual incentive and long-term performance awards will be in cash, stock, other awards or other property, at the discretion of the
Management Planning and Development Committee (the “MP&D Committee”) of the Board. The ICP allows for a maximum of 58 million shares of CVS Health
Corporation common stock to be reserved and available for grants. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately 30 million shares of CVS Health
Corporation common stock available for future grants under the ICP.
Upon the acquisition of Aetna (the “Aetna Acquisition”) on November 28, 2018, approximately 22 million shares of Aetna common stock subject to awards
outstanding under the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (“SIP”) were assumed by CVS Health Corporation. In addition, in accordance with the
merger agreement, shares which were available for future issuance under the SIP were converted into approximately 32 million shares of CVS Health Corporation
common stock reserved and available for issuance pursuant to future awards. Subsequent to the expiration of the SIP on May 21, 2020, the ICP is the only
compensation plan under which the Company grants stock options, restricted stock and other stock-based awards to its employees.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the
stock award (generally three to five years) using the straight-line method. The following table is a summary of stock-based compensation for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Stock options and stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) 
$
80 $
71 $
76 
Restricted stock units and performance stock units
404 
329 
377 
Total stock-based compensation
$
484 $
400 $
453 
(1)
Includes the ESPP.
ESPP
The Company’s Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) provides for the purchase of up to 60 million shares of CVS Health Corporation common stock. Under
the ESPP, eligible employees may purchase common stock at the end of each six month offering period at a purchase price equal to 90% of the lower of the fair
market value on the first day or the last day of the offering period. During 2021, approximately 3 million shares of common stock were purchased under the
provisions of the ESPP at an average price of $60.51 per share. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 31 million shares of common stock were available for
issuance under the ESPP.
(1)
_____________________________________________
156

The fair value of stock-based compensation associated with the ESPP is estimated on the date of grant (the first day of the six month offering period) using the
Black-Scholes option pricing model.
The following table is a summary of the assumptions used to value the ESPP awards for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
2021
2020
2019
Dividend yield 
1.34 %
1.46 %
1.70 %
Expected volatility 
25.27 %
37.21 %
27.96 %
Risk-free interest rate 
0.08 %
0.81 %
2.27 %
Expected life (in years) 
0.5
0.5
0.5
Weighted-average grant date fair value
$
12.55 
$
13.85 
$
10.51 
(1)
The dividend yield is calculated based on semi-annual dividends paid and the fair market value of CVS Health Corporation stock at the grant date.
(2)
The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of CVS Health Corporation’s daily stock price over the previous six month period.
(3)
The risk-free interest rate is selected based on the Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected term of ESPP purchases (i.e., six months).
(4)
The expected life is based on the semi-annual purchase period.
Restricted Stock Units and Performance Stock Units
The Company’s restricted stock units and performance stock units are considered nonvested share awards and require no payment from the employee. The fair
value of the restricted stock units is based on the market price of CVS Health Corporation common stock on the grant date and is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the vesting period. For each restricted stock unit granted, employees receive one share of common stock, net of taxes, at the end of the vesting period.
The Company’s performance stock units contain performance vesting conditions in addition to a service vesting condition. Vesting of the Company’s performance
stock units is dependent upon the degree to which the Company achieves its performance goals, which are generally set for a three-year performance period and are
approved at the time of grant by the MP&D Committee.
The fair value of performance stock units granted with service and performance vesting conditions is based on the market price of CVS Health Corporation
common stock on the grant date and is recognized over the vesting period. Certain of the performance stock units also contain a market vesting condition based on
the performance of CVS Health Corporation common stock relative to a comparator group. The fair value of these performance stock units is determined using a
Monte Carlo simulation as of the grant date and is recognized over the vesting period.
As of December 31, 2021, there was $529 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to the Company’s restricted stock units and performance stock
units that are expected to vest. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.1 years. The total fair value of restricted stock units
vested during 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $406 million, $229 million and $265 million, respectively.
The following table is a summary of the restricted stock unit and performance stock unit activity for the year ended December 31, 2021:
In thousands, except weighted average grant date fair value
Units
Weighted Average 
Grant Date 
Fair Value
Outstanding at beginning of year, nonvested
14,824 $
58.12 
Granted
6,190 $
74.39 
Vested
(5,448) $
74.47 
Forfeited
(1,236) $
63.40 
Outstanding at end of year, nonvested
14,330 $
63.02 
Stock Options and SARs
All stock option grants are awarded at fair value on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and
stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
157

service period. Stock options granted generally become exercisable over a four-year period from the grant date. Stock options granted through 2018 generally
expire seven years after the grant date. Stock options granted subsequent to 2018 generally expire ten years after the grant date.
All unvested Aetna SARs outstanding upon the acquisition of Aetna were converted into replacement CVS Health Corporation SARs. The replacement SARs
granted are settled in CVS Health Corporation common stock, net of taxes, based on the appreciation of the stock price on the exercise date over the market price
on the date of grant. The fair value of SARs is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-
line basis over the requisite service period. SARs generally become exercisable over a three-year period from the grant date. SARs generally expire ten years after
the grant date. No SARs have been granted subsequent to the Aetna Acquisition.
The following table is a summary of stock option and SAR activity that occurred for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Cash received from stock options exercised (including ESPP)
$
549 $
264 $
210 
Payments for taxes for net share settlement of equity awards
168 
88 
112 
Intrinsic value of stock options and SARs exercised
105 
24 
30 
Fair value of stock options and SARs vested
224 
252 
467 
The fair value of each stock option is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model based on the following assumptions at the time of grant:
2021
2020
2019
Dividend yield 
2.68 %
3.42 %
3.68 %
Expected volatility 
27.10 %
25.22 %
21.76 %
Risk-free interest rate 
1.13 %
0.61 %
0.56 %
Expected life (in years) 
6.3
6.3
6.3
Weighted-average grant date fair value
$
14.57 
$
8.78 
$
6.27 
(1)
The dividend yield is based on annual dividends paid and the fair market value of CVS Health Corporation stock at the grant date.
(2)
The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of CVS Health Corporation’s daily stock price over a period equal to the expected life of each option grant after
adjustments for infrequent events such as stock splits.
(3)
The risk-free interest rate is selected based on yields from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected term of the options being valued.
(4)
The expected life represents the number of years the options are expected to be outstanding from grant date based on historical option or SAR holder exercise experience.
As of December 31, 2021, unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock options totaled $38 million, which the Company expects to be recognized
over a weighted-average period of 2.0 years. After considering anticipated forfeitures, the Company expects approximately 9 million of the unvested stock options
to vest over the requisite service period.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
158

The following table is a summary of the Company’s stock option and SAR activity for the year ended December 31, 2021:
In thousands, except weighted average exercise price and remaining contractual term
Shares
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise 
 Price
Weighted 
Average 
Remaining 
Contractual 
Term
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value
Outstanding at beginning of year
23,955 $
69.62 
Granted
3,322 $
74.66 
Exercised
(6,366) $
63.41 
Forfeited
(694) $
62.66 
Expired
(1,156) $
87.42 
Outstanding at end of year
19,061 $
71.74 
4.75 $
603,137 
Exercisable at end of year
9,704 $
79.99 
2.61
229,034 
Vested at end of year and expected to vest in the future
18,709 $
71.82 
4.69
590,514 
12.
Shareholders’ Equity
Share Repurchases
The following share repurchase programs have been authorized by the Board:
In billions
Authorization Date
Authorized
Remaining as of 
December 31, 2021
December 9, 2021 (“2021 Repurchase Program”)
$
10.0 
$
10.0 
November 2, 2016 (“2016 Repurchase Program”)
15.0 
— 
Each of the share Repurchase Programs was effective immediately. The 2016 Repurchase program was terminated effective December 9, 2021. The 2021
Repurchase Program permits the Company to effect repurchases from time to time through a combination of open market repurchases, privately negotiated
transactions, accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) transactions, and/or other derivative transactions. The 2021 Repurchase Program can be modified or terminated
by the Board at any time.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock pursuant to the 2016 or 2021
Repurchase Programs.
Pursuant to the authorization under the 2021 Repurchase Program, the Company entered into a $1.5 billion fixed dollar ASR with Barclays Bank PLC
(“Barclays”). Upon payment of the $1.5 billion purchase price on January 4, 2022, the Company received a number of shares of CVS Health Corporation’s
common stock equal to 80% of the $1.5 billion notional amount of the ASR or approximately 11.6 million shares at a price of $103.34 per share, which were
placed into treasury stock in January 2022. At the conclusion of the ASR, the Company may receive additional shares equal to the remaining 20% of the
$1.5 billion notional amount. The ultimate number of shares the Company may receive will depend on the daily volume-weighted average price of the Company’s
stock over an averaging period, less a discount. It is also possible, depending on such weighted average price, that the Company will have an obligation to Barclays
which, at the Company’s option, could be settled in additional cash or by issuing shares. Under the terms of the ASR, the maximum number of shares that could be
delivered to the Company is 29.0 million.
Dividends
The quarterly cash dividend declared by the Board was $0.50 per share in 2021 and 2020. In December 2021, the Board authorized a 10% increase in the quarterly
cash dividend to $0.55 per share effective in 2022. CVS Health Corporation has paid cash dividends every quarter since becoming a public company. Future
dividend payments will depend on the Company’s earnings, capital requirements, financial condition and other factors considered relevant by the Board.
Regulatory Requirements
The Company’s insurance business operations are conducted through subsidiaries that principally consist of health maintenance organizations (“HMOs”) and
insurance companies. The Company’s HMO and insurance subsidiaries report their financial
159

statements in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by state regulatory authorities which may differ from GAAP. The combined statutory net income for
the years ended and estimated combined statutory and capital surplus at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 for the Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries
were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Statutory net income
$
3,302 $
3,667 $
2,842 
Estimated statutory capital and surplus
14,879 
13,238 
10,975 
The Company’s insurance and HMO subsidiaries paid $1.6 billion of gross dividends to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In addition to general state law restrictions on payments of dividends and other distributions to stockholders applicable to all corporations, HMOs and insurance
companies are subject to further regulations that, among other things, may require those companies to maintain certain levels of equity and restrict the amount of
dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their equity holders. In addition, in connection with the Aetna Acquisition, the Company made certain
undertakings that require prior regulatory approval of dividends by certain of its HMOs and insurance companies. At December 31, 2021, these amounts were as
follows:
In millions
Estimated minimum statutory surplus required by regulators
$
7,261 
Investments on deposit with regulatory bodies
794 
Estimated maximum dividend distributions permitted in 2022 without prior regulatory approval
2,939 
Noncontrolling Interests
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, noncontrolling interests were $306 million and $312 million, respectively, primarily related to third party interests in the
Company’s operating entities. The noncontrolling entities’ share is included in total shareholders’ equity on the consolidated balance sheets.
160

13.
Other Comprehensive Income
Shareholders’ equity included the following activity in accumulated other comprehensive income in 2021, 2020 and 2019:
At December 31,
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Net unrealized investment gains (losses):
Beginning of year balance
$
1,214 $
774 $
97 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications ($(489), $497 and $927 pretax)
(410)
415 
763 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income ($(32), $31 and $(105) pretax) 
(26)
25 
(86)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
(436)
440 
677 
End of year balance
778 
1,214 
774 
Foreign currency translation adjustments:
Beginning of year balance
7 
4 
(158)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
(7)
3 
8 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 
— 
— 
154 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
(7)
3 
162 
End of year balance
— 
7 
4 
Net cash flow hedges:
Beginning of year balance
248 
279 
312 
Other comprehensive loss before reclassifications ($0, $(7) and $(25) pretax)
— 
(5)
(18)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income ($(34), $(35) and $(20) pretax) 
(26)
(26)
(15)
Other comprehensive loss
(26)
(31)
(33)
End of year balance
222 
248 
279 
Pension and other postretirement benefits:
Beginning of year balance
(55)
(38)
(149)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications ($20, $(30) and $162 pretax)
15 
(22)
120 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss ($6, $7 and $(12) pretax) 
5 
5 
(9)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
20 
(17)
111 
End of year balance
(35)
(55)
(38)
Total beginning of year accumulated other comprehensive income
1,414 
1,019 
102 
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
(449)
395 
917 
Total end of year accumulated other comprehensive income
$
965 $
1,414 $
1,019 
(1)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income for specifically identified debt securities are included in net investment income in the consolidated statements of
operations.
(2)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) represent the elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment associated with the sale of Onofre, which was
sold on July 1, 2019. The loss on the divestiture of Onofre is reflected in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
(3)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income for specifically identified cash flow hedges are included within interest expense in the consolidated statements of
operations. The Company expects to reclassify approximately $11 million, net of tax, in net gains associated with its cash flow hedges into net income within the next 12 months.
(4)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss for specifically identified pension and other postretirement benefits are included in other income in the consolidated
statements of operations.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
161

14.
Earnings Per Share
Earnings per share is computed using the two-class method. SARs and options to purchase 7 million, 15 million, and 17 million shares of common stock were
outstanding, but were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, because
their exercise prices were greater than the average market price of the common shares and, therefore, the effect would be antidilutive.
The following is a reconciliation of basic and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions, except per share amounts
2021
2020
2019
Numerator for earnings per share calculation:
Income from continuing operations
$
7,898 $
7,201 $
6,631 
Income allocated to participating securities
— 
— 
(5)
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
12 
(13)
3 
Income from continuing operations attributable to CVS Health
$
7,910 $
7,188 $
6,629 
Denominator for earnings per share calculation:
Weighted average shares, basic
1,319 
1,309 
1,301 
Effect of dilutive securities
10 
5 
4 
Weighted average shares, diluted
1,329 
1,314 
1,305 
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Basic
$
6.00 $
5.49 $
5.10 
Diluted
$
5.95 $
5.47 $
5.08 
15.
Reinsurance
The Company utilizes reinsurance agreements primarily to: (a) reduce required capital and (b) facilitate the acquisition or disposition of certain insurance contracts.
Ceded reinsurance agreements permit the Company to recover a portion of its losses from reinsurers, although they do not discharge the Company’s primary
liability as the direct insurer of the risks reinsured.
On November 30, 2018, the Company completed the sale of Aetna’s standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plans to a subsidiary of WellCare Health Plans,
Inc. (“WellCare”), effective December 31, 2018. In connection with that sale, subsidiaries of WellCare and Aetna entered into reinsurance agreements under which
WellCare ceded to Aetna 100% of the insurance risk related to the divested standalone Medicare Part D prescription drug plans for the 2019 PDP plan year.
In January 2022, the Company entered into two four-year reinsurance agreements with an unrelated reinsurer that allow it to reduce required capital and provide
collateralized excess of loss reinsurance coverage on a portion of the Health Care Benefits segment’s group Commercial Insured business.
Reinsurance recoverables (recorded as other current assets or other assets on the consolidated balance sheets) at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
Reinsurer
Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company
$
1,887 $
2,364 
Lincoln Life & Annuity Company of New York
395 
406 
VOYA Retirement Insurance and Annuity Company
167 
170 
All Other
100 
115 
Total
$
2,549 $
3,055 
162

Direct, assumed and ceded premiums earned for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Direct
$
76,320 $
69,711 $
62,968 
Assumed
492 
478 
2,108 
Ceded
(680)
(825)
(1,954)
Net premiums
$
76,132 $
69,364 $
63,122 
The impact of reinsurance on benefit costs for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Direct
$
64,414 $
56,077 $
52,592 
Assumed
398 
329 
1,562 
Ceded
(552)
(727)
(1,625)
Net benefit costs
$
64,260 $
55,679 $
52,529 
There is not a material difference between premiums on a written basis versus an earned basis.
The Company also has various agreements with unrelated reinsurers that do not qualify for reinsurance accounting under GAAP, and consequently are accounted
for using deposit accounting. The Company entered into these contracts to reduce the risk of catastrophic loss which in turn reduces the Company’s capital and
surplus requirements. Total deposit assets and liabilities related to reinsurance agreements that do not qualify for reinsurance accounting under GAAP were not
material as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
16.
Commitments and Contingencies
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The Company believes COVID-19’s impact on its businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial
condition primarily will be driven by the geographies impacted and the severity and duration of the pandemic; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global
economies and consumer behavior and health care utilization patterns; and the timing, scope and impact of stimulus legislation as well as other federal, state and
local governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are beyond the Company’s knowledge and control. As a result, the impact COVID-19 will
have on the Company’s businesses, operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition is uncertain, but the impact could be adverse and material. COVID-19
also may result in legal and regulatory proceedings, investigations and claims against the Company.
Guarantees
The Company has the following significant guarantee arrangements at December 31, 2021:
•
ASC Claim Funding Accounts - The Company has arrangements with certain banks for the processing of claim payments for its ASC customers. The banks
maintain accounts to fund claims of the Company’s ASC customers. The customer is responsible for funding the amount paid by the bank each day. In these
arrangements, the Company guarantees that the banks will not sustain losses if the responsible ASC customer does not properly fund its account. The
aggregate maximum exposure under these arrangements is generally limited to $250 million. The Company can limit its exposure to these guarantees by
suspending the payment of claims for ASC customers that have not adequately funded the amount paid by the bank.
•
Separate Accounts Assets - Certain Separate Accounts assets associated with the large case pensions business in the Corporate/Other segment represent funds
maintained as a contractual requirement to fund specific pension annuities that the Company has guaranteed. Minimum contractual obligations underlying the
guaranteed benefits in these Separate Accounts were approximately $1.3 billion and $1.4 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note 1
‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information on Separate Accounts. Contract holders assume all investment and mortality risk and are
required to maintain Separate Accounts balances at or above a specified level. The level of required funds is a function of the risk underlying the Separate
Account’s investment strategy. If contract holders do not maintain the required level of Separate Accounts assets to meet the annuity guarantees, the Company
would
163

establish an additional liability. Contract holders’ balances in the Separate Accounts at December 31, 2021 exceeded the value of the guaranteed benefit
obligation. As a result, the Company was not required to maintain any additional liability for its related guarantees at December 31, 2021.
Lease Guarantees
Between 1995 and 1997, the Company sold or spun off a number of subsidiaries, including Bob’s Stores and Linens ‘n Things, each of which subsequently filed
for bankruptcy, and Marshalls. In many cases, when a former subsidiary leased a store, the Company provided a guarantee of the former subsidiary’s lease
obligations for the initial lease term and any extension thereof pursuant to a renewal option provided for in the lease prior to the time of the disposition. When the
subsidiaries were disposed of and accounted for as discontinued operations, the Company’s guarantees remained in place, although each initial purchaser agreed to
indemnify the Company for any lease obligations the Company was required to satisfy. If any of the purchasers or any of the former subsidiaries fail to make the
required payments under a store lease, the Company could be required to satisfy those obligations, and any significant adverse impact of COVID-19 on such
purchasers and/or former subsidiaries increases the risk that the Company will be required to satisfy those obligations. As of December 31, 2021, the Company
guaranteed 72 such store leases (excluding the lease guarantees related to Linens ‘n Things, which have been recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance
sheets), with the maximum remaining lease term extending through 2030.
Guaranty Fund Assessments, Market Stabilization and Other Non-Voluntary Risk Sharing Pools
Under guaranty fund laws existing in all states, insurers doing business in those states can be assessed (in most states up to prescribed limits) for certain obligations
of insolvent insurance companies to policyholders and claimants. The life and health insurance guaranty associations in which the Company participates that
operate under these laws respond to insolvencies of long-term care insurers and life insurers as well as health insurers. The Company’s assessments generally are
based on a formula relating to the Company’s health care premiums in the state compared to the premiums of other insurers. Certain states allow assessments to be
recovered over time as offsets to premium taxes. Some states have similar laws relating to HMOs and/or other payors such as not-for-profit consumer-governed
health plans established under the ACA.
In 2009, the Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner placed long-term care insurer Penn Treaty Network America Insurance Company and one of its subsidiaries
(collectively, “Penn Treaty”) in rehabilitation, an intermediate action before insolvency, and subsequently petitioned a state court to convert the rehabilitation into a
liquidation. Penn Treaty was placed in liquidation in March 2017. The Company has recorded a liability for its estimated share of future assessments by applicable
life and health insurance guaranty associations. It is reasonably possible that in the future the Company may record a liability and expense relating to other
insolvencies which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operating results, financial condition and cash flows, and the risk is heightened by any
significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the solvency of other insurers, including long-term care and life insurers. While historically the
Company has ultimately recovered more than half of guaranty fund assessments through statutorily permitted premium tax offsets, significant increases in
assessments could lead to legislative and/or regulatory actions that limit future offsets.
HMOs in certain states in which the Company does business are subject to assessments, including market stabilization and other risk-sharing pools, for which the
Company is assessed charges based on incurred claims, demographic membership mix and other factors. The Company establishes liabilities for these assessments
based on applicable laws and regulations. In certain states, the ultimate assessments the Company pays are dependent upon the Company’s experience relative to
other entities subject to the assessment, and the ultimate liability is not known at the financial statement date. While the ultimate amount of the assessment is
dependent upon the experience of all pool participants, the Company believes it has adequate reserves to cover such assessments.
The Company’s total guaranty fund assessments liability was immaterial at both December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Litigation and Regulatory Proceedings
The Company has been involved or is currently involved in numerous legal proceedings, including litigation, arbitration, government investigations, audits,
reviews and claims. These include routine, regular and special investigations, audits and reviews by CMS, state insurance and health and welfare departments, the
U.S. Department of Justice (the “DOJ”), state attorneys general, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (the “DEA”) and other governmental authorities.
Legal proceedings, in general, and securities, class action and multi-district litigation, in particular, and governmental special investigations, audits and reviews can
be expensive and disruptive. Some of the litigation matters may purport or be determined
164

to be class actions and/or involve parties seeking large and/or indeterminate amounts, including punitive or exemplary damages, and may remain unresolved for
several years. The Company also may be named from time to time in qui tam actions initiated by private third parties that could also be separately pursued by a
governmental body. The results of legal proceedings, including government investigations, are often uncertain and difficult to predict, and the costs incurred in
these matters can be substantial, regardless of the outcome.
The Company records accruals for outstanding legal matters when it believes it is probable that a loss will be incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated.
The Company evaluates, on a quarterly basis, developments in legal matters that could affect the amount of any accrual and developments that would make a loss
contingency both probable and reasonably estimable. If a loss contingency is not both probable and reasonably estimable, the Company does not establish an
accrued liability. None of the Company’s accruals for outstanding legal matters are material individually or in the aggregate to the Company’s financial condition.
Except as otherwise noted, the Company cannot predict with certainty the timing or outcome of the legal matters described below, and the Company is unable to
reasonably estimate a possible loss or range of possible loss in excess of amounts already accrued for these matters. The Company believes that its defenses and
assertions in pending legal proceedings have merit and does not believe that any of these pending matters, after consideration of applicable reserves and rights to
indemnification, will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position. Substantial unanticipated verdicts, fines and rulings, however, do
sometimes occur, which could result in judgments against the Company, entry into settlements or a revision to its expectations regarding the outcome of certain
matters, and such developments could have a material adverse effect on its results of operations. In addition, as a result of governmental investigations or
proceedings, the Company may be subject to damages, civil or criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions including possible suspension or loss of licensure
and/or exclusion from participating in government programs. The outcome of such governmental investigations of proceedings could be material to the Company.
Usual and Customary Pricing Litigation
The Company and certain current and former directors and officers are named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits that allege that the Company’s retail
pharmacies overcharged for prescription drugs by not submitting the correct usual and customary price during the claims adjudication process. These actions are
brought by a number of different types of plaintiffs, including plan members, private payors, government payors, and shareholders based on different legal theories.
Some of these cases are brought as putative class actions, and in some instances, classes have been certified. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
PBM Litigation and Investigations
The Company is named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits and is subject to a number of investigations concerning its PBM practices.
The Company is facing multiple lawsuits, including by a State Attorney General, governmental subdivisions and several putative class actions, regarding drug
pricing and its rebate arrangements with drug manufacturers. These complaints, brought by a number of different types of plaintiffs under a variety of legal
theories, generally allege that rebate agreements between the drug manufacturers and PBMs caused inflated prices for certain drug products. The Company is
defending itself against these claims. The Company has also received subpoenas, civil investigative demands (“CIDs”) and other requests for documents and
information from, and is being investigated by, Attorneys General of multiple states and the District of Columbia regarding its PBM practices, including pricing
and rebates. The Company has been providing documents and information in response to these subpoenas, CIDs and requests for information.
United States ex rel. Behnke v. CVS Caremark Corporation, et al. (U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania). In April 2018, the Court unsealed a
complaint filed in February 2014. The government has declined to intervene in this case. The relator alleges that the Company submitted, or caused to be
submitted, to Part D of the Medicare program Prescription Drug Event data and/or Direct and Indirect Remuneration reports that misrepresented true prices paid by
the Company’s PBM to pharmacies for drugs dispensed to Part D beneficiaries with prescription benefits administered by the Company’s PBM. The Company is
defending itself against these claims.
165

Controlled Substances Litigation, Audits and Subpoenas
In December 2017, the U.S. Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation consolidated numerous cases filed against various defendants by plaintiffs such as counties,
cities, hospitals, Indian tribes and third-party payors, alleging claims generally concerning the impacts of widespread prescription opioid abuse. The consolidated
multidistrict litigation captioned In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation (MDL No. 2804) is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
Ohio. This multidistrict litigation presumptively includes hundreds of relevant federal court cases that name the Company as a defendant. A significant number of
similar cases that name the Company as a defendant in some capacity are pending in state courts. In addition, the Company has been named as a defendant in
similar cases brought by certain state Attorneys General. The Company is defending itself against all such claims. Additionally, the Company has received
subpoenas, CIDs and/or other requests for information regarding opioids from state Attorneys General and insurance and other regulators of several U.S.
jurisdictions. The Company has been cooperating with the government with respect to these subpoenas, CIDs and other requests for information. In November
2021, the Company was among the chain pharmacies found liable by a jury in a trial in federal court in Ohio; the remedy pursuant to that verdict has not been
determined and the Company plans to appeal.
In January 2020, the DOJ served the Company with a DEA administrative subpoena. The subpoena seeks documents relating to practices with respect to
prescription opioids and other controlled substances at CVS Pharmacy locations concerning potential violations of the federal Controlled Substances Act and the
federal False Claims Act. In January 2022, the DOJ served the Company with a CID regarding similar subjects. The Company is providing documents and
information in response to these matters.
Prescription Processing Litigation and Investigations
The Company is named as a defendant in a number of lawsuits and is subject to a number of investigations concerning its prescription processing practices,
including the following:
U.S. ex rel. Bassan et al. v. Omnicare, Inc. and CVS Health Corp. (U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York). In December 2019, the U.S.
Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York (the “SDNY”) filed a complaint-in-intervention in this previously sealed qui tam case. The complaint
alleges that for certain non-skilled nursing facilities, Omnicare improperly filled prescriptions beyond one year where a valid prescription did not exist and that
these dispensing events violated the federal False Claims Act. The Company is defending itself against these claims.
In July 2017, the Company also received a subpoena from the California Department of Insurance requesting documents concerning the Company’s Omnicare
pharmacies’ cycle fill process for assisted living facilities. The Company has been cooperating with the California Department of Insurance and providing
documents and information in response to this subpoena.
In December 2016, the Company received a CID from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of New York requesting documents and information in
connection with a federal False Claims Act investigation concerning whether the Company’s retail pharmacies improperly submitted certain insulin claims to Part
D of the Medicare program rather than Part B of the Medicare program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and providing documents and
information in response to this CID.
Provider Proceedings
The Company is named as a defendant in purported class actions and individual lawsuits arising out of its practices related to the payment of claims for services
rendered to its members by providers with whom the Company has a contract and with whom the Company does not have a contract (“out-of-network
providers”). Among other things, these lawsuits allege that the Company paid too little to its health plan members and/or providers for out-of-network services
and/or otherwise allege that the Company failed to timely or appropriately pay or administer out-of-network claims and benefits (including the Company’s post
payment audit and collection practices and reductions in payments to providers due to sequestration). Other major health insurers are the subject of similar
litigation or have settled similar litigation.
The Company also has received subpoenas and/or requests for documents and other information from, and been investigated by, state Attorneys General and other
state and/or federal regulators, legislators and agencies relating to, and the Company is involved in other litigation regarding, its out-of-network benefit payment
and administration practices. It is reasonably possible that others could initiate additional litigation or additional regulatory action against the Company with
respect to its out-of-network benefit payment and/or administration practices.
166

CMS Actions
CMS regularly audits the Company’s performance to determine its compliance with CMS’s regulations and its contracts with CMS and to assess the quality of
services it provides to Medicare beneficiaries. CMS uses various payment mechanisms to allocate and adjust premium payments to the Company’s and other
companies’ Medicare plans by considering the applicable health status of Medicare members as supported by information prepared, maintained and provided by
providers. The Company collects claim and encounter data from providers and generally relies on providers to appropriately code their submissions to the
Company and document their medical records, including the diagnosis data submitted to the Company with claims. CMS pays increased premiums to Medicare
Advantage plans and Medicare PDP plans for members who have certain medical conditions identified with specific diagnosis codes. Federal regulators review and
audit the providers’ medical records to determine whether those records support the related diagnosis codes that determine the members’ health status and the
resulting risk-adjusted premium payments to the Company. In that regard, CMS has instituted risk adjustment data validation (“RADV”) audits of various
Medicare Advantage plans, including certain of the Company’s plans, to validate coding practices and supporting medical record documentation maintained by
providers and the resulting risk adjusted premium payments to the plans. CMS may require the Company to refund premium payments if the Company’s risk
adjusted premiums are not properly supported by medical record data. The Office of the Inspector General of the HHS (the “OIG”) also is auditing the Company’s
risk adjustment-related data and that of other companies. The Company expects CMS and the OIG to continue these types of audits.
In 2012, CMS revised its audit methodology for RADV audits to determine refunds payable by Medicare Advantage plans for contract year 2011 and forward.
Under the revised methodology, among other things, CMS will extrapolate the error rate identified in the audit sample of approximately 200 members to all risk
adjusted premium payments made under the contract being audited. For contract years prior to 2011, CMS did not extrapolate sample error rates to the entire
contract. As a result, the revised methodology may increase the Company’s exposure to premium refunds to CMS based on incomplete medical records maintained
by providers. Since 2013, CMS has selected certain of the Company’s Medicare Advantage contracts for various contract years for RADV audit, and the number of
RADV audits continues to increase. The Company is currently unable to predict which of its Medicare Advantage contracts will be selected for future audit, the
amounts of any retroactive refunds of, or prospective adjustments to, Medicare Advantage premium payments made to the Company, the effect of any such refunds
or adjustments on the actuarial soundness of the Company’s Medicare Advantage bids, or whether any RADV audit findings would require the Company to change
its method of estimating future premium revenue in future bid submissions to CMS or compromise premium assumptions made in the Company’s bids for prior
contract years, the current contract year or future contract years. Any premium or fee refunds or adjustments resulting from regulatory audits, whether as a result of
RADV, Public Exchange related or other audits by CMS, the OIG or otherwise, including audits of the Company’s MLR rebates, methodology and/or reports,
could be material and could adversely affect the Company’s operating results, cash flows and/or financial condition.
Medicare and Medicaid CIDs
The Company has received CIDs from the Civil Division of the DOJ in connection with a current investigation of the Company’s patient chart review processes in
connection with risk adjustment data submissions under Parts C and D of the Medicare program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and
providing documents and information in response to these CIDs.
In May 2017, the Company received a CID from the SDNY requesting documents and information concerning possible false claims submitted to Medicare in
connection with reimbursements for prescription drugs under the Medicare Part D program. The Company has been cooperating with the government and
providing documents and information in response to this CID.
Stockholder Matters
Beginning in February 2019, multiple class action complaints, as well as a derivative complaint, were filed by putative plaintiffs against the Company and certain
current and former officers and directors. The plaintiffs in these cases assert a variety of causes of action under federal securities laws that are premised on
allegations that the defendants made certain omissions and misrepresentations relating to the performance of the Company’s LTC business unit. The Company and
its current and former officers and directors are defending themselves against these claims. Since filing, several of the cases have been consolidated, and the first-
filed federal case, City of Miami Fire Fighters’ and Police Officers’ Retirement Trust, et al. (formerly known as Anarkat), was dismissed with prejudice in
February 2021. Plaintiffs have appealed that decision to the First Circuit after their motion for reconsideration was denied. In re CVS Health Corp. Securities Act
Litigation (formerly known as Waterford) and In
167

re CVS Health Corp. Securities Litigation (formerly known as City of Warren and Freundlich) have been stayed pending the outcome of the First Circuit appeal.
In August and September 2020, two class actions under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”) were filed in the U.S. District Court for
the District of Connecticut against CVS Health, Aetna, and several current and former executives, directors and/or members of Aetna’s Compensation and Talent
Management Committee: Radcliffe v. Aetna Inc., et al. and Flaim v. Aetna Inc., et al. The plaintiffs in these cases assert a variety of causes of action premised on
allegations that the defendants breached fiduciary duties and engaged in prohibited transactions relating to participants in the Aetna 401(k) Plan’s investment in
company stock between December 3, 2017 and February 20, 2019, claiming losses related to the performance of the Company’s LTC business unit. The district
court consolidated the actions and the Company is defending itself against these claims. In October 2021, the consolidated case was dismissed without prejudice.
Plaintiffs may seek leave to file an amended complaint. The Company also received a related document request pursuant to ERISA § 104(b), to which the
Company has responded.
In December 2021, the Company received a demand for inspection of books and records pursuant to Delaware Corporation Law Section 220 (the “Demand”). The
Demand purports to be related to potential breaches of fiduciary duties by the Board in relation to certain matters concerning opioids.
Other Legal and Regulatory Proceedings
The Company is also a party to other legal proceedings and is subject to government investigations, inquiries and audits and has received and is cooperating with
the government in response to CIDs, subpoenas or similar process from various governmental agencies requesting information. These other legal proceedings and
government actions include claims of or relating to bad faith, medical or professional malpractice, breach of fiduciary duty, claims processing, dispensing of
medications, non-compliance with state and federal regulatory regimes, marketing misconduct, denial of or failure to timely or appropriately pay or administer
claims and benefits, provider network structure (including the use of performance-based networks and termination of provider contracts), rescission of insurance
coverage, improper disclosure or use of personal information, anticompetitive practices, general contractual matters, product liability, intellectual property
litigation and employment litigation. Some of these other legal proceedings are or are purported to be class actions or derivative claims. The Company is defending
itself against the claims brought in these matters.
Awards to the Company and others of certain government contracts, particularly Medicaid contracts and other contracts with government customers in the
Company’s Health Care Benefits segment, frequently are subject to protests by unsuccessful bidders. These protests may result in awards to the Company being
reversed, delayed or modified. The loss or delay in implementation of any government contract could adversely affect the Company’s operating results. The
Company will continue to defend contract awards it receives.
There also continues to be a heightened level of review and/or audit by regulatory authorities and legislators of, and increased litigation regarding, the Company’s
and the rest of the health care and related benefits industry’s business and reporting practices, including premium rate increases, utilization management,
development and application of medical policies, complaint, grievance and appeal processing, information privacy, provider network structure (including provider
network adequacy, the use of performance-based networks and termination of provider contracts), provider directory accuracy, calculation of minimum medical
loss ratios and/or payment of related rebates, delegated arrangements, rescission of insurance coverage, limited benefit health products, student health products,
pharmacy benefit management practices (including manufacturers’ rebates, pricing, the use of narrow networks and the placement of drugs in formulary tiers),
sales practices, customer service practices, vendor oversight and claim payment practices (including payments to out-of-network providers).
As a leading national health solutions company, the Company regularly is the subject of government actions of the types described above. These government
actions may prevent or delay the Company from implementing planned premium rate increases and may result, and have resulted, in restrictions on the Company’s
businesses, changes to or clarifications of the Company’s business practices, retroactive adjustments to premiums, refunds or other payments to members,
beneficiaries, states or the federal government, withholding of premium payments to the Company by government agencies, assessments of damages, civil or
criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including the possible suspension or loss of licensure and/or suspension or exclusion from participation in
government programs.
The Company can give no assurance that its businesses, financial condition, operating results and/or cash flows will not be materially adversely affected, or that the
Company will not be required to materially change its business practices, based on: (i) future enactment of new health care or other laws or regulations; (ii) the
interpretation or application of existing laws or
168

regulations as they may relate to one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in which the Company competes and/or the health care
industry generally; (iii) pending or future federal or state government investigations of one or more of the Company’s businesses, one or more of the industries in
which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally; (iv) pending or future government audits, investigations or enforcement actions against the
Company; (v) adverse developments in any pending qui tam lawsuit against the Company, whether sealed or unsealed, or in any future qui tam lawsuit that may be
filed against the Company; or (vi) adverse developments in pending or future legal proceedings against the Company or affecting one or more of the industries in
which the Company competes and/or the health care industry generally.
17.
Segment Reporting
The Company has three operating segments, Health Care Benefits, Pharmacy Services and Retail/LTC, as well as a Corporate/Other segment. The Company’s
segments maintain separate financial information, and the Company’s chief operating decision maker (the “CODM”) evaluates the segments’ operating results on a
regular basis in deciding how to allocate resources among the segments and in assessing segment performance. The CODM evaluates the performance of the
Company’s segments based on adjusted operating income, which is defined as operating income (GAAP measure) excluding the impact of amortization of
intangible assets and other items, if any, that neither relate to the ordinary course of the Company’s business nor reflect the Company’s underlying business
performance. See the reconciliation of consolidated operating income (GAAP measure) to consolidated adjusted operating income below for further context
regarding the items excluded from operating income in determining adjusted operating income. The Company uses adjusted operating income as its principal
measure of segment performance as it enhances the Company’s ability to compare past financial performance with current performance and analyze underlying
business performance and trends. Non-GAAP financial measures the Company discloses, such as consolidated adjusted operating income, should not be considered
a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, revenues from the federal government accounted for 17%, 16% and 16%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated total revenues,
primarily related to contracts with CMS for coverage of Medicare-eligible individuals within the Health Care Benefits segment.
169

The following is a reconciliation of financial measures of the Company’s segments to the consolidated totals:
In millions
Health Care 
Benefits
Pharmacy  
Services 
Retail/ 
LTC
Corporate/ 
Other
Intersegment
Eliminations 
Consolidated 
Totals
2021:
Revenues from external customers
$
81,515 $
143,194 
$
66,078 $
125 
$
— 
$
290,912 
Intersegment revenues
85 
9,828 
34,010 
— 
(43,923)
— 
Net investment income
586 
— 
17 
596 
— 
1,199 
Total revenues
82,186 
153,022 
100,105 
721 
(43,923)
292,111 
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,012 
6,859 
7,623 
(1,471)
(711)
17,312 
Depreciation and amortization
1,837 
576 
1,884 
215 
— 
4,512 
2020:
Revenues from external customers
74,926 
132,663 
60,208 
111 
— 
267,908 
Intersegment revenues
58 
9,275 
30,990 
— 
(40,323)
— 
Net investment income
483 
— 
— 
315 
— 
798 
Total revenues
75,467 
141,938 
91,198 
426 
(40,323)
268,706 
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
6,188 
5,688 
6,146 
(1,306)
(708)
16,008 
Depreciation and amortization
1,832 
612 
1,801 
196 
— 
4,441 
2019:
Revenues from external customers
68,979 
130,428 
56,258 
100 
— 
255,765 
Intersegment revenues
26 
11,063 
30,350 
— 
(41,439)
— 
Net investment income
599 
— 
— 
412 
— 
1,011 
Total revenues
69,604 
141,491 
86,608 
512 
(41,439)
256,776 
  Adjusted operating income (loss)
5,202 
5,129 
6,705 
(1,000)
(697)
15,339 
Depreciation and amortization
1,721 
766 
1,723 
161 
— 
4,371 
(1) Total revenues of the Pharmacy Services segment include approximately $11.6 billion, $10.9 billion and $11.5 billion of retail co-payments for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note
1 ‘‘Significant Accounting Policies’’ for additional information about retail co-payments.
(2) Intersegment revenue eliminations relate to intersegment revenue generating activities that occur between the Health Care Benefits segment, the Pharmacy Services segment, and/or the
Retail/LTC segment. Intersegment adjusted operating income eliminations occur when members of Pharmacy Services Segment clients (“PSS members”) enrolled in Maintenance Choice
elect to pick up maintenance prescriptions at one of the Company’s retail pharmacies instead of receiving them through the mail. When this occurs, both the Pharmacy Services and
Retail/LTC segments record the adjusted operating income on a stand-alone basis.
(1)
(2)
_____________________________________________
®
170

The following is a reconciliation of consolidated operating income to adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
In millions
2021
2020
2019
Operating income (GAAP measure)
$
13,193 $
13,911 $
11,987 
Amortization of intangible assets 
2,259 
2,341 
2,436 
Acquisition-related integration costs 
132 
332 
480 
Store impairments 
1,358 
— 
231 
Goodwill impairment 
431 
— 
— 
Acquisition purchase price adjustment outside of measurement period 
(61)
— 
— 
(Gain) loss on divestiture of subsidiary 
— 
(269)
205 
Receipt of fully reserved ACA risk corridor receivable 
— 
(307)
— 
Adjusted operating income
$
17,312 $
16,008 $
15,339 
(1) The Company’s acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets as required under the acquisition method of accounting which consist primarily of trademarks,
customer contracts/relationships, covenants not to compete, technology, provider networks and value of business acquired. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated
useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in the Company’s GAAP
consolidated statements of operations in operating expenses within each segment. Although intangible assets contribute to the Company’s revenue generation, the amortization of intangible
assets does not directly relate to the underwriting of the Company’s insurance products, the services performed for the Company’s customers or the sale of the Company’s products or
services. Additionally, intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of the Company’s acquisition activity. Accordingly, the Company believes
excluding the amortization of intangible assets enhances the Company’s and investors’ ability to compare the Company’s past financial performance with its current performance and to
analyze underlying business performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within the
Company’s GAAP financial statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset
amortization is excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an
intangible asset becomes impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised.
(2) In 2021, 2020 and 2019, acquisition-related integration costs relate to the Aetna Acquisition. The acquisition-related integration costs are reflected in the Company’s GAAP consolidated
statements of operations in operating expenses within the Corporate/Other segment.
(3) During the year ended December 31, 2021, the store impairment charge relates to the write down of operating lease right-of-use assets and property and equipment in connection with the
planned closure of approximately 900 retail stores between 2022 and 2024. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the store impairment charges related to the write down of operating
lease right-of-use assets in connection with the planned closure of 68 underperforming retail pharmacy stores in 2019 and 2020. The store impairment charges are reflected in the Company’s
GAAP consolidated statements of operations within the Retail/LTC segment.
(4) During the year ended December 31, 2021, the goodwill impairment charge relates to the LTC reporting unit within the Retail/LTC segment.
(5) In June 2021, the Company received $61 million related to a purchase price working capital adjustment for an acquisition completed during the first quarter of 2020. The resolution of this
matter occurred subsequent to the acquisition accounting measurement period and is reflected in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December
31, 2021 as a reduction of operating expenses within the Health Care Benefits segment.
(6) In 2020, the gain on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax gain on the sale of the Workers’ Compensation business, which the Company sold on July 31, 2020 for approximately
$850 million. The gain on divestiture is reflected as a reduction of operating expenses in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement of operations within the Health Care Benefits
segment. In 2019, the loss on divestiture of subsidiary represents the pre-tax loss on the sale of Onofre, which occurred on July 1, 2019. The loss on divestiture primarily relates to the
elimination of the cumulative translation adjustment from accumulated other comprehensive income and is reflected in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement of operations in
operating expenses within the Retail/LTC segment.
(7) In 2020, the Company received $313 million owed to it under the ACA’s risk corridor program that was previously fully reserved for as payment was uncertain. After considering offsetting
items such as the ACA’s minimum MLR rebate requirements and premium taxes, the Company recognized pre-tax income of $307 million in the Company’s GAAP consolidated statement
of operations within the Health Care Benefits segment.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
_____________________________________________
171

Index to Consolidated Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited CVS Health Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control-
Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion,
CVS Health Corporation (the Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on
the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the 2021 consolidated
financial statements of the Company and our report dated February 9, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are
required  to  be  independent  with  respect  to  the  Company  in  accordance  with  the  U.S.  federal  securities  laws  and  the  applicable  rules  and  regulations  of  the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting  includes  those  policies  and  procedures  that  (1)  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any  evaluation  of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
Boston, Massachusetts
February 9, 2022
172

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CVS Health Corporation
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of CVS Health Corporation (the Company) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the related
consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, shareholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2021, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the
three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated February 9, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance
with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We  conducted  our  audits  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  PCAOB.  Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to
be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the
accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
173

Annual goodwill impairment test of the Commercial Business reporting unit
Description of the
Matter
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s goodwill related to the Commercial Business reporting unit was $26.5 billion. As discussed in
Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, goodwill is not amortized, but rather is subject to an annual impairment review, or more
frequent reviews, if events and circumstances indicate an impairment exists.
Auditing management's annual goodwill impairment test related to the Commercial Business reporting unit was complex and highly
judgmental  due  to  the  significant  estimation  required  to  determine  the  fair  value  of  the  reporting  unit.  In  particular,  the  fair  value
estimate  was  sensitive  to  changes  in  significant  assumptions,  such  as  the  discount  rate,  projected  revenue  and  projected  operating
income that are forward-looking and affected by future economic and market conditions.
How We Addressed the
Matter in Our Audit
We  obtained  an  understanding,  evaluated  the  design  and  tested  the  operating  effectiveness  of  controls  over  the  Company’s  annual
goodwill impairment review process, including controls over management’s review of the significant assumptions described above. 
To test the estimated fair value of the Commercial Business reporting unit, we performed audit procedures that included, among others,
assessing methodologies and testing the significant assumptions discussed above and the underlying data used by the Company in its
analysis. We compared the significant assumptions to the reporting unit’s historical results and third-party industry data. We performed
sensitivity analyses of significant assumptions to evaluate the changes in the fair value of the reporting unit that would result from
changes  in  the  key  assumptions.  We  involved  valuation  specialists  to  assist  in  our  assessment  of  the  methodology  and  significant
assumptions (such as the discount rate) used by the Company. In addition, we tested management’s reconciliation of the fair value of all
reporting units to the market capitalization of the Company.
Valuation of health care costs payable
Description of the
Matter 
At December 31, 2021, the incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) liabilities represented $6.6 billion of $8.8 billion of health care costs
payable. As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company’s liability for health care costs payable includes
estimated payments for (1) services rendered to members but not yet reported and (2) claims that have been reported but not yet paid,
each as of the financial statement date (collectively, “IBNR”). The estimated IBNR liability is developed utilizing actuarial principles
and assumptions that include historical and projected claim submission and processing patterns, historical and assumed medical cost
trends, historical utilization of medical services, claim inventory levels, changes in membership and product mix, seasonality and other
relevant factors to record the actuarial best estimate of health care costs payable. There is significant uncertainty inherent in determining
management’s actuarial best estimate of health care costs payable. In particular, the estimate is sensitive to the assumed completion
factors and the assumed health care cost trend rates.
Auditing management’s actuarial best estimate of IBNR reserves for health care costs payable for its products and services involved a
high degree of subjectivity in evaluating management’s assumptions used in the valuation process.
How We Addressed the
Matter in Our Audit 
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls over the process for estimating
IBNR reserves. This included, among others, controls over the completeness and accuracy of data used in the actuarial projections, the
transfer  of  data  between  underlying  source  systems,  and  the  review  and  approval  processes  that  management  has  in  place  for  the
actuarial principles and assumptions used in estimating the health care costs payable.
To test IBNR reserves, our audit procedures included, among others, testing the completeness and accuracy of the underlying claim and
membership data used in the calculation of IBNR reserves. We involved actuarial specialists to assist with our audit procedures, which
included,  among  others,  evaluating  the  methodologies  applied  by  the  Company  in  determining  the  actuarially  determined  liability,
evaluating  management’s  actuarial  principles  and  assumptions  used  in  their  analysis  based  on  historical  claim  experience,  and
independently calculating a range of reserve estimates for comparison to management’s actuarial best estimate of the liability for health
care costs payable. Additionally, we performed a review of the prior period liabilities for incurred but not paid claims to subsequent
claims development.
174

/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2007.
Boston, Massachusetts
February 9, 2022
175

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures.
Evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, after evaluating the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15 (f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of December 31, 2021, have concluded that as
of such date the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were adequate and effective at a reasonable assurance level and designed to ensure that material
information relating to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries would be made known to such officers on a timely basis.
Management’s report on internal control over financial reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. The Company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of the
Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial
statements. In order to ensure the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective, management regularly assesses such control and did so most
recently for its financial reporting as of December 31, 2021.
Management conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria established in Internal
Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 Framework). This evaluation included
review of the documentation, evaluation of the design effectiveness and testing of the operating effectiveness of controls. The Company’s system of internal
control over financial reporting is enhanced by periodic reviews by the Company’s internal auditors, written policies and procedures and a written Code of Conduct
adopted by CVS Health Corporation’s Board of Directors, applicable to all employees of the Company. In addition, the Company has an internal Disclosure
Committee, comprised of management from each functional area within the Company, which performs a separate review of disclosure controls and procedures.
There are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any system of internal control over financial reporting.
Based on management’s assessment, management concluded that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective and provides reasonable
assurance that assets are safeguarded and that the financial records are reliable for preparing financial statements as of December 31, 2021.
Ernst & Young LLP, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, is appointed by CVS Health Corporation’s Board of Directors and ratified by
CVS Health Corporation’s stockholders. They were engaged to render an opinion regarding the fair presentation of the Company’s consolidated financial
statements as well as conducting an audit of internal control over financial reporting. Their reports included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K are based upon audits
conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Changes in internal control over financial reporting
There has been no change in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required by paragraph (d) of
Rule 13a-15 or Rule 15d-15 that occurred during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
176

Table of Contents
Item 9B. Other Information.
No events have occurred during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021 that would require disclosure under this item.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
Information concerning the Executive Officers of CVS Health Corporation is included in Part I of this 10-K pursuant to General Instruction G to Form 10-K.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Committees of the Board as of the Annual Meeting,” “Code of Conduct,” “Audit Committee Report,” and
“Biographies of our Incumbent Board Nominees” are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Non-Employee Director Compensation” and “Executive Compensation and Related Matters,” including
“Letter from the Management Planning and Development Committee,” “Compensation Committee Report,” “Compensation Discussion and Analysis” and
“Compensation of Named Executive Officers” are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Share Ownership of Directors and Certain Executive Officers” and “Share Ownership of Principal
Stockholders” are incorporated herein by reference. Those sections contain information concerning security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters.
The following table summarizes information about the registrant’s common stock that may be issued upon the exercise of options, warrants and rights under all of
the Company’s equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2021:
Number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights 
(a)
Weighted 
average exercise 
price of 
outstanding 
options, warrants 
and rights 
(b)
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
first column) 
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by stockholders 
29,075 
$
74.09 
29,585 
Equity compensation plans not approved by stockholders 
5,064 
43.63 
— 
Total
34,139 
$
72.68 
29,585 
(1) Shares in thousands.
(2) Consists of: (i) 17,575 shares of common stock underlying outstanding options, (ii) 854 shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock appreciation rights (“SARs”)
and (iii) 15,710 shares of common stock issuable on the vesting of outstanding restricted stock units, deferred stock units and performance stock units, assuming target level performance in
the case of performance stock units. The number of shares included with respect to outstanding SARs is the number of shares of CVS Health Corporation common stock that would have
been issued had the SARs been exercised based on the closing price per share of CVS Health Corporation common stock on December 31, 2021, as reported on the NYSE, which was
$103.16.
(3) Consists of the CVS Health 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan.
(4) Consists of the Amended Aetna Inc. 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Aetna Stock Plan”). The Aetna Stock Plan expired on May 21, 2020, therefore there are no securities available for
future issuance under this plan.
The Aetna Stock Plan was last approved by Aetna’s shareholders at Aetna’s 2017 Annual Meeting on May 19, 2017. The Company elected to continue to grant
awards under the Aetna Stock Plan to employees of Aetna and its subsidiaries following the completion of the Company’s acquisition of Aetna. The Aetna Stock
Plan was designed to promote the Company’s interests and those of its stockholders and to further align the interests of stockholders and employees by tying
awards to total return to stockholders, enabling plan participants to acquire additional equity interests in the Company and providing compensation opportunities
dependent upon the Company’s performance. The Aetna Stock Plan was not submitted to the Company’s stockholders and expired on May 21, 2020. Under the
Aetna Stock Plan, eligible participants could be granted stock options to
(1) (2)
(1)
(3)
(4)
_____________________________________________
177

Table of Contents
purchase shares of CVS Health Corporation common stock, SARs, time-vesting and/or performance-vesting incentive stock or incentive units and other stock-
based awards.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
The sections of the Proxy Statement under the captions “Independence Determinations for Directors” and “Related Person Transaction Policy” are incorporated
herein by reference.
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services.
The section of the Proxy Statement under the caption “Item 2: Ratification of Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm for 2021” is
incorporated herein by reference.
178

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
The following documents are filed as part of this 10-K:
1.
Financial Statements. See “Index to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules. All financial statement schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not required under the instructions, or the
information is included in the consolidated financial statements or related notes.
3.
Exhibits. The exhibits listed in the “Index to Exhibits” in this Item 15 are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this 10-K. Exhibits marked with an
asterisk (*) are management contracts or compensatory plans or arrangements. Exhibits other than those listed are omitted because they are not required to
be listed or are not applicable. Pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, the Registrant hereby agrees to furnish to the Securities and Exchange
Commission a copy of any omitted instrument that is not required to be listed.
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Exhibit
Description
3
Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws
3.1
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant dated June 4, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1C of Registrant’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed June 5, 2018).
3.2
By-Laws of the Registrant, as amended and restated July 8, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed July 10, 2020).
4
Instruments defining the rights of security holders, including indentures
4.1
Specimen common stock certificate (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registration Statement of the Registrant ((then known as
CVS Corporation) as successor to Melville Corporation) on Form 8-B filed November 4, 1996).
4.2
Senior Indenture dated August 15, 2006, between the Registrant and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 15, 2006).
4.3
Form of the Registrant’s 2021 Floating Rate Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed March 12, 2018).
4.4
Form of the Registrant’s 2021 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.5
Form of the Registrant’s 2023 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.6
Form of the Registrant’s 2025 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.6 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.7
Form of the Registrant’s 2028 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.7 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.8
Form of the Registrant’s 2038 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.8 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.9
Form of the Registrant’s 2048 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.9 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 12,
2018).
4.10
Form of the Registrant’s 2024 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August
15, 2019).
4.11
Form of the Registrant’s 2026 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August
15, 2019).
4.12
Form of the Registrant’s 2029 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August
15, 2019).
4.13
Form of the Registrant’s 2027 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.14
Form of the Registrant’s 2030 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.15
Form of the Registrant’s 2040 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
179

4.16
Form of the Registrant’s 2050 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2020).
4.17
Form of the Registrant’s 2027 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August
21, 2020).
4.18
Form of the Registrant’s 2030 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August
21, 2020).
4.19
Form of the Registrant’s 2040 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August
21, 2020).
4.20
Form of the Registrant’s 2027 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
December 16, 2020).
4.21
Form of the Registrant’s 2031 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
December 16, 2020).
4.22
Form of the 2031 Note (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 18, 2021).
4.23
Material terms of outstanding securities that are registered under Section 12 of the 1934 Act as required by Item 202(a)-(d) and (f) of
Regulation S-K.
10
Material Contracts
10.1
Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 11, 2021, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto, and Bank of America, N.A., as
Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended June 30, 2021).
10.2
Five Year Credit Agreement, dated as of May 16, 2019, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America N.A., as
Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended June 30, 2019).
10.3
Amendment No. 1 to Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 16, 2019, to the Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, by
and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.3 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.4
Five Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 17, 2018, by and among the Registrant, the lenders party thereto and The Bank of New York
Mellon, as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended June 30, 2018).
10.5*
The Registrant’s Supplemental Retirement Plan I for Select Senior Management, as amended and restated as of December 31, 2008
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2009).
10.6*
Form of Enterprise Non-Competition, Non-Disclosure and Developments Agreement between the Registrant and certain of the Registrant’s
executive officers (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 of the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2013).
10.7*
The Registrant’s Deferred Stock Compensation Plan, as amended and restated (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to the Registrant's
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.8*
The Registrant’s 2007 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.2 to the Registrant’s Registration
Statement on Form S-8 filed May 19, 2020).
10.9*
Universal 409A Definition Document, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.28 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015).
10.10*
The Registrant’s Amended and Restated Deferred Compensation Plan.
10.11*
The Registrant’s Partnership Equity Program, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.12*
The Registrant’s Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to the Registrant’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.13*
The Registrant’s 2017 Incentive Compensation Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the Registrant’s Registration
Statement on Form S-8 filed May 19, 2020).
10.14*
The Registrant’s Executive Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.15*
The Registrant’s Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2017).
10.16*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.29 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.17*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant - between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.30 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
180

10.18*
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014).
10.19*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Pre-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.32 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2014).
10.20*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Post-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2014).
10.21*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2018).
10.22*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement (LTIP) - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2018).
10.23*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended September 30, 2020).
10.24*
The Registrant’s Management Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to the Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.25*
The Registrant’s Amended and Restated Severance Plan for Non-Store Employees dated October 11, 2021.
10.26*
The Registrant’s Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Program, as amended (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.27*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.39 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.28*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant - between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.40 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.29*
Form of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.41 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018).
10.30*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Pre-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2018).
10.31*
Form of Partnership Equity Program Participant Purchased RSUs, Company Matching RSUs and Company Matching Options Agreement
(Post-Tax) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2013).
10.32*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.33*
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2008).
10.34*
Amendment dated as of December 21, 2012 to the Amended and Restated Employment Agreement between the Registrant and Larry Merlo
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012).
10.35*
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.37 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.36*
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38
to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.37*
Amendment dated January 22, 2015 to Nonqualified Stock Option Agreements between the Registrant and Larry Merlo (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed January 23, 2015).
10.38*
Form of Performance Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2019).
10.39*
Change in Control Agreement effective as of July 19, 2010 between the Registrant and Eva Boratto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2019).
181

10.40*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated June 21, 2019 between the Registrant and Eva Boratto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.48 to
the registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.41*
Separation Agreement dated June 9, 2021 between CVS Pharmacy, Inc. and Eva C. Boratto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021).
10.42*
Change in Control Agreement dated December 22, 2008 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.33 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012).
10.43*
Amendment dated as of December 31, 2012 to the Change in Control Agreement dated December 22, 2008 between the Registrant and
Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.34 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2012).
10.44*
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement - Annual Grant dated April 1, 2016 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.44 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.45*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated May 20, 2016 between the Registrant and Jonathan Roberts (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.45 to the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016).
10.46*
Change in Control Agreement dated October 1, 2012 between the Registrant and Thomas Moriarty (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2015).
10.47*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated July 8, 2019 between the Registrant and Thomas Moriarty (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.56
of the Registrant's Annual Report on form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019).
10.48*
Amended and Restated Employment Agreement dated November 5, 2020 between the Registrant and Karen S. Lynch (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.51 to the Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020).
10.49*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated November 6, 2020 between the Registrant and Karen S. Lynch (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.52 to the Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020).
10.50*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated September 29, 2020 between the Registrant and Alan Lotvin (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.1 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2021).
10.51*
Change in Control Agreement dated October 15, 2012 between the Registrant and Alan Lotvin (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to
the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2021).
10.52*
Letter Agreement dated May 16, 2021 between the Registrant and Shawn Guertin (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the
Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021).
10.53*
Restrictive Covenant Agreement dated May 16, 2021 between CVS Pharmacy, Inc. and Shawn Guertin (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.5 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021).
10.54*
Change in Control Agreement dated May 16, 2021 between the Registrant and Shawn Guertin (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to
the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021).
10.55*
Form of Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement between the Registrant and selected employees of the Registrant.
10.56*
Descriptions of certain arrangements not embodied in formal documents as described under the heading “Non-Employee Director
Compensation” are incorporated herein by reference to the Proxy Statement (when filed).
21
Subsidiaries of the registrant
21.1
Subsidiaries of CVS Health Corporation.
23
Consents of experts and counsel
23.1
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP.
31
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certifications
31.1
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer.
31.2
Certification by the Chief Financial Officer.
32
Section 1350 Certifications
32.1
Certification by the Chief Executive Officer.
182

Table of Contents
32.2
Certification by the Chief Financial Officer.
101
Interactive Data File
101
The following materials from the CVS Health Corporation Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021
formatted in Inline XBRL: (i) the Consolidated Statements of Operations, (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income, (iii) the
Consolidated Balance Sheets, (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, (v) the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity and
(vi) the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File because its
XBRL tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document.
104
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File - The cover page from the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021,
formatted in Inline XBRL (included as Exhibit 101).
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary.
None.
183

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
Date:
February 9, 2022
By:
/s/ SHAWN M. GUERTIN
Shawn M. Guertin
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title(s)
Date
/s/ FERNANDO AGUIRRE
Director
February 9, 2022
Fernando Aguirre
/s/ C. DAVID BROWN II
Director
February 9, 2022
C. David Brown II
/s/ JAMES D. CLARK
Senior Vice President - Controller and Chief
February 9, 2022
James D. Clark
Accounting Officer (Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ ALECIA A. DECOUDREAUX
Director
February 9, 2022
Alecia A. DeCoudreaux
/s/ NANCY-ANN M. DEPARLE
Director
February 9, 2022
Nancy-Ann M. DeParle
/s/ DAVID W. DORMAN
Chair of the Board and Director
February 9, 2022
David W. Dorman
/s/ ROGER N. FARAH
Director
February 9, 2022
Roger N. Farah
/s/ ANNE M. FINUCANE
Director
February 9, 2022
Anne M. Finucane
/s/ SHAWN M. GUERTIN
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
February 9, 2022
Shawn M. Guertin
Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ EDWARD J. LUDWIG
Director
February 9, 2022
Edward J. Ludwig
/s/ KAREN S. LYNCH
President and Chief Executive Officer
February 9, 2022
Karen S. Lynch
(Principal Executive Officer) and Director
/s/ JEAN-PIERRE MILLON
Director
February 9, 2022
Jean-Pierre Millon
/s/ MARY L. SCHAPIRO
Director
February 9, 2022
Mary L. Schapiro
/s/ WILLIAM C. WELDON
Director
February 9, 2022
William C. Weldon
/s/ TONY L. WHITE
Director
February 9, 2022
Tony L. White

Exhibit 4.23
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
The following description (this “Description”) of the terms of the common stock of CVS Health Corporation (“CVS Health”) is a summary only and is
qualified by reference to the relevant provisions of Delaware law and the Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Charter”) and the By-Laws (the “By-Laws”) of
CVS Health. Copies of the Charter and the By-Laws are incorporated by reference as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10-K to which this Description is an
exhibit.
Authorized Capital Stock
Under the Charter as of February 9, 2022, the authorized capital stock of CVS Health consisted of (i) 3,200,000,000 shares of common stock, par value of
$0.01 per share (“common stock”), (ii) 120,619 shares of cumulative preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share (“preferred stock”), and (iii) 50,000,000 shares of
preference stock, par value $1.00 per share (“preference stock”).
Common Stock
The holders of shares of common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters voted on by CVS Health stockholders, including elections of
directors. Except as otherwise required by law, or by the provisions of the preferred stock or the preference stock, or provided in any resolution adopted by the
CVS Health board of directors (the “board”) with respect to any subsequently created class or series of shares of CVS Health, the holders of the shares of common
stock exclusively possess all voting power. The Charter precludes cumulative voting in the election of directors. The Charter provides for a majority vote standard
for uncontested elections of directors, and a plurality of votes standard for contested elections of directors. Subject to any rights of any outstanding series of
preferred stock or preference stock, (i) the holders of shares of common stock are entitled to such dividends as may be declared from time to time by the board
from funds available therefor, (ii) no dividends may be declared, paid, or set aside for payment on shares of common stock unless full cumulative dividends are
paid on any outstanding preference stock and any other preferred stock issued and outstanding at such time that is designated to have such dividend preference and
(iii) upon dissolution the holders of shares of common stock are entitled to receive pro rata all assets of CVS Health available for distribution to such holders,
subject to any liquidation preferences designated to any preferred stock or preference stock that may be issued and outstanding at such time of liquidation.
No Preemptive Rights
The Charter provides that no holder of any shares of CVS Health of any class or series may have any preemptive right to purchase or subscribe to any shares
of CVS Health or any security convertible into shares of CVS Health of any class or series.
Provisions Relating to Amendments to CVS Health’s Charter and By-Laws
Under Delaware law, stockholders have the right to adopt, amend or repeal the certificate of incorporation and by-laws of a corporation. However, Delaware
law requires that any amendment to the Charter also be approved by the board. Under Delaware law, unless a higher vote is required in a corporation’s certificate
of incorporation, amendments to the corporation’s certificate of incorporation will be adopted upon receiving at a properly convened meeting the affirmative vote
of a majority of the votes cast by all stockholders entitled to vote thereon, and if any class or series is entitled to vote thereon as a class, the affirmative vote of a
majority of the votes cast in each class vote.
In addition, the By-Laws may be amended by the board with respect to all matters not exclusively reserved by law to the stockholders. Amendments to
the By-Laws may be adopted and approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of record of a majority of the outstanding shares of stock of CVS Health entitled
to vote at any annual or special meeting, or by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors cast at any regular or special meeting, at which a quorum is
present.
1

Certain Statutory and Charter Provisions
Certain provisions of the Charter and By-Laws summarized in the following paragraphs may be deemed to have an antitakeover effect and may delay, defer
or prevent a tender offer or takeover attempt.
Potential Issuances of Preferred Stock and Preference Stock
As of February 9, 2022, the Charter authorized 120,619 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share and 50,000,000 shares of preference stock, par
value $1.00 per share. The Charter also authorizes the board to issue shares of preferred stock or preference stock, from time to time, in such class or classes, and
such series within any class, and with such designations, preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights, and qualifications, limitations or
restrictions thereof as the board may determine, including, for example, (i) the designation of the class or series; (ii) the number of shares of the class or series,
which number the board may thereafter (except where otherwise provided in the designation of any subsequently authorized class or series) increase or decrease
(but not below the number of shares thereof then outstanding); (iii) whether dividends, if any, will be cumulative or noncumulative and the dividend rate of the
class or series; (iv) the dates on which dividends, if any, will be payable; (v) the redemption rights and price or prices, if any, for shares of the class or series;
(vi) the terms and amounts of any sinking fund provided for the purchase or redemption of shares of the class or series; (vii) the amounts payable on shares of the
class or series in the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the affairs of CVS Health; (viii) whether the shares of the class
or series will be convertible into shares of any other class or series, or any other security, of CVS Health or any other corporation, and, if so, the specification of
such other class or series or such other security, the conversion price or prices or rate or rates, any adjustments thereof, the date or dates as of which such shares
will be convertible and all other terms and conditions upon which such conversion may be made; (ix) restrictions on the issuance of shares of the same class or
series or of any other class or series; and (x) the voting rights, if any, of the holders of such class or series. The authorized capital stock of CVS Health, including
preferred stock, preference stock and common stock, will be available for issuance without further action by CVS Health stockholders, unless such action is
required by applicable law or the rules of any stock exchange or automated quotation system on which CVS Health’s securities may be listed or traded. If the
approval of CVS Health stockholders is not so required, the board does not intend to seek stockholder approval.
Although the board has no intention at the present time of doing so, it could issue a class or series of preferred stock or preference stock that could,
depending on the terms of such class or series, impede completion of a merger, tender offer or other takeover attempt that the holders of some, or a majority, of
CVS Health shares might believe to be in their best interests or in which CVS Health stockholders might receive a premium for their shares over the then-current
market price of such shares.
Potential Issuances of Rights to Purchase Securities
CVS Health does not currently have a stockholder rights plan, although the board retains the right to adopt a new plan at a future date. The Charter grants
the board exclusive authority to create and issue rights entitling the holders thereof to purchase from CVS Health shares of capital stock or other securities and to
elect to repurchase, redeem, terminate or amend any such rights. The times at which and terms upon which such rights are to be issued, repurchased, redeemed,
terminated or amended are to be determined exclusively by the board and set forth in the contracts or instruments that evidence any such rights. The authority of
the board with respect to such rights includes determining, for example, (i) the purchase price of the capital stock or other securities or property to be purchased
upon exercise of such rights; (ii) provisions relating to the times at which and the circumstances under which such rights may be exercised or sold or otherwise
transferred, either together with or separately from any other shares or other securities of CVS Health; (iii) provisions which adjust the number or exercise price of
such rights or the amount or nature of the shares, other securities or other property receivable upon exercise of such rights in the event of a combination, split or
recapitalization of any shares of CVS Health, a change in ownership of CVS Health’s shares or other securities or a reorganization, merger, consolidation, sale of
assets or other occurrence relating to CVS Health or any shares of CVS Health, and provisions restricting the ability of CVS Health to enter into any such
transaction absent an assumption by the other party or parties thereto of the obligations of CVS Health under such rights; (iv) provisions which deny the holder of a
specified percentage of the outstanding securities of CVS Health the right to exercise such rights and/or cause such rights held by such holder to become void;
(v) provisions which
2

permit CVS Health to redeem or exchange such rights; and (vi) the appointment of the rights agent with respect to such rights. This provision is intended to
confirm the board’s exclusive authority to issue, repurchase, redeem, terminate or amend share purchase rights or other rights to purchase shares or securities of
CVS Health or any other corporation.
Stockholder Action by Written Consent
The Charter provides that stockholder action may be taken at an annual or special meeting of stockholders or by written consent in lieu of a meeting, but
only if such action is taken in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and By-Laws. Any person other than CVS Health seeking to have the CVS Health
stockholders authorize or take corporate action by written consent without a meeting is required to deliver a written notice signed by holders of record of at least
twenty-five percent (25%) of the voting power of the outstanding capital stock of CVS Health entitled to express consent on the relevant action and request that a
record date be fixed for such purpose.
Stockholder Vote on Fundamental or Extraordinary Corporate Transactions
Under Delaware law, a sale, lease or exchange of all or substantially all of CVS Health’s assets, an amendment to the Charter, a merger or consolidation of
CVS Health with another corporation or a dissolution of CVS Health generally requires the affirmative vote of the board and, with limited exceptions, the
affirmative vote of a majority of the aggregate voting power of the outstanding stock entitled to vote on the transaction.
With respect to transactions with related persons (persons who own at least 10% of the outstanding capital stock of CVS Health), the Charter provides that a
majority of outstanding shares (excluding those owned by the related person) voting as a single class is required to approve a business combination transaction with
a related person, unless (i) such transaction is approved by a majority of continuing directors (directors who are not the related person, or an affiliate or associate
thereof (or a representative or nominee of the related person or such affiliate or associate), that is involved in the relevant business combination and (a) who were
members of the board immediately prior to the time that such related person became a related person or (b) whose initial election as a director was recommended
by the affirmative vote of a least a majority of the continuing directors then in office, provided that, in either such case, such continuing director has continued in
office after becoming a continuing director) or (ii) certain fair price requirements are met.
State Anti-Takeover Provisions
CVS Health has not opted out of Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, which provides that, if a person acquires 15% or more of the
outstanding voting stock of a Delaware corporation, thereby becoming an “interested stockholder,” that person may not engage in certain “business combinations”
with the corporation, including mergers, purchases and sales of 10% or more of its assets, stock purchases and other transactions pursuant to which the percentage
of the corporation’s stock owned by the interested stockholder increases (other than on a pro rata basis) or pursuant to which the interested stockholder receives a
financial benefit from the corporation, for a period of three years after becoming an interested stockholder unless one of the following exceptions applies: (i) the
board approved the acquisition of stock pursuant to which the person became an interested stockholder or the transaction that resulted in the person becoming an
interested stockholder prior to the time that the person became an interested stockholder; (ii) upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the person
becoming an interested stockholder such person owned at least 85% of the outstanding voting stock of CVS Health, excluding, for purposes of determining the
voting stock outstanding, voting stock owned by directors who are also officers and certain employee stock plans; or (iii) the transaction is approved by the board
and by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the outstanding voting stock which is not owned by the interested stockholder. An “interested stockholder” also
includes the affiliates and associates of a 15% or more owner and any affiliate or associate of CVS Health who was the owner of 15% or more of the outstanding
voting stock within the three-year period prior to determine whether a person is an interested stockholder.
3

Exhibit 10.10
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2022
Proprietary

CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
Deferred Compensation Plan
PAGE
ARTICLE I –INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................
5
1.1
Name of Plan.........................................................................................................................
5
1.2
Purpose of Plan.....................................................................................................................
5
1.3
“Top Hat” Pension Benefit Plan..............................................................................................
5
1.4
Funding..................................................................................................................................
5
1.5
Effective Date.........................................................................................................................
5
1.6
Administration........................................................................................................................
5
1.7
Number and Gender..............................................................................................................
5
1.8
Headings................................................................................................................................
5
ARTICLE II – DEFINITIONS..............................................................................................................
6
2.1
Account..................................................................................................................................
6
2.2
Aetna Plans...........................................................................................................................
6
2.3
Affiliate...................................................................................................................................
6
2.4
Annual Cash Incentive...........................................................................................................
6
2.5
Annual Cash Incentive Deferral.............................................................................................
6
2.6
Base Salary............................................................................................................................
6
2.7
Base Salary Deferral..............................................................................................................
6
2.8
Beneficiary.............................................................................................................................
7
2.9
Board.....................................................................................................................................
7
2.10
Change in Control..................................................................................................................
7
2.11
Code......................................................................................................................................
7
2.12
Commissions.........................................................................................................................
7
2.13
Commissions Deferral...........................................................................................................
7
2.14
Committee.............................................................................................................................
7
2.15
Company Account..................................................................................................................
7
2.16
Company Contribution...........................................................................................................
7
2.17
CVS Caremark Retention Payment.......................................................................................
8
2.18
Deferrals................................................................................................................................
8
2.19
Deferral Account....................................................................................................................
8
Proprietary
Page | i

2.20
Deferred Compensation Election...........................................................................................
8
2.21
Disability.................................................................................................................................
8
2.22
Distribution Date....................................................................................................................
8
2.23
Effective Date.........................................................................................................................
8
2.24
Elective Deferrals...................................................................................................................
8
2.25
Eligible Executive...................................................................................................................
8
2.26
Employee...............................................................................................................................
8
2.27
ERISA....................................................................................................................................
9
2.28
Executive...............................................................................................................................
9
2.29
Future Fund...........................................................................................................................
9
2.30
Grandfathered Company Account.........................................................................................
9
2.31
Grandfathered Deferral Account............................................................................................
9
2.32
Lost Matching Contributions..................................................................................................
9
2.33
Participant..............................................................................................................................
9
2.34
Plan Administrator..................................................................................................................
9
2.35
Plan Year................................................................................................................................
9
2.36
Qualified Future Fund Matching Contribution........................................................................
9
2.37
Retirement.............................................................................................................................
9
2.38
Specified Employee...............................................................................................................
10
2.39
Specific Future Year...............................................................................................................
10
2.40
Termination of Employment...................................................................................................
10
2.41
Total Pay................................................................................................................................
10
2.42
Universal 409A Definition Document.....................................................................................
10
2.43
Valuation Date........................................................................................................................
10
2.44
Year of Service.......................................................................................................................
10
ARTICLE III – ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION..........................................................................
11
3.1
Eligibility.................................................................................................................................
11
3.2
Commencement of Participation............................................................................................
11
3.3
Termination of Participation...................................................................................................
11
ARTICLE IV – DEFERRALS & COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS........................................................
12
4.1
Deferrals................................................................................................................................
12
4.2
Filing Requirements of Deferred Compensation Elections....................................................
12
4.3
Modification or Revocation of Election by Participant............................................................
13
4.4
Company Contributions and Other Deferrals.........................................................................
14
4.5
Deferral and Contribution Timing...........................................................................................
15
Proprietary
Page | ii

ARTICLE V – ACCOUNTS................................................................................................................
17
5.1
Establishment of Bookkeeping Accounts...............................................................................
17
5.2
Subaccounts..........................................................................................................................
17
5.3
Hypothetical Nature of Accounts............................................................................................
17
5.4
Vesting...................................................................................................................................
17
5.5
Deferral Crediting Options.....................................................................................................
17
5.6
Hypothetical Gains or Losses................................................................................................
18
ARTICLE VI – DISTRIBUTION OF ACCOUNT.................................................................................
19
6.1
Distribution Elections – Timing of Payment...........................................................................
19
6.2
Disability Distributions............................................................................................................
19
6.3
Distributions in the Event of Death........................................................................................
19
6.4
Distributions Upon Termination of Employment Other Than Retirement, Death or Disability
20
6.5
Change in Control..................................................................................................................
20
6.6
Form of Payment...................................................................................................................
20
6.7
Change of Distribution Election.............................................................................................
21
6.8
Account Valuation upon a Distribution...................................................................................
22
6.9
Designation of Beneficiary.....................................................................................................
22
6.10
Unclaimed Account................................................................................................................
22
6.11
Hardship Withdrawals............................................................................................................
22
6.12
Distribution of Grandfathered Deferral Account and the Grandfathered Company Account
23
ARTICLE VII – ADMINISTRATION....................................................................................................
24
7.1
Plan Administrator..................................................................................................................
24
7.2
General Powers of Administration.........................................................................................
24
7.3
Costs of Administration..........................................................................................................
24
7.4
Indemnification.......................................................................................................................
24
7.5
409A Compliance...................................................................................................................
25
ARTICLE VIII – CLAIMS PROCEDURE............................................................................................
26
8.1
Claims....................................................................................................................................
26
8.2
Claim Decision.......................................................................................................................
26
8.3
Request for Review/Appeal...................................................................................................
26
8.4
Review of Decision...............................................................................................................
26
8.5
Time Limit for Bringing Legal Action......................................................................................
26
ARTICLE IX – MISCELLANEOUS.....................................................................................................
27
9.1
Not Contract of Employment..................................................................................................
27
9.2
Non-Assignability of Benefits.................................................................................................
27
Proprietary
Page | iii

9.3
Withholding and Deduction and Taxes..................................................................................
27
9.4
Amendment and Termination.................................................................................................
27
9.5
Compliance with Securities and Other Laws.........................................................................
28
9.6
No Trust Created...................................................................................................................
28
9.7
Unsecured General Creditor Status of Employee..................................................................
28
9.8
Limitation...............................................................................................................................
28
9.9
Payment to Minors and Incompetents...................................................................................
28
9.10
Acceleration of or Delay in Payments....................................................................................
29
9.11
Severability.............................................................................................................................
29
9.12
Governing Laws.....................................................................................................................
29
9.13
Binding Effect.........................................................................................................................
29
APPENDIX A – PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S GRANDFATHERED
DEFERRAL ACCOUNT AND GRANDFATHERED COMPANY ACCOUNT....................................
30
Article I – Definitions.........................................................................................................................
30
Article IV – Deferrals and Company Contributions...........................................................................
30
Article V – Maintenance of Accounts................................................................................................
30
Article VI – Payment of Benefit.........................................................................................................
30
APPENDIX B – PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE
OMNICARE, INC. DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.................................................................
32
Article 2: Participation.......................................................................................................................
32
Article 3: Contributions & Deferral Elections.....................................................................................
32
APPENDIX C APPENDIX C – PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT
UNDER THE AETNA SUPPLEMENTAL 401(K) PLAN AND AETNA DEFERRED COMPENSATION
PROGRAM...........................................................................................................
33
Proprietary
Page | iv

ARTICLE I – INTRODUCTION
1.1
Name of Plan.
CVS  Health  Corporation  (the  “Company”)  hereby  adopts  the  CVS Health  Deferred  Compensation  Plan  as  amended  and  restated  as  of
January 1, 2022 (the “Plan”).
1.2
Purpose of Plan.
The purpose of the Plan is to provide certain eligible employees of the Company or an Affiliate authorized by the Committee to participate in
the Plan the opportunity to defer elements of his or her compensation which might not otherwise be deferrable under other plans maintained
by the Company or an Affiliate and to make deferrals and receive contributions that would be obtainable under the CVS Health Future Fund
401(k) Plan (“Future Fund”) in the absence of certain restrictions and limitations in the Internal Revenue Code.
1.3
“Top Hat” Pension Benefit Plan.
The Plan is an “employee pension benefit plan” within the meaning of ERISA. However, the Plan is unfunded and maintained for a select
group of management or highly compensated employees and, therefore, it is intended that the Plan will be exempt from Parts 2, 3 and 4 of
Title I of ERISA. The Plan is not intended to qualify under Section 401(a) of the Code.
1.4
Funding.
The Plan is unfunded. All benefits will be paid from the general assets of the Company. Participants in the Plan shall have the status of
general unsecured creditors of the Company.
1.5
Effective Date.
The Plan was originally effective as of January 1, 1997, and amended and restated in its entirety effective as of December 31, 2008, to
comply with the provisions of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code and regulations promulgated thereunder and as of December 17,
2014,  October  1,  2015,  November  1,  2016,  and  January  1,  2020  to  reflect  certain  design  and  administrative  changes  desired  by  the
Company.
1.6
Administration.
The Plan shall be administered by the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, as defined in Article VII.
1.7
Number and Gender.
Wherever appropriate herein, words used in the singular shall be considered to include the plural and words used in the plural shall be
considered to include the singular. The masculine gender, where appearing in the Plan, shall be deemed to include the feminine gender.
The feminine gender, where appearing in the Plan, shall be deemed to include the masculine gender.
1.8
Headings.
The headings of Articles and Sections herein are included solely for convenience, and if there is any conflict between such headings and the
text of the Plan, the text shall control.
Proprietary
Page | 1

ARTICLE II – DEFINITIONS
For purposes of the Plan, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless their context clearly requires a different
meaning:
2.1
Account.
The Company Account, Deferral Account, Grandfathered Company Account, and the Grandfathered Deferral Account maintained by the
Company on behalf of each Participant pursuant to the Plan.
2.2
Aetna Plans.
The Aetna Deferred Compensation Program (“Aetna Program”) and the Aetna Supplemental 401K Plan (“Aetna Supplemental Plan”).
2.3
Affiliate.
A subsidiary of the Company, as defined in the Company’s Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.4
Annual Cash Incentive.
The amount awarded to a Participant in cash for a Plan Year under a regular (annual) incentive plan (other than an exceptional performance
award  program  or  a  one-time  incentive  plan  or  program)  maintained  by  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate,  and  any  other  amount  otherwise
included in Annual Cash Incentive for purposes of the Plan under rules as are adopted by the Committee.
Effective January 1, 2015, Operation Production Incentives shall be excluded from the definition of Annual Cash Incentive.
2.5
Annual Cash Incentive Deferral.
The amount of a Participant’s Annual Cash Incentive which a Participant elects to have withheld on a pre-tax basis from his or her Annual
Cash Incentive and credited to his or her Deferral Account pursuant to the Plan.
2.6
Base Salary.
The base rate of cash compensation paid by the Company or an Affiliate to or for the benefit of a Participant for services rendered or labor
performed while a Participant, including deferrals pursuant to the Plan and any pre-tax contribution to be made on the Participant’s behalf to
any qualified plan maintained by the Company or an Affiliate pursuant to a cash or deferred arrangement maintained by the Company or an
Affiliate (as defined under Section 401(k) of the Code) or under any cafeteria plan (as defined under Section 125 of the Code) or under a
qualified transportation fringe (as defined under Section 132(f) of the Code). Base Salary shall exclude any overtime, premium pay, shift
differentials, bonuses, commissions or any other form of supplemental cash compensation, except to the extent otherwise deemed “Base
Salary” for purposes of the Plan under rules as are adopted by the Committee.
2.7
Base Salary Deferral.
The amount of a Participant’s Base Salary which the Participant elects to have withheld on a pre- tax basis from his or her Base Salary and
credited to his or her Deferral Account pursuant to the Plan.
Proprietary
Page | 2

2.8
Beneficiary.
The person or persons (which may include trusts) designated in writing (either by hand or electronic submission) by the Participant on the
beneficiary designation form prescribed by the Plan Administrator to receive the amounts, if any, payable under the Plan upon the death of
the  Participant.  In  the  absence  of  such  written  designation  by  the  Participant,  the  Beneficiary  shall  mean,  in  the  following  order,  the
Participant’s  spouse,  if  any;  the  person  named  as  the  Participant’s  beneficiary  under  the  Company’s  life  insurance  program;  or  the
Participant’s estate.
2.9
Board.
The Board of Directors of the Company.
2.10
Change in Control.
“Change in Control” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.11
Code.
The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. References to any provision of the Code or regulation (including a proposed regulation)
thereunder shall include any successor provisions or regulations.
2.12
Commissions.
The amount of a Participant’s sales commissions or other commissions payable under a sales commissions or other commissions plan
maintained by the Company or an Affiliate. (Sales commissions for purposes of the Plan shall mean sales commissions as defined in Treas.
Reg. Section 1.409A-2(a)(12)(i) and any subsequent guidance and such sales commissions are considered to be earned in the taxable year
of the Participant in which the sale is completed so that the amount of the Commissions are reasonably determinable.)
2.13
Commissions Deferral.
The amount of a Participant’s Commissions that a Participant elects to have withheld on a pre-tax basis from his or her Commissions and
credited to his or her Deferral Account pursuant to the Plan.
2.14
Committee.
The Management Planning and Development Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company or any other directors of the Company
designated as the Committee.
2.15
Company Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s) thereof) maintained for each Participant to record the amount of Company Contributions that
are either (i) credited on his or her behalf under Section 4.4 on or after January 1, 2005 or (ii) were credited on his or her behalf under
Section 4.4 prior to January 1, 2005, but became vested on or after January 1, 2005, as adjusted pursuant to Section 5.6.
2.16
Company Contribution.
The amount, as determined by the Company on an annual basis based on the provisions of the Plan, which is credited on the Participant’s
behalf by the Company to his or her Company Account pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.4(a) of the Plan.
Proprietary
Page | 3

2.17
CVS Caremark Retention Payment.
The amount granted to an Eligible Executive, as defined in and provided for under the provisions of the employment term sheet agreement
entered into between the Company or an Affiliate and said Eligible Executive, as a former employee of Caremark Rx, Inc., in connection
with the merger involving Caremark, Rx, Inc. and the Company.
2.18
Deferrals.
The amount of deferrals credited to a Participant pursuant to Section 4.1.
2.19
Deferral Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s) thereof) maintained for each Participant to record any and all deferrals made under the Plan.
2.20
Deferred Compensation Election.
The  written  election  (either  by  hand  or  electronic  submission)  including  any  amendments,  attachments  and  appendices  thereto  as
prescribed by the Plan Administrator, regardless of how it may be titled, under which the Participant agrees to defer a portion of his or her
Base Salary and/or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions under the Plan (or any other cash remuneration payable to a Participant that he
or she may elect to defer under the provisions of the Plan, including but not limited to awards under the Company’s Long Term Incentive
Plan  (LTIP).  This  election  as  to  deferral  and  the  related  form  and  timing  of  distribution  is  made  by  the  Participant  and  constitutes  the
agreement entered into between the Company and a Participant for participation in the Plan. The Participant elects the terms of his or her
deferral pursuant to the provisions of this Plan and the administrative procedures established by the Plan Administrator.
2.21
Disability.
“Disability” as defined in the Company’s Long-Term Disability Plan.
2.22
Distribution Date.
The date on which a Participant’s distribution is scheduled to be paid with respect to his or her Account under the Plan pursuant to his or her
Deferred Compensation Election, which date shall take into account any processing period.
2.23
Effective Date.
January 1, 1997.
2.24
Elective Deferrals.
Elective Deferrals as defined in the Future Fund.
2.25
Eligible Executive.
An Executive who is eligible to participate in the Plan as provided in Section 3.1(a).
2.26
Employee.
Any common-law full-time salaried exempt employee of the Company or an Affiliate, other than a store manager, pharmacist or MinuteClinic
practitioner, who has been authorized by the Committee to participate in the Plan.
Proprietary
Page | 4

2.27
ERISA.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
2.28
Executive.
An Employee whose Base Salary (determined on the basis of a maximum forty (40) hour work week) equals or exceeds $175,000 (as
adjusted from time to time by the Committee).
2.29
Future Fund.
The CVS Health Future Fund 401(k) Plan.
2.30
Grandfathered Company Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s)) maintained for each Participant to record the amount of Company Contributions credited on a
Participant’s behalf under Section 4.4, which were vested as of December 31, 2004, adjusted as provided in Section 5.6.
2.31
Grandfathered Deferral Account.
The bookkeeping account (or subaccount(s)) maintained for each Participant to record (i) the amount of Base Salary and/or Annual Cash
Incentive or Commissions deferred in accordance with Section 4.1, (ii) the amount of LTIP deferrals deferred in accordance with Section
4.4, and/or (iii) the amount of cash retention award deferrals deferred in accordance with Section 4.4, as of December 31, 2004, adjusted
pursuant to Section 5.6.
2.32
Lost Matching Contributions.
The amounts credited on a Participant’s behalf to his or her Company Account pursuant to the provisions of Section 4.4(a).
2.33
Participant.
Each Eligible Executive participating in the Plan as set forth in Section 3.2.
2.34
Plan Administrator.
The Deferred Compensation Plans Committee appointed pursuant to Section 7.1 to administer the Plan.
2.35
Plan Year.
A calendar year ending on December 31.
2.36
Qualified Future Fund Matching Contribution.
The total of all matching contributions that could have been made by the Company or an Affiliate with respect to a Plan Year for the benefit
of a Participant under and in accordance with the terms of Future Fund.
2.37
Retirement.
Termination of Employment with the Company and all Affiliates on or after (i) age fifty-five (55) and the completion of ten (10) or more Years
of Service or, if earlier, (ii) age sixty (60) and the completion of five (5) or more Years of Service.
Proprietary
Page | 5

2.38
Specified Employee.
“Specified Employee” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.39
Specific Future Year.
A calendar year in the future elected by a Participant with respect to the distribution of his or her Account(s) (or subaccount(s) thereof)
pursuant to the Plan.
2.40
Termination of Employment.
“Termination of employment” as such term is defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
2.41
Total Pay
The total of Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive and Commissions.
2.42
Universal 409A Definition Document.
The document developed by the Company for the purpose of defining terms relating to benefits or amounts in all plans covered by Section
409A of the Code and sponsored by the Company or any Affiliate.
2.43
Valuation Date.
The date on which an Account is valued under the Plan, as determined by the Committee, by reference to the New York Stock Exchange.
2.44
Year of Service.
Year of Participation Service as defined in Future Fund.
Proprietary
Page | 6

ARTICLE III – ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION
3.1
Eligibility.
(a)
An Employee who is an Executive on October 1  of a calendar year (or such other date in the calendar year as designated by the
Committee) shall be eligible to participate in the Plan. The Committee may, in its sole discretion, designate other key employees of
the Company or an Affiliate who are members of a select group of management or highly compensated employees as eligible to
participate in the Plan.
(b)
Notwithstanding any Plan provision to the contrary, Employees must also be subject to the income tax laws of the United States in
order to be eligible for participation in the Plan.
(c)
Subject to the provisions of Sections 3.3 and Section 4.1, an Eligible Executive shall remain eligible to continue participation in the
Plan for each Plan Year following his or her initial year of participation in the Plan.
(d)
A Participant who ceases to be an Executive can continue to be eligible to participate unless and until such Participant fails to make
an annual deferral election under the Plan or under the CVS Health Corporation Deferred Stock Compensation Plan, at which point
the Employee must meet the threshold compensation level in order to be eligible to participate for a future Plan Year.
(e)
Deferred Compensation Plan Participants who made a deferral under the Deferred Compensation Plan with respect to the two most
recent enrollment periods shall, regardless of compensation threshold, be eligible to participate in the Deferred Compensation Plan
for the 2020 Plan Year.
(f)
Active  Aetna  employees  who  elected  to  defer  in  either  of  the  Aetna  Plans  in  the  two  most  recent  enrollment  periods  shall,
regardless of compensation threshold, be eligible to participate in the Deferred Compensation Plan for the 2020 Plan Year.
3.2
Commencement of Participation.
An Eligible Executive shall become a Participant effective as of the date that the Eligible Executive’s first Deferred Compensation Election
becomes  effective,  provided  that  the  Eligible  Executive  has  provided  such  information  as  the  Plan  Administrator  deems  necessary  to
properly administer the Plan.
3.3
Termination of Participation.
(a)
Participation shall cease when the benefits that have been credited to a Participant’s Deferral Account have been distributed to him
or her.
(b)
Subject to the provisions of Section 4.3(c), a Participant shall only be eligible to make Deferrals under the Plan for as long as he or
she remains an Eligible Executive.
(c)
If a former Participant who has incurred a Termination of Employment with the Company and all Affiliates and whose participation in
the  Plan  ceased  under  Section  3.3(a)  is  reemployed  as  an  Executive,  the  former  Participant  may  again  become  eligible  to
participate in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.1(a).
st
Proprietary
Page | 7

ARTICLE IV – DEFERRALS & COMPANY CONTRIBUTIONS
4.1
Deferrals.
(a)
Subject to the following provisions of this Article IV, an Eligible Executive may defer for any Plan Year: (i) up to fifty percent (50%) of
Base  Salary  otherwise  earned  and  payable  in  that  Plan  Year,  and/or  (ii)  up  to  eighty  percent  (80%)  of  Annual  Cash  Incentive
otherwise earned in that Plan Year and payable in that Plan Year or in the first calendar quarter of the following Plan Year, and/or
(iii) with respect to Deferred Compensation Elections made prior to November 1, 2021, up to eighty percent (80%) of Commissions
otherwise earned in that Plan Year and payable in that Plan Year or in the first calendar quarter of the following Plan Year, and with
respect  to  Deferred  Compensation  Elections  made  on  or  after  November  1,  2021,  up  to  eighty  percent  (80%)  of  Commissions
otherwise payable in the applicable Plan Year in accordance with Section 4.2. The Plan Administrator may, as it deems appropriate,
establish maximum or minimum limits on the amounts which may be deferred for a Plan Year and/or the times of such Deferred
Compensation Elections. An Eligible Executive shall be given advance notice of any such limits. Notwithstanding anything in the
Plan to the contrary,  a previously submitted Participant’s Deferred Compensation Election (with respect to Base Salary, Annual
Cash Incentive and/or Commissions) shall be disregarded following the Participant’s Termination of Employment.
(b)
Deferrals under the Plan shall be calculated with respect to the gross cash compensation payable to the Participant prior to any
deductions (e.g., 401(k) deferrals) or withholdings. However, the Deferrals shall be reduced by the Plan Administrator as necessary
if  it  is  later  determined,  after  Deferrals  are  made  under  the  Plan  and  after  additional  deduction  of  all  required  income  and
employment taxes, 401(k) and other employee benefit deductions, and other deductions required by law, that all such total deferrals
will exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the cash compensation of the Participant available under Section 4.1(a). Changes to
payroll  withholdings  that  affect  the  amount  of  compensation  being  deferred  to  the  Plan  shall  be  allowed  only  to  the  extent
permissible under Section 409A of the Code.
4.2
Filing Requirements of Deferred Compensation Elections.
Subject to the following provisions of this Section, during an annual enrollment period established by the Plan Administrator in any Plan
Year, an Eligible Executive described in Section 3.1 may elect, subject to Section 4.1 above, to defer: (a) a portion of his or her Base Salary
that is otherwise earned and payable in the next Plan Year, and/or (b) a portion of his or her Annual Cash Incentive otherwise earned in the
next Plan Year and payable in that Plan Year or in the first calendar quarter of the subsequent Plan Year, and/or (c) with respect to Deferred
Compensation Elections made prior to November 1, 2021, a portion of his or her Commissions otherwise earned in the next Plan Year and
payable in that Plan Year or in the first calendar quarter of the subsequent Plan Year, and with respect to Deferred Compensation Elections
made  on  or  after  November  1,  2021,  a  portion  of  his  or  her  Commissions  payable  in  the  second  succeeding  Plan  Year  following  the
calendar year in which such Deferred Compensation Election is made. The aforementioned Deferred Compensation Elections are to be
made by submitting a Deferred Compensation Election during such annual enrollment period. If an Executive becomes an Eligible Executive
after October 1 (or such later date as prescribed by the Plan Administrator)  in any calendar year, he or she may not make a Deferred
Compensation Election for Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions earned in the next Plan Year (and on or after November 1,
2021, for Commissions payable in the second succeeding Plan Year).
A  Participant  shall  submit  a  Deferred  Compensation  Election  in  the  manner  specified  by  the  Plan  Administrator  and  a  Deferred
Compensation  Election  that  is  not  timely  filed  shall  be  considered  void  and  have  no  effect.  If  a  Participant  does  not  file  a  Deferred
Compensation Election applicable to his or her Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions earned in a Plan Year on or before the
close of the applicable annual enrollment period (or such later date prescribed by the
Proprietary
Page | 8

Plan Administrator), the Participant shall be deemed to have elected not to make a Deferred Compensation Election for such Plan Year. The
Plan Administrator shall establish procedures that govern deferral elections under the Plan, including the ability to make separate elections
for Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions, and any other cash remuneration payable to the Participant that the Committee or
Plan Administrator permits a Participant to defer under the Plan.
Subject to the provisions of this Article, an Eligible Executive must file a new Deferred Compensation Election for each Plan Year that the
Eligible Executive is eligible to participate in the Plan if the Eligible Executive intends to make a deferral under the Plan for such Plan Year.
4.3
Modification or Revocation of Election by Participant.
(a)
A Participant’s Deferred Compensation Election for a Plan Year shall become irrevocable as of the close of business on the date
established by the Plan Administrator, but not later than the applicable date described below.
i.
In  the  case  of  a  deferral  of  Base  Salary  and/or  Annual  Cash  Incentives  and  with  respect  to  Commissions,  Deferred
Compensation Elections made before November 1, 2021, on the last day of the calendar year preceding the Plan Year in
which such Base Salary or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions applicable to that Deferred Compensation Election is
earned. Such Deferred Compensation Elections shall become effective as of the first day of the Plan Year in which such
Base Salary and/or Annual Cash Incentive and/or Commission is earned.
ii.
In the case of a deferral of Commissions, for Deferred Compensation Elections made on or after November 1, 2021, on the
last  day  of  the  second  calendar  year  preceding  the  Plan  Year  in  which  such  Commissions  applicable  to  that  Deferred
Compensation Election are paid. Such Deferred Compensation Elections shall become effective as of the first day of the
Plan Year that precedes the Plan Year in which such Commission is paid.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Plan Administrator may cancel a Participant’s Deferred Compensation Elections for the balance
of a Plan Year if the Participant submits evidence of an unforeseeable emergency (as defined in the Universal 409A Definition
Document) to the Plan Administrator. Any Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive, Commissions or other cash remuneration which
would have been deferred pursuant to that cancelled Deferred Compensation Election shall be paid to the Eligible Executive as if he
or she had not made that election.
A  Participant  may  revoke  or  change  a  Deferred  Compensation  Election  any  time  prior  to  the  date  such  election  becomes
irrevocable. Any such change or revocation shall be made in a form and manner determined by the Plan Administrator. Under no
circumstances may a Participant’s Deferred Compensation Election be made, modified or revoked retroactively.
(b)
If  a  Participant’s  Deferred  Compensation  Election  applicable  to  his  or  her  Base  Salary  and/or  Annual  Cash  Incentive  or
Commissions is cancelled for a Plan Year, he or she will not be permitted to elect to make Deferrals again until the next Plan Year.
(c)
If a Participant ceases to be an Executive after the date a Deferred Compensation Election becomes effective but continues to be
employed by the Company or an Affiliate, his or her Deferred Compensation Election currently in effect shall remain in force.
(d)
Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, if an Eligible Executive:
Proprietary
Page | 9

i.
receives  a  withdrawal  of  deferred  cash  contributions  on  account  of  hardship  from  any  plan  which  is  maintained  by  the
Company or an Affiliate and which meets the requirements of Section 401(k) of the Code (or any successor thereto); and
ii.
is  precluded  from  making  contributions  to  such  401(k)  plan  for  at  least  six  (6)  months  after  receipt  of  the  hardship
withdrawal,
the Eligible Executive’s Deferred Compensation Election with respect to Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions in
effect at that time shall be cancelled. Any Base Salary, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions payment which would have been
deferred pursuant to that Deferred Compensation Election but for the application of this Section 4.3(d) shall be paid to the Eligible
Executive as if he or she had not made that election.
4.4
Company Contributions and Other Deferrals.
(a)
Company Contributions – Restoration of Lost Matching Contribution.
The amount of Lost Matching Contributions credited under the Plan on a Participant’s behalf each calendar year shall be equal to (i)
minus (ii) where:
i.
is the lesser of (a) total Qualified Future Fund Matching Contribution that would have been allocated on the Participant’s
behalf  under  Future  Fund  for  the  Plan  Year,  without  giving  effect  to  any  reductions  or  limitations  required  by  Sections
401(a)(17), 401(k), 402(g) and/or 415 of the Code (i.e., 5% of Total Pay), and (b) the Future Fund matching contribution
that would have been allocated on the participants behalf, had the participant contributed the maximum amount permissible
by law for that plan year, plus his or her Deferral under Section 4.1 for the Plan Year; and
ii.
If  the  Participant  is  eligible  to  contribute  to  Future  Fund  (whether  pre-tax  or  after-tax)  during  the  Plan  Year,  (ii)  is  the
maximum amount of matching contributions that could have been made on the participants behalf to Future Fund had the
participant contributed the maximum amount permissible by law for that Plan Year.
In addition, if the Participant is not eligible to contribute to Future Fund during the Plan Year but is eligible to contribute to
another qualified defined contribution plan (whether pre-tax or after-tax) maintained by the Company or an Affiliate during
that Plan Year, the amount under this clause (ii) shall equal, unless otherwise provided by the Committee, the maximum
amount of matching contributions the Participant would have received under the provisions of Future Fund for that Plan
Year had he or she been eligible to contribute to Future Fund during that Plan Year, based on his or her Base Salary and/or
Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions otherwise earned and payable in that Plan Year.
For purposes of this subsection (a), for the Plan Year in which the requirement to complete one (1) Year of Service is met, Total
Compensation for the entire Plan Year shall be taken into account.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of determining the Lost Matching Contributions to be credited under this Section 4.4(a),
Years of Service with respect to a Participant employed by Red Oak Sourcing, LLC, the limited liability corporation formed pursuant
to the Framework Agreement between CVS Pharmacy, Inc. and Cardinal Health 110 Inc., dated December 10, 2013 (“Cardinal”),
who immediately prior to becoming employed by Red Oak Sourcing, LLC was employed by Cardinal, shall include the period of
such Participant’s employment rendered with Cardinal.
Proprietary
Page | 10

Lost Matching Contributions shall be credited under this Section 4.4(a) with respect to a Participant who made a Bonus Deferral
Contribution  election  under  the  Omnicare,  Inc.  Deferred  Compensation  Plan  with  respect  to  the  2016  Plan  Year  but  such  Lost
Matching Contributions shall be subject to the Participant’s distribution election and the distribution provisions of the Omnicare, Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan in effect on the date of such Participant’s election.
Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  Participant  shall  not  be  eligible  to  receive  a  Lost  Matching  Contribution
following the Participant’s Termination of Employment, unless the Participant terminates due to Retirement.
For purposes of clarification, in no event shall a Participant be eligible to receive a Lost Matching Contribution if the Participant does
not make an actual deferral into the Plan for the Plan Year.
(b)
LTIP Deferrals.
At the sole discretion of the Committee, all or a portion of a Participant’s cash award under the LTIP may be deferred under the
Plan. Such election shall be made in accordance with the procedures established by the Plan Administrator. The deferral election
applicable to an LTIP cash award shall be made prior to the close of the calendar year preceding the first day of the performance
period applicable to that award. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such election shall become irrevocable as of the close of business of
the last day of the calendar year preceding the first day of the performance period applicable to that award. However, if such award
meets the definition of performance-based compensation (as defined under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-1(e) and any subsequent
guidance),  the  Plan  Administrator  may  permit  such  election  to  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  under  Treas.  Reg.
Section  1.409A-2(a)(8)  and  subsequent  guidance.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  previously  submitted
deferral  election  of  a  Participant’s  cash  award  under  the  LTIP  shall  be  disregarded  following  the  Participant’s  Termination  of
Employment.
(c)
Cash Retention Award Deferrals.
At the sole discretion of the Committee and subject to the procedures established by the Plan Administrator, an Eligible Executive
may elect to defer all or a portion of a cash retention award that may be otherwise paid under a cash retention program maintained
by the Company or an Affiliate. The deferral election applicable to such cash retention award shall be made in accordance with the
provisions  of  Treasury  Regulations  Section  1.409A-  2(a)(5).  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary,  a  previously
submitted deferral election of a Participant’s cash retention award shall be disregarded following the Participant’s Termination of
Employment.
4.5
Deferral and Contribution Timing.
Base  Salary  Deferrals  will  be  credited  to  the  Account  of  each  Participant  as  of  the  date  of  the  paycheck  from  which  the  deferral  was
withheld. A Participant whose employment terminates during a payroll period will cease deferral withholding effective as of the first day of
the following payroll period.
Annual Cash Incentive Deferrals and Commission Deferrals will be credited to the Account of each Participant as of the day on which such
Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions, whichever is applicable, otherwise would have been paid to the Participant in cash.
Company Contributions for the Restoration of Lost Matching Contribution pursuant to Section 4.4(a)
Proprietary
Page | 11

above  will  generally  be  credited  to  the  Participant’s  Company  Account  as  of  the  last  day  of  each  Plan  Year  following  the  Participant’s
completion of one (1) Year of Participation Service (as defined in Future Fund).
LTIP deferrals shall be credited to the Account of the Participant at the time designated by the Plan Administrator.
Cash  retention  awards  Deferrals  will  be  credited  to  the  Account  of  the  Participant  as  of  the  day  on  which  such  cash  retention  award
otherwise would have been paid to the Participant in cash.
Proprietary
Page | 12

ARTICLE V– ACCOUNTS
5.1
Establishment of Bookkeeping Accounts.
Separate bookkeeping accounts shall be maintained for each Participant. Said accounts (or subaccount(s) thereof) shall be credited with the
deferrals and contributions made by or on behalf of the Participant pursuant to the Plan and credited (or charged, as the case may be) with
the hypothetical investment results determined pursuant to this Article of the Plan.
5.2
Subaccounts.
Within each Participant’s bookkeeping account, separate subaccount(s) shall be maintained to the extent necessary for the administration of
the Plan. Generally, subaccount(s) will be set up for each year, for each Deferred Compensation Election the Participant makes, and for the
Company Contribution credited each year on behalf of a Participant.
5.3
Hypothetical Nature of Accounts.
The accounts established under this Article shall be hypothetical in nature and shall be maintained for bookkeeping purposes only so that
hypothetical gains or losses on the deferrals or contributions made to the Plan can be credited (or charged, as the case may be).
Neither the Plan nor any of the accounts, or subaccount(s), established hereunder shall hold any actual funds or assets. The right of any
person to receive one or more payments under the Plan shall be an unsecured claim against the general assets of the Company. Any
liability of the Company to any Participant, former Participant, or Beneficiary with respect to a right to payment shall be based solely upon
contractual obligations created by the Plan. The Company, an Affiliate, the Board, the Committee, or any other person shall not be deemed
to be a trustee of any amounts to be paid under the Plan. Nothing contained in the Plan, and no action taken pursuant to its provisions, shall
create  or  be  construed  to  create  a  trust  of  any  kind,  or  a  fiduciary  relationship,  between  the  Company,  an  Affiliate,  the  Board,  the
Committee, the Plan Administrator, or any other person and a Participant or any other person.
5.4
Vesting.
Deferral Account. A Participant shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested in his or her Deferral Account and Grandfathered Deferral
Account at all times. A Participant shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested in the LTIP deferrals credited on his or her behalf pursuant
to Section 4.4(b) and any cash retention award deferrals credited on his or her behalf pursuant to Section 4.4(c).
Company Account. A Participant shall be one hundred percent (100%) vested in his or her Company Account and Grandfathered Company
Account at all times.
5.5
Deferral Crediting Options.
Deferral Crediting Options are similar to investment choices in a qualified defined contribution plan, except that they are hypothetical in
nature and no funds are actually held in the Plan. Deferral Crediting Options determine the hypothetical gain or loss to be reflected in the
Participant Accounts and shall be elected by Participants in the manner determined by the Plan Administrator.
The Deferral Crediting Options offered to Participants are determined by the Plan Administrator at its sole discretion. The Plan Administrator
specifically retains the right to change the Deferral Crediting Options at any time, in its sole discretion.
In  the  event  the  Plan  Administrator  designates  more  than  one  Deferral  Crediting  Option,  each  Participant  shall  electronically  submit  a
Deferral Crediting Option election during each annual
Proprietary
Page | 13

enrollment period, which shall be used to measure the hypothetical investment performance of his or her Accounts, within such time period
and on such form as the Plan Administrator may prescribe. The designation of a Deferral Crediting Option shall not require the Company to
invest or earmark their general assets in any manner. If a Participant fails to make a Deferral Crediting Option, his or her Accounts shall be
deemed invested in a Deferral Crediting Option as determined by the Plan Administrator.
A Participant may change his or her election of a Deferral Crediting Option used to measure the hypothetical investment performance of his
or her Account balance within such time periods and in such manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator. The election shall be effective as
soon as administratively practicable after the date on which the election is submitted in the manner specified by the Plan Administrator.
Any  amounts  added  to  or  subtracted  from  a  Participant’s  Account  on  any  given  Valuation  Date  will  be  converted  to  hypothetical  unit
equivalents (“Hypothetical Units”) with a value per Hypothetical Unit (“Unit Price”) based on the daily closing price on said date (“Unit Price”)
for any given Deferral Crediting Option.
5.6
Hypothetical Gains or Losses.
Any hypothetical dividends, capital gains and any other income or unit activity will be reflected in the Deferral Crediting Options. The timing
of these will be the same as for the funds on which each Deferral Crediting Option is based.
The gain or loss on Participant Accounts will be calculated each Valuation Date. The Unit Price shall determine each Deferral Crediting
Option’s hypothetical value, based on the number of units within the Account for any given Deferral Crediting Option. Account balances on a
given day will be based on the previous day’s New York Stock Exchange closing price.
Proprietary
Page | 14

ARTICLE VI – DISTRIBUTION OF ACCOUNT
6.1
Distribution Elections – Timing of Payment.
(a)
Subject to the limitations set forth in this Article VI, each time a Participant makes a Deferred Compensation Election with respect to
a  Plan  Year  beginning  on  or  after  January  1,  2016,  the  Participant  shall  designate  on  that  applicable  Deferred  Compensation
Election, separately for Participant deferrals and Company Contributions, as adjusted pursuant to Article V, that the distribution of
such deferrals shall be made or commence, as the case may be, pursuant to Section 6.6, as of (i) the Participant’s Retirement; or
(ii) a Specific Future Year not later than the Plan Year in which the Participant attains age seventy-one (71).
A Participant may choose different options with respect to each Deferred Compensation Election. A Participant may not change the
election made pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.1, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.7 below.
i.
Retirement.  The  distribution  of  the  portion  of  a  Participant’s  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  subaccount(s))  that  is
deferred to Retirement under this Section shall commence on the first business day in the January next following his or her
Retirement,  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  Section  6.6,  provided,  however,  that  with  respect  to  a  Participant  who  is  a
Specified Employee as of the date of his or her Retirement, payment of any portion of his or her Deferral or Company
Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) that is subject to Section 409A of the Code will be delayed until the first business
day of the seventh (7th) month following the date such Retirement occurs.
ii.
Specific Future Year. In the event a Participant elects to have the distribution of such deferrals made or commence as of a
Specific Future Year, subject to rules established by the Plan Administrator, the deferral period must be at least five (5)
Plan  Years.  The  distribution  of  the  portion  of  a  Participant’s  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  subaccount(s))  that  is
deferred to a Specific Future Year shall commence on the first business day of January in that specific year pursuant to the
provisions of Section 6.6.
(b)
Company  Contributions  shall  be  distributed  pursuant  to  the  Participant’s  distribution  election.  In  the  event  a  Participant  has  not
made a distribution election for the Company Contributions for that Plan Year, such distribution shall mirror his or her distribution
election made with respect to his or her Base Salary Deferral or Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions Deferral for that Plan Year,
if any, in such order; otherwise, such distribution shall be made at the Participant’s Retirement.
6.2
Disability Distributions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a Participant has a Termination of Employment because he or she has become Disabled, as determined by
the Plan Administrator, such Participant will receive the balance of his or her Deferral Account and Company Account paid out in five (5)
annual substantially equal installments with the first payment to be made within seventy-five (75) days from the date of the Participant’s
Termination of Employment. Subsequent annual payments will be paid as of the first business day in January of each subsequent year of
the installment period.
6.3
Distributions in the Event of Death.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a Participant’s death, the Participant’s Beneficiary will receive the remaining balance of the
Participant’s Deferral Account and Company Account paid
Proprietary
Page | 15

in two (2) annual installments with the first payment to be made within seventy-five (75) days of the Participant’s date of death. The second
annual payment will be paid as of the first business day in January of the subsequent calendar year.
6.4
Distributions Upon Termination of Employment Other Than Retirement, Death or Disability.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event a Participant incurs a Termination of Employment from the Company and all Affiliates for any
reason other than Retirement, death or Disability, said Participant will receive his or her entire Deferral Account and Company Account
balance in a single lump sum payment. Such payment shall be made within seventy-five (75) days of the date the Participant’s Termination
of  Employment  occurs;  provided,  however,  that  with  respect  to  a  Participant  who  is  a  Specified  Employee  as  of  the  date  of  his  or  her
Termination  of  Employment  for  reasons  other  than  death,  payment  of  any  portion  of  his  or  her  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  any
subaccount(s) thereof) pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.4 will be delayed until the first business day of the seventh (7th) month
following the date such Termination of Employment occurs.
6.5
Change in Control.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  provisions  of  this  Article  VI,  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  Change  in  Control,  a  Participant  who  has  a  valid
change in control election(s) in effect shall automatically receive the balance of his or her Deferral Account and Company Account related to
that election, in cash, in a single lump sum payment. Such lump sum payment shall be paid within forty-five (45) business days after the
Change in Control occurs. If such Participant dies after such Change in Control event occurs, but before receiving such payment, it shall be
made to his or her Beneficiary.
6.6
Form of Payment.
(a)
Installments. Subject to the limitations set forth in Article VI, distributions will be made in annual (or quarterly, if the election was
made prior to October 1, 2008) installments, as elected by the Participant, for up to, and including, ten (10) years (fifteen (15) years
for an election made prior to October 1, 2008). The initial installment of an annual or quarterly payment stream will begin as of the
first business day of the January (a) next following the Participant’s date of Retirement or (b) of the Specific Future Year, as the
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of set forth in Section 6.1. Subsequent annual or quarterly payments will be as of
the first business day of each subsequent calendar year or quarter of the installment period.
Each installment will be equal to a fraction of the Account balance (or subaccount(s) thereof) as of the date the installment is paid,
with the numerator of the fraction being “1” and the denominator being the number of payments remaining in the payment schedule.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph (a), if a Participant dies before receiving payment of the entire balance of
his or her Deferral and Company Accounts under the provisions of this Section, the remaining value of such Accounts shall be
payable to his or her Beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.9.
(b)
Lump  sum.  A  Participant  may  elect  distribution  in  the  form  of  a  single  lump  sum  payment.  Except  for  Specified  Employees,
distribution shall be made as of the first business day of the January (a) next following the Participant’s date of Retirement or (b) of
the Specific Future Year, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of set forth in Section 6.1.
Proprietary
Page | 16

(c)
Distributions to a Participant made pursuant to Section 6.1 will occur pursuant to the Participant’s payment elections at the time he
or she submits the applicable Deferred Compensation Election. A Participant may choose different forms of payment with respect to
each Deferred Compensation Election. Company Contributions, adjusted pursuant to Article V, shall be distributed pursuant to the
Participant’s form of payment election made with respect to his or her Company Contributions for that year. If the Participant has not
made an election with respect to his or her Company Contributions, the portion of his or her Company Account attributable to such
Company contributions will be distributed in accordance with his or her form of payment election with respect to his or her Base
Salary Deferral, Annual Cash Incentive or Commissions Deferrals for that year, if any, in that order; otherwise payment will be made
in  a  lump  sum  payment.  In  the  absence  of  an  election  of  the  form  of  payment  by  a  Participant  on  a  Deferred  Compensation
Election, the portion of the Participant’s Account deferred pursuant to that Deferred Compensation Election, adjusted pursuant to
the provisions of Article V, shall be paid in a single lump sum.
(d)
A Participant shall not change his or her form of payment election, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.7 below.
6.7
Change of Distribution Election.
(a)
In accordance with such procedures as the Plan Administrator may prescribe, a Participant may elect to change his or her Specific
Future Year election under Section 6.1(a)(ii) with respect to a portion of his or her Deferral Account (or an Interim Distribution date
election applicable to a portion of his or her Deferral Account or Company Account made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as
in effect  prior  to  December  31,  2008)  to a later  Specific  Future  Year  (or,  if  applicable,  a later  Interim  Distribution  date)  by duly
completing,  executing  and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  Specific  Future  Year  election  (or  Interim  Distribution  date
election) applicable to such Deferrals, subject to the following limitations:
i.
such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to the Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) then
in  effect  with  respect  to  that  portion  of  his  or  her  Deferral  or  Company  Account  (or  subaccount(s)  thereof),  and  such
election will not become effective until at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made; and
ii.
the new Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) shall be a calendar year that is not less than five (5) years from
the Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) then in effect.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective for election changes made on or after January 1, 2021, a Participant may elect to delay his
or her distribution from an elected Specific Future Year to a new Specific Future Year that is at least five (5) years from the Specific
Future  Year  then  in  effect,  provided  the  election  is  made  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing  provisions  of  this  Section  6.7(a).  A
Participant may elect to delay his or her distribution from an elected Specific Future Year (or Interim Distribution date) pursuant to
this Section 6.7(a) more than once, provided that all such elections comply with the provisions of this Section 6.7(a).
(b)
In accordance with such procedures as the Plan Administrator may prescribe, a Participant may elect to delay the payment of a
portion of his or her Deferral or Company Account (or any subaccount(s) thereof) scheduled to be paid at his or her Retirement to
his  or  her  Retirement  plus  five  (5)  calendar  years  by  duly  completing,  executing  and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new
Retirement election applicable to such deferrals; provided,
Proprietary
Page | 17

however such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to Retirement and shall not become effective until at least
twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made.
(c)
In  accordance  with  such  procedures  as  the  Plan  Administrator  may  prescribe,  a  Participant  may  elect  to  change  the  form  of
payment election under Section 6.6 applicable to his or her distribution under Section 6.1(a)(i) or (ii) by duly completing, executing
and  filing  with  the  Plan  Administrator  a  new  form  of  payment  election  applicable  to  such  deferrals,  subject  to  the  following
limitations:
i.
such election must be made at least twelve (12) months prior to the Specific Future Year then in effect with respect to that
portion of his or her Deferral or Company Account (or subaccount(s) thereof), and such election will not become effective
until at least twelve (12) months after the date on which the election is made; and
ii.
the distribution of that portion of his or her Deferral or Company Account (or subaccount(s) thereof) shall be deferred for
five (5) years from the date such amount would otherwise have been paid absent this election.
Notwithstanding the foregoing or any provision of any Appendix to this Plan, effective for election changes made on or after January
1, 2021, in no case may a Participant elect to change the form of payment election to an installment form that includes payments for
a period in excess of ten (10) years.
(d)
It  is  the  Company’s  intent  that  the  provisions  of  Sections  6.7(a),  (b)  and  (c)  comply  with  the  subsequent  election  provisions  in
Section  409A(a)(4)(C)  of  the  Code,  related  regulations  and other  applicable  guidance,  and  this  Section  6.7  shall  be  interpreted
accordingly. The Plan Administrator may impose additional restrictions or conditions on a Participant’s ability to make an election
pursuant to this Section 6.7. For avoidance of doubt, a Participant may not elect to alter the distribution of any portion of his or her
Deferral or Company Accounts (or any subaccount(s) thereof) from Retirement to a Specific Future Year or, except as provided in
paragraph (a) above, from a Specific Future Year to Retirement.
6.8
Account Valuation upon a Distribution.
With  respect  to  a  distribution  made  pursuant  to  this  Article,  the  Valuation  Date  of  a Participant’s  Account  shall  be  the  day  immediately
preceding the Distribution Date.
6.9
Designation of Beneficiary.
Each Participant shall have the right to designate a Beneficiary to receive payment of his or her Account in the event of death. Any such
designation may be changed at any time by executing and submitting (either by hand or electronic submission) a new designation on a form
prescribed by the Plan Administrator.
6.10
Unclaimed Account.
If the Plan Administrator is unable to locate a Participant or Beneficiary to whom an Account is payable, such Account may be forfeited to
the  Company  upon  the  Plan  Administrator’s  determination.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  if  subsequent  to  any  such  forfeiture,  the
Participant or Beneficiary to whom such Account is payable makes a valid claim, such forfeited Account shall be restored to the Plan and
paid by the Company.
6.11
Hardship Withdrawals.
A Participant may apply in writing to the Plan Administrator for, and the Plan Administrator may
Proprietary
Page | 18

grant, a hardship withdrawal of all or any part of a Participant’s Deferral or Company Account if the Plan Administrator, in its sole discretion,
determines that the Participant has incurred an Unforeseeable Emergency, as defined in the Universal 409A Definition Document.
The Plan Administrator shall determine whether an event qualifies as a hardship within this Section, in its sole and absolute discretion. Such
request shall be made in a time and manner determined by the Plan Administrator. The payment made from a Participant’s Deferral or
Company  Account  (or  any  subaccount(s)  thereof)  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this  Section  6.11  shall  not  be  in  excess  of  the  amount
necessary to meet such financial hardship of the Participant, including amounts necessary to pay any federal, state or local income taxes
with respect to the payment and shall not be available unless all other financial resources of the Participant have been exhausted. Payment
shall be made in the month following the date the Plan Administrator determines that the Participant has incurred an unforeseeable severe
financial hardship and grants the right to a withdrawal pursuant to this Section 6.11.
6.12
Distribution of Grandfathered Deferral Account and the Grandfathered Company Account.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  provisions  of  this  Article  VI,  the  distribution  from  a  Participant’s  Grandfathered  Deferral  Account  and
Grandfathered Company Account (or subaccount(s)) shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004,
without regard to any amendments after October 3, 2004 which would constitute a material modification for Section 409A of the Code, as
modified in Appendix A attached hereto.
Proprietary
Page | 19

ARTICLE VI — ADMINISTRATION
7.1
Plan Administrator.
The Plan shall be administered by the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, appointed by the Committee as Plan Administrator. The
Plan Administrator shall be responsible for the general operation and administration of the Plan and for carrying out the provisions thereof.
The Plan Administrator may delegate to others certain aspects of the management and operations of the Plan including the employment of
advisors and the delegation of ministerial duties to qualified individuals, provided that such delegation is in writing.
7.2
General Powers of Administration.
The Plan Administrator shall have the exclusive responsibility and complete discretionary authority to control the operation, management
and administration of the Plan, with all powers necessary to enable it properly to carry out such responsibilities, including, but not limited to,
the power to interpret the Plan and any related documents, to establish procedures for making any elections called for under the Plan, to
make factual determinations regarding any and all matters arising hereunder, including, but not limited to, the right to determine eligibility for
benefits, the right to construe the terms of the Plan, the right to remedy possible ambiguities, inequities, inconsistencies or omissions, and
the right to resolve all interpretive, equitable or other questions arising under the Plan. The decisions of the Plan Administrator or such other
party as is authorized under the terms of any grantor trust on all matters shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons to the extent
permitted by law. The Plan Administrator shall have all powers necessary or appropriate to enable it to carry out its administrative duties.
Not in limitation, but in application of the foregoing, the Plan Administrator shall have the duty and power to interpret the Plan and determine
all questions that may raise hereunder as to the status and rights of Employees, Participants, Beneficiaries, and any other person. The Plan
Administrator may exercise the powers hereby granted in its sole and absolute discretion. No member of the Deferred Compensation Plans
Committee shall be personally liable for any actions taken by the Plan Administrator unless the member’s action involves gross negligence
or willful misconduct.
7.3
Costs of Administration.
The costs of administering the Plan shall be borne by the Company unless and until the Participant receives written notice of the imposition
of such administrative costs; with such costs to begin with the next Plan Year and none may be assessed retroactively for prior Plan Years.
Such costs shall be charged against the Participant’s Account and shall be uniform or proportional for all Participants. Such costs shall not
exceed the standard rates for similarly designed nonqualified plans under administration by high quality third party administrators at the time
such costs are initially imposed and thereafter.
7.4
Indemnification.
The Company shall indemnify each director, officer or employee of the Company or any Affiliate and each member of the Committee and
Deferred Compensation Plans Committee, including any subcommittee or delegates thereof, against any and all claims, losses, damages,
expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred by them, and any liability, including any amounts paid in settlement with their approval, arising
from  their  action  or  failure  to  act,  except  when  the  same  is  judicially  determined  to  be  attributable  to  their  gross  negligence  or  willful
misconduct, as a result of the fact that he or she is or was serving the Plan in any capacity at the request of the Company.
Proprietary
Page | 20

7.5
409A Compliance.
With respect to the accounts subject to Section 409A of the Code, the Plan is intended to comply with the requirements of Section 409A of
the Code and the provisions hereof shall be interpreted in a manner that satisfies the requirements of Section 409A of the Code and the
regulations thereunder, and the Plan shall be operated accordingly. Regardless of, and superseding any other provision of the Plan to the
contrary,  if  any  provision  of  the  Plan  would  otherwise  frustrate  or  conflict  with  this  intent,  the  provision  will  be  interpreted  and  deemed
amended so as to avoid this conflict.
Proprietary
Page | 21

ARTICLE VIII – CLAIMS PROCEDURE
8.1
Claims.
A person who believes that he or she is being denied a benefit to which he or she is entitled under the Plan (hereinafter referred to as a
“Claimant”)  may  file  a  written  request  for  such  benefit  with  the  Plan  Administrator,  setting  forth  his  or  her  claim.  The  request  must  be
addressed to the Senior Vice President, Compensation and Benefits, at the Company’s then principal place of business.
8.2
Claim Decision.
Upon receipt of a claim, the Plan Administrator or its delegate shall review and determine the claim within ninety (90) days. If the Plan
Administrator determines that additional time is needed to review the claim, the Plan Administrator will provide the Claimant with a notice of
the  extension  before  the  end  of  the  initial  ninety  (90)-day  period.  The  notice  of  extension  will  provide  the  date  by  which  the  Plan
Administrator expects to make a decision.
If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Plan Administrator shall notify the Claimant in writing of the following:
(a)
The reason or reasons for such denial;
(b)
The pertinent provisions of the Plan;
(c)
Appropriate information as to the steps to be taken if the Claimant wishes to submit the claim for review; and
(d)
The time limits for requesting a review under this Section.
8.3
Request for Review/Appeal.
Within sixty (60) days after the receipt by the Claimant of the initial written notice of a denial, the Claimant may request in writing that the
initial  determination  be  reviewed.  Such  request  must  be  addressed  to  the  Senior  Vice  President,  Compensation  and  Benefits,  at  the
Company’s then principal place of business. The Claimant or his or her duly authorized representative may, but need not, submit issues and
comments in writing for consideration by the Appeals Committee, a subcommittee of the Deferred Compensation Plans Committee. If the
Claimant does not request a review of the initial determination within such sixty (60)-day period, he or she shall be barred and stopped from
challenging the Plan Administrator’s initial determination.
8.4
Review of Decision.
Within sixty (60) days after the Plan Administrator’s receipt of a request for review, the Appeals Committee of the Plan Administrator will
review the Plan Administrator’s initial determination. After considering all materials presented by the Claimant, the Appeals Committee will
render a written decision, setting forth the reasons for the decision and containing references to the pertinent provisions of the Plan. If the
Appeals  Committee  requires  an  extension  of  the  sixty  (60)-day  time  period,  the  Appeals  Committee  will so  notify  the  Claimant  and will
render the decision as soon as possible, but no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of the request for review.
8.5
Time Limit for Bringing Legal Action.
Any legal action by the Claimant must be brought within ninety (90) days following the date of the decision on the final review under Section
8.4 above.
Proprietary
Page | 22

ARTICLE IX – MISCELLANEOUS
9.1
Not Contract of Employment.
The adoption and maintenance of the Plan shall not be deemed to be a contract between the Company or an Affiliate and any person and
shall not be consideration for the employment of any person. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to give any person the right to be
retained in the employ of the Company or an Affiliate or to restrict the right of the Company or an Affiliate to discharge any person at any
time  nor  shall  the  Plan  be  deemed  to  give  the  Company  or  an  Affiliate  the  right  to  require  any  person  to  remain  in  the  employ  of  the
Company or an Affiliate or to restrict any person’s right to terminate his or her employment at any time.
9.2
Non-Assignability of Benefits.
No  Participant,  Beneficiary  or  distributees  of  benefits  under  the  Plan  shall  have  any  power  or  right  to  transfer,  assign,  anticipate,
hypothecate or otherwise encumber any part or all of the amounts payable hereunder, which are expressly declared to be unassignable and
nontransferable. Any such attempted assignment or transfer shall be void. No amount payable hereunder shall, prior to actual payment
thereof, be subject to seizure by any creditor of any such Participant, Beneficiary or other distributees for the payment of any debt judgment
or other obligation, by a proceeding at law or in equity, nor transferable by operation of law in the event of the bankruptcy, insolvency or
death of such Participant, Beneficiary or other distributee hereunder.
9.3
Withholding and Deduction and Taxes.
All deferrals and payments provided for hereunder shall be subject to applicable withholding and other deductions as shall be required of the
Company under any applicable local, state or federal law. The Company may require that the Participant or Beneficiary making a deferral or
receiving payments pay to the Company the amount of any federal, state or local taxes, if any, that the Company or any Affiliate is required
to withhold with respect to such deferrals or payments or the Company or any Affiliate may deduct from other wages paid by the Company
or any Affiliate the amount of any withholding taxes due with respect to such deferrals or payments. A Participant or Beneficiary shall be
solely responsible for any tax consequences related to deferrals or payments made under the Plan. The Company shall have no obligation
to make any payment under the Plan until the Company’s or any Affiliate’s tax withholding obligations have been satisfied by the Participant
or Beneficiary.
9.4
Amendment and Termination.
The Committee or its delegate may from time to time, in its discretion, amend, in whole or in part, any or all of the provisions of the Plan;
provided, however, that no amendment may be made that would impair the rights of a Participant with respect to amounts already allocated
to his or her Account without the Participant’s consent. To the extent consistent with the rules relating to plan terminations and liquidations in
Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or otherwise consistent with Section 409A of the Code, the Committee, in its sole discretion, may
terminate the Plan and any related Deferred Compensation Election at any time and in that event the Committee may provide that, without
the prior written consent of Participants, the Participants’ Accounts shall be distributed in a single cash lump sum upon termination of the
Plan.  Unless  so  distributed  in accordance  with  the  preceding  sentence,  in  the  event  of  a  Plan  termination,  the  Plan  Administrator  shall
continue to maintain the Participants’ Accounts until distributed pursuant to the terms of the Plan and Participants shall remain one hundred
percent  (100%)  vested  in  all  amounts  credited  to  their  Accounts.  In  the  event  of  a  Plan  termination,  the  distribution  of  a  Participant’s
Grandfathered Deferral Account and Grandfathered Company Account shall be made pursuant to the provisions of the Plan as set forth on
October 3, 2004, without regard to any amendments after October 3,
Proprietary
Page | 23

2004 which would constitute a material modification for Section 409A of the Code, as modified in Appendix A attached hereto.
9.5
Compliance with Securities and Other Laws.
Notwithstanding any Plan provision to the contrary, the Committee may at any time impose such restrictions on the Plan and participation
therein, including limiting the amount of any deferral or the timing thereof, as the Committee may deem advisable from time to time in order
to comply or preserve compliance with any applicable laws, including any applicable state and federal securities laws and exemptions from
registration available thereunder.
9.6
No Trust Created.
Nothing contained in the Plan and no action taken pursuant to its provisions by the Company or any person, shall create, nor be construed
to create, a trust of any kind or a fiduciary relationship between the Company or an Affiliate and the Participant, Beneficiary, or any other
person.
9.7
Unsecured General Creditor Status of Employee.
The payments to the Participant, Beneficiary or any other distributees hereunder shall be made from assets which shall continue, for all
purposes, to be a part of the general, unrestricted assets of the Company. No person shall have or acquire any interest in any such assets
by virtue of the provisions of the Plan. The Company’s obligation hereunder shall be an unfunded and unsecured promise to pay money in
the future. To the extent that the Participant, Beneficiary or other distributees acquire a right to receive payments from the Company under
the provisions hereof, such right shall be no greater than the right of any unsecured general creditor of the Company. No such person shall
have or acquire any legal or equitable right, interest or claim in or to any property or assets of the Company.
In the event that, in its discretion, the Company purchases an insurance policy, or policies, insuring the life of the Employee, or any other
property,  to  allow  the  Company  to  recover  the  cost  of  providing  the  benefits,  in  whole,  or  in  part,  hereunder,  neither  the  Participant,
Beneficiary or other distributee shall have or acquire any rights whatsoever therein or in the proceeds therefrom. The Company shall be the
sole owner and beneficiary of any such policy or policies and, as such, shall possess and, may exercise all incidents of ownership therein.
No such policy, policies or other property shall be held in any trust for a Participant, Beneficiary or other distributee or held as collateral
security for any obligation of the Company hereunder. An Employee’s participation in the underwriting or other steps necessary to acquire
such policy or policies may be required by the Company and, if required, shall not be a suggestion of any beneficial interest in such policy or
policies to a Participant.
9.8
Limitation.
A Participant and his or her Beneficiary shall assume all risk in connection with any decrease in value of his or her Account, and neither the
Company nor the Committee or the Plan Administrator shall be liable or responsible therefor.
9.9
Payment to Minors and Incompetents.
If any Participant, spouse, or Beneficiary entitled to receive any benefits hereunder is a minor or is deemed by the Plan Administrator or is
adjudicated to be legally incapable of giving a valid receipt and discharge for such benefits, the benefits will be paid to the person or entity
as the Plan Administrator determines has been appointed or established to receive such payment on behalf of such person. Such payment
shall, to the extent made, be deemed a complete discharge of any payment obligation under the Plan.
Proprietary
Page | 24

9.10
Acceleration of or Delay in Payments.
The Plan Administrator, in its sole and absolute discretion, may elect to accelerate the time or form of payment of a benefit owed to the
Participant hereunder, provided such acceleration is permitted under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A-3(j)(4) and any subsequent guidance. The
Plan Administrator may also, in its sole and absolute discretion, delay the time for payment of a benefit owed to the Participant hereunder, to
the extent permitted under Treas. Reg. Section 1.409A- 2(b)(7) and any subsequent guidance.
9.11
Severability.
If any provision of the Plan shall be held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions
hereof; instead, each provision shall be fully severable and the Plan shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provision had
never been included herein.
9.12
Governing Laws.
All provisions of the Plan shall be construed in accordance with the laws of Rhode Island, except to the extent preempted by federal law.
9.13
Binding Effect.
The terms of the Plan shall be binding on each Participant and his or her heirs and legal representatives and on the Company and its
successors and assigns.
Proprietary
Page | 25

APPENDIX A – PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S GRANDFATHERED DEFERRAL
ACCOUNT AND GRANDFATHERED COMPANY ACCOUNT
This Appendix A constitutes an integral part of the Plan and is applicable with respect to the Grandfathered Deferral Account and the Grandfathered
Company  Account  of  those  individuals  who  were  Participants  in  the  Plan  on  December  31,  2004.  The  Grandfathered  Deferral  Account  and
Grandfathered Company Account are subject to all the terms and conditions of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004, without regard to any Plan
amendments  after  October  3,  2004  which  would  constitute  a  material  modification  for  Section  409A  of  the  Code,  as  modified  below.  Section
references in this Appendix A correspond to appropriate Sections of the Plan as set forth on October 3, 2004.
Article I – Definitions
Section 2.15. Company Account means the Participant’s Grandfathered Company Account as set forth in Section 2.28.
Section 2.19. Deferral Account means the Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account as set forth in Section 2.29 of the foregoing provisions of the
Plan.
For purposes of a Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account and Grandfathered Company Account, the term Change in Control shall have the
meaning set forth in the 1997 Incentive Compensation Plan as in effect on October 3, 2004.
Article IV – Deferrals and Company Contributions
The provisions of Section 4.03 shall continue to apply to a Participant’s  Grandfathered  Deferral Account, Grandfathered  Company Account and
amounts transferred from the Melville Deferred Compensation Plan that were vested on or earlier than December 31, 2004.
Article V – Maintenance of Accounts
The provisions of Section V as set forth in the foregoing provisions of the Plan as amended and restated effective as of December 31, 2008 shall be
applicable to a Participant’s Grandfathered Deferral Account and Grandfathered Company Account on and after January 1, 2009.
Article VI – Payment of Benefit
For purposes of this Article VI – Payment of Benefit, the term “termination of employment” or any other similar language means with respect to a
Participant the complete cessation of providing service to the Company and any Affiliate as an employee.
6.2.
Form of Payment
Effective on or after October 1, 2008, a Participant shall not elect installments in excess of ten (10) years or quarterly installments.
6.3.
Disability Distributions
A Participant shall be entitled to distribution under this Section if such Participant becomes “Disabled” as such term is defined under Section
6.03 of the Plan.
6.6.
Change of Distribution Election
On and after January 1, 2009, a change in a Specific Future Year distribution date or an Interim distribution date shall be effective only if the
new Specific Future Year distribution date or an Interim
Proprietary
Page | 26

distribution date is not less than five (5) years later then the date in effect prior to the change election.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the forms of distribution election available to Participants covered by this Appendix A shall be limited to the
forms of distribution described in Section 6.6 of the Plan, but in no case may a Participant elect to change the form of payment election to an
installment form that includes payments for a period of in excess of ten (10) years
Proprietary
Page | 27

APPENDIX B – PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE OMNICARE,
INC. DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
This Appendix B constitutes an integral part of the Plan and is applicable with respect to a Participant’s Account (“Omnicare Account”) under the
Omnicare,  Inc.  Deferred  Compensation  Plan,  effective  January  1,  2017.  The  Participants’  Omnicare  Accounts  are  subject  to  all  the  terms  and
conditions of the Omnicare Plan as set forth on January 1, 2013. Section references in this Appendix B correspond to appropriate Sections of the
Omnicare Plan as set forth on January 1, 2013.
Article 2: Participation
Effective December 31, 2016, there shall be no new Participants in the Plan.
Article 3: Contributions & Deferral Elections
3.1
Elections to Defer Compensation.
Effective December 31, 2016 there shall be no new Elections to defer Compensation.
3.2
Company Contributions.
Effective December 31, 2016 there shall be no Discretionary Company Contributions or Company Matching Contributions.
3.3
Investment Elections.
Effective January 1, 2017, a Participant shall be eligible to designate the investment of his or her Omnicare Account solely in accordance
with the Deferral Crediting Options of the CVS Health Corporation Deferred Compensation Plan.
Proprietary
Page | 28

APPENDIX C APPENDIX C – PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO A PARTICIPANT’S ACCOUNT UNDER THE AETNA
SUPPLEMENTAL 401(K) PLAN AND AETNA DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
This Appendix C constitutes an integral part of the Plan and is applicable with respect to a Participant’s accounts under the Aetna Supplemental
401(k) Plan and Aetna Deferred Compensation Program (collectively, the “Aetna Accounts”), effective January 1, 2020, which have been merged
into the Plan. The Participants’ Aetna Accounts are subject to all the terms and conditions of the Plan except that the Aetna Accounts shall remain
subject to the distribution provisions of the Supplemental 401(k) Plan as set forth on January 1, 2009, as amended, and the Deferred Compensation
Program as set forth on January 1, 2008, as applicable, and as set forth below:
AETNA SUPPLEMENTAL 401(K) PLAN
Payment of Deferred Amounts
1.
Timing of Payment for Participants whose Termination from Service Occurs on or after January 1, 2005.
The vested Account balance of any Participant whose Termination from Service (“separation from service” as defined Code Section 409A)
occurs on or after January 1, 2005 shall be paid in a lump sum no later than thirty [30] days after later of (a) the date that is six (6) months
following the Participant’s Termination from Service Date; or (b) the January 1 next following the Participant’s Termination from Service
Date.
2.
Election as to Time of Payment – Prior Participants.
Each Participant who incurred a Termination from Service prior to January 1, 2005 shall have had an opportunity to make an election, on a
form and in the manner prescribed by the Company for this purpose, specifying the time at which his or her vested Account balance is to be
paid.
Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 3 and 4 below, payment of any such Participant’s vested Account balance shall be made to the
Participant in a lump sum as soon as practicable after the Valuation Date on or next following the time specified for payment in the election
made by the Participant under this paragraph 2.
In the absence of an election which complies with either paragraph 2 or 3, any such Participant’s vested Account balance shall be paid in a
lump sum as soon as practicable after the Valuation Date on or next following the Participant’s Termination from Service.
3.
Time of Payment-Certain Prior Participants.
This paragraph 3 applies to Participants who ceased to be Employees prior to October 1, 1996 without having made an election pursuant to
paragraph  2  hereof.  Payment  of  the  Account  balance  of  any  such  Participant  shall  be  made  in  a  lump  sum  at  the  earlier  of  the
commencement  of  the  Participant’s  (i)  final  distribution  from  the  Aetna  401(k)  Plan;  or  (ii)  required  minimum  distributions  following
attainment of age 70½, unless the Participant has otherwise elected, prior to termination of employment, to receive payment at a later date.
4.
Payment in the Event of Participant’s Death.
Notwithstanding any election that may have been made by a Participant pursuant to paragraph 2 or 3, and notwithstanding the provisions of
paragraph 1, any vested Account balance that has not been paid to the Participant as of the date of the Participant’s death shall be paid to
the Participant’s Beneficiary in a lump sum on the Valuation Date on or next following the Participant’s death.Acceleration of Payment.
Proprietary
Page | 29

If a Participant experiences an “unforeseeable emergency” as defined in Section 409A, the Participant may submit to the Administrator a
written request for a distribution, including such documentation as the Administrator may require. The Administrator shall review the request
and make a determination approving or denying the requested distribution. If approved, distribution shall be made on the first business day
of the month following the approval and shall be limited to such amount as is reasonably necessary to alleviate the Participant’s emergency
need, taking into account other assets available to the Participant to the extent required by Section 409A. In addition, and notwithstanding
any other provision of this Plan to the contrary, the Company, in its sole discretion, may accelerate the payment of vested Account balances
in any other circumstances permitted under Section 409A.
5.
Change of Distribution Election.
The provisions of Section 6.7(c) shall apply to Aetna Accounts.
AETNA DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM
Payment
1.
Payment will begin on the specified date or event elected by the Participant for each year’s deferrals. The form of payment(s) will be made
according to the option(s) elected by the Participant for each year’s deferred funds. If the Participant failed to specify the time and form of
payment on an election form, payment shall be made in accordance with: (a) if applicable, the time and form specified by the Company in
the separate written arrangement providing for the compensation or (b) if not so specified, the time of payment shall be the Participant’s
separation from service and the form of payment shall be a single lump sum. Payments are subject to such deductions as may be required
in accordance with federal and state tax regulations.
2.
Notwithstanding  the  preceding  paragraph,  if  a  Participant  is  a  “Specified  Employee”  within  the  meaning  of  Section  409A  at  the  time  of
termination of employment, any payment of “deferred compensation” hereunder to which the participant would otherwise be entitled, due to
such  termination  of  employment,  during  the  first  six  months  following  termination  of  employment,  shall  remain  in  the  Participant’s
bookkeeping account and be paid in a lump sum on the six-month anniversary of the Specified Employee’s termination of employment date
(or, if earlier, death). This requirement shall only apply to the extent required by Section 409A.
3.
The payment of “deferred compensation” (within the meaning of Section 409A) under this program may not be accelerated in violation of
Section 409A.
4.
Unless otherwise noted in the deferral election form, in the event of the Participant’s “disability” i(within the meaning of Section 409A) or
death during the deferral period, payment shall be made to the Participant or the Participant’s beneficiary upon such event.
5.
In case of an “unforeseeable emergency,” within the meaning of Section 409A, a Participant may submit a request for payment of amounts
already deferred to be advanced and/or a deferral election to be canceled, to the extent permitted under Section 409A. The Company shall
make the determination of unforeseeable emergency in its sole discretion consistent with the requirements of Section 409A. If approved,
payment shall be made on the first day of the month following approval and shall be limited to such amount as is reasonably necessary to
alleviate the Participant’s emergency need, taking into account other assets available to the Participant to the extent required by Section
409A.
6.
The provisions of Section 6.7(c) shall apply to Aetna Accounts.
Proprietary
Page | 30

Exhibit 10.25
CVS HEALTH SEVERANCE PLAN FOR
NON-STORE EMPLOYEES
(Amended and Restated as of October 11, 2021)
Proprietary

CVS HEALTH SEVERANCE PLAN
FOR NON-STORE EMPLOYEES
(Amended and Restated as of October 11, 2021)
WHEREAS, CVS Health Corporation (the “Company”) has established the CVS Health Severance Plan for Non-
Store Employees (the “Plan”) to provide financial assistance to employees in non-store positions who are involuntarily
terminated and are eligible within the terms and conditions of the Plan;
WHEREAS, it is intended that the Plan constitute an employee welfare benefit plan within the scope of Section
3(1)  of  the  Employee  Retirement  Income  Security  Act  of  1974,  as  amended  (“ERISA”),  that  the  Plan  constitute  a
separation  pay  plan  within  the  scope  of  Department  of  Labor  (“DOL”)  Regulation  Section  2510.3-  2(b),  and  that  all
payments made under the Plan be deductible by the Company under Section 162(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended (the “Code”);
WHEREAS, the benefits provided under the Plan are intended to constitute separation pay within the meaning of
Treasury Regulation Section 1.409A-1(b)(9)(iii);
WHEREAS, this document is the official plan document; and
WHEREAS, the Company wishes to make certain amendments to the Plan, effective as of October 11, 2021
(the “Effective Date”);
NOW, THEREFORE, as of the Effective Date, the Company does hereby amend the Plan to provide as follows:
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS
For purposes of the Plan, the following terms, when used with an initial capital letter, shall have the meaning set
forth below unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context.
1.1     “Affiliate” shall mean (a) any corporation which is required to be aggregated with the Company under Code
Section 414(b), (c), (m), or (o) and (b) any other entity in which the Company has an ownership interest and which the
Company designates as an Affiliate for purposes of the Plan.
1.2     “Cause” shall refer to a termination of an Eligible Employee’s employment because of the
Eligible Employee’s (a) failure to satisfactorily perform under a performance improvement plan of the Employer; (b) acts
of unethical business activity, including but not limited to fraud, misappropriation, embezzlement, dishonesty, harassment,
discrimination  in  violation  of  Employer  policies,  or  willful  or  negligent  destruction  of  property  of  an  Employer  or  an
Affiliate; (c) misconduct that could cause damage (monetary, reputational or otherwise) to the Employer, an Affiliate, or
any personnel thereof; (d) conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, whether or not any right to
appeal has been or may be exercised; (e) negligence of duty; (f) insubordination; or (g) a violation of the Employer’s
policy, procedure, or practice.
1.3      “Code” shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
1.4      “Eligible Employee” shall mean an individual who is employed by the Employer on a regular basis in a
non-store position and has been employed by the Employer in any position for a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the
individual’s separation of employment. For purposes of the Plan, distribution warehouse employees, field managers and
employees employed by CVS ProCare, Inc. working at Company headquarters, shall be treated as working in a non-store
location  and  therefore  not  subject  to  exclusion  from  eligibility.  For  purposes  of  the  Plan,  individuals  in  the  following
categories will not be considered Eligible Employees:
2
Proprietary

(a)
individuals  who  are  covered  by  a  collective  bargaining  agreement,  provided  welfare  benefits
were the subject of bargaining, unless the terms of the collective bargaining agreement provide for participation in
the Plan;
(b)
individuals who are seasonal employees, leased employees, independent contractors, temporary
employees, or consultants;
(c)
individuals who work for the Employer or an Affiliate in a store location of the Company or an
Affiliate,  or  whose  compensation  is  paid  through  or  according  to  a  store  payroll,  including  but  not  limited  to:
pharmacists, store managers, assistant store managers, crew, and pharmacy staff;
(d)
individuals employed by MinuteClinic, L.L.C. or by any practitioner-owned entity managed by
MinuteClinic, L.L.C.;
(e)
the President and CEO of CVS Health Corporation;
(f)
individuals employed in Puerto Rico; and
(g)
individuals employed outside the United States of America.
The decision of whether an individual falls into one of these categories and whether an individual is employed by an
Employer on a regular basis in a non-store position for a minimum of ninety (90) days shall be made by the Employer in
its sole discretion. Any individual who is excluded from being considered an Eligible Employee under the Plan shall be
excluded from the Plan regardless of the individual’s reclassification by a government agency, including a reclassification
by the Internal Revenue Service for tax withholding purposes.
1.5
“Employer” shall mean CVS Pharmacy, Inc., Caremark Rx, L.L.C. and Aetna Inc. and any current or
future Affiliate thereof that does not maintain its own severance plan for employees of that Affiliate.
1.6
“ERISA” shall mean the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
1.7
“Exempt  Employee”  shall  mean  an  Eligible  Employee  who  is  paid  on  a  salaried  basis  for  payroll
purposes and classified in the sole discretion of the Employer under its normal classification procedures as an exempt
employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
1.8
“Involuntary  Termination”  shall  mean  an  Eligible  Employee’s  termination  of  employment  with  the
Employer  due  to  the  unilateral  action  of  the  Employer,  including  but  not  limited  to  a  termination  as  a  result  of  the
elimination of an Eligible Employee’s position due to a reorganization or changes in responsibilities, a reduction in force,
or  a  closing  of  the  business  unit  in  which  the  Eligible  Employee  works;  provided,  however,  that  such  Involuntary
Termination constitutes a separation from service under Treasury Regulation Section 1.409A-1(h). Notwithstanding the
foregoing, an Eligible Employee will not have an Involuntary Termination if the Eligible Employee: (a) is terminated for
Cause, as determined by the Employer in its sole discretion; (b) voluntarily terminates his or her employment at any time
or resigns prior to an Involuntary Termination; (c) takes a leave of absence; (d) is administratively terminated for failure to
return from a leave of absence upon expiration of his or her leave; (e) terminates employment due to his or her death or
disability; (f) transfers to an Affiliate; (g) transfers to a new employer in connection with the sale of an Employer facility;
or (h) fails to accept an offer for a job with the Employer that is comparable to the job that he or she is performing for the
Employer  at  the  time  of  the  offer.  For  purposes  of  Subsection  (h)  of  this  Section  1.8,  whether  a  job  is  considered
“comparable”  shall  be  determined  in  the  sole  discretion  of  the  Employer,  taking  into  account  whether  the  new  job  is
located 50 or fewer miles from the Eligible Employee’s job at the time of the offer, whether the compensation offered is
materially less than the Eligible Employee’s compensation at the time of the offer, and
3
Proprietary

whether the new job will result in a substantial change of duties from the Eligible Employee’s job at the time of the offer.
The determination of whether an Eligible Employee’s termination of employment is an Involuntary Termination shall be
made in the sole discretion of the Employer. If an Employer deems an Eligible Employee’s termination of employment to
be an Involuntary Termination and, Employer later learns of facts and circumstances that, had the Employer known such
facts and circumstances at the time of termination, would have resulted in a termination of employment for Cause, the
Eligible  Employee’s  termination  shall  be  deemed  as  of  the  date  of  termination  to  not  have  been  an  Involuntary
Termination.
1.9
“Non-exempt Employee”  shall  mean  an  Eligible  Employee  who  is  paid  on  an  hourly  basis  for  time
worked and classified in the sole discretion of the Employer under its normal classification procedures as a non-exempt
employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
1.10
“Plan Administrator” shall mean the Senior Vice President of Human Resources of CVS Pharmacy, Inc.,
or such other person, designated by the Chief People Officer of the Company to act as the Plan Administrator.
1.11
“Rehire Date” shall mean the date an Eligible Employee accepts reemployment with any Employer.
1.12
“Severance Pay” shall mean the pay an Eligible Employee is eligible to receive under Subsection (b) of
Section 2.1 of the Plan upon his or her Involuntary Termination.
1.13
“Severance Period”  shall  mean  the  period  of  time  during  which  an  Eligible  Employee  is  eligible  to
receive Severance Pay
1.14
“Weekly Rate” shall mean, (a) with respect to an Eligible Employee paid on a salaried basis, an Eligible
Employee’s annual base salary (as determined by the Employer), as of the date of the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary
Termination, expressed on a weekly basis (as determined in the sole discretion of the Employer), and (b) with respect to an
Eligible Employee paid on an hourly basis, the hourly wage rate of the Eligible Employee as of the date of the Eligible
Employee’s Involuntary Termination multiplied by the Eligible Employee’s regularly scheduled number of hours of service
per week (as determined by the Employer), not in excess of 40 hours. Weekly Rate shall exclude any overtime, incentive,
and bonus payments, unless otherwise required by law.
1.15
“Year  of  Service”  shall  mean  each  full  year  of  service  performed  by  the  Eligible  Employee  for  an
Employer as reflected in the records of the Employer and as determined as of the Eligible Employee’s date of termination
of employment, based on the Employer’s policies and procedures for determining periods of service, and the applicable
law.
ARTICLE 2
SEVERANCE PAY AND ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
2.1     (a)     Eligibility. Upon his or her Involuntary Termination, an Eligible Employee may, in the discretion of the
Plan Administrator, be granted Severance Pay and benefits provided under Subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this Section
2.1, provided the conditions of Section 2.2 are satisfied. The determination of whether Severance Pay is payable under
the Plan, and the form and amount of such pay, shall be made in the sole discretion of the Plan Administrator.
(b)
Severance  Pay.  The  Severance  Pay  payable  to  an  Eligible  Employee  in  the  event  of  Involuntary
Termination shall be determined by the Plan Administrator in its, his or her sole discretion, using the guidelines set forth
in Appendix A for the applicable Eligible Employee’s grade, as determined by the Employer. Notwithstanding such
referenced guidelines, the Plan Administrator may increase or decrease (including, to zero) the amount of Severance Pay
with respect to any Eligible Employee for reasons it, he or
4
Proprietary

she  deems  appropriate  in  its  sole  discretion  at  any  time,  whether  before  or  after  payments  of  Severance  Pay  have
commenced (including, but not limited to, a decrease to take into account any debts owed to an Employer or a decrease
if an Eligible Employee fails to satisfactorily perform his or her duties and is not on or has not completed a performance
improvement plan at the time of termination of employment), at any time, whether before or after payments of Severance
Pay have commenced. A special one-time lump sum payment shall be made with respect to each Eligible Employee who
experienced  an  Involuntary  Termination  on  or  after  January  1,  2021  and  prior  to  October  11,  2021  equal  to  the
difference, if any, between the Severance Pay payable to such Eligible Employee under Appendix A as in effect upon his
or her Involuntary Termination and the Severance Pay that would have been paid to him or her under Appendix A as in
effect as of October 11, 2021.
(c)
COBRA Assistance. In the event an Eligible Employee who has an Involuntary Termination
(i) is eligible to elect continuation coverage under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 as
amended (“COBRA”) in accordance with the terms of the medical and prescription drug plan and/or dental plan of the
Employer and (ii) properly and timely elects such continuation coverage, the Employer may pay for a portion of the
cost of COBRA coverage equivalent to the contribution which the Employer makes on behalf of similarly situated
active employees under such plan for the appropriate tier of coverage selected and in place immediately prior to the
date  of  the  Eligible  Employee’s  Involuntary  Termination  (e.g.,  employee-only,  family  coverage),  for  a  period
determined in the sole discretion of the Plan Administrator, which generally shall be the Severance Period but in any
event  no  longer  than  eighteen  (18)  months  from  the  date  of  the  Involuntary  Termination.  Any  COBRA  assistance
provided under this Subsection (c) shall be paid by the Employer directly to the insurance carrier, if applicable. The
portion of the COBRA premium not covered by the COBRA assistance specified in this Subsection (c) must be paid by
the Eligible Employee directly to the insurance carrier or service provider that administers COBRA, as applicable,
based on the standard rules under the respective plan for payment of COBRA premiums. This Subsection (c) does not
provide COBRA assistance in the event the Eligible Employee fails to properly and timely elect COBRA continuation
coverage, regardless of whether his or her covered dependents elect COBRA continuation coverage.
(d)     Outplacement Services.  Upon  an  Involuntary  Termination,  the  outplacement  services  provided  to  an
Eligible Employee shall be provided in the sole discretion of the Plan Administrator based on the guidelines contained
in this Subsection (d).
(i)
If  an  Eligible  Employee  so  desires,  he  or  she  may  be  eligible  for  outplacement  services  for
assistance  in  obtaining  new  employment,  provided  through  a  vendor  selected  by  the  Employer,  with  the
Employer directly providing payment to such vendor. The provision of outplacement services is contingent
upon the Eligible Employee’s cooperation with the outplacement service vendor, upon the active efforts of the
Eligible Employee to locate a new position, and upon the Eligible Employee initiating outplacement services
during the Severance Period.
(ii)
Subject to the requirements of Paragraph (i) of this Subsection (d), outplacement services shall
be  offered  for  a  period  of  time  determined  in  the  sole  discretion  of  the  Plan  Administrator,  based  on  the
guidelines  set  forth  in  Appendix  A  for  the  applicable  Eligible  Employee’s  grade,  as  determined  by  the
Employer,  provided  that  in  no  event  shall  such  services  extend  beyond  twelve  (12)  months  following  the
Involuntary Termination of the Eligible Employee.
(e)
Form and Timing of Payment. In the event an Eligible Employee is awarded Severance Pay under the
terms  of  Subsection  (a)  of  this  Section  2.1,  such  Severance  Pay  shall  be  paid  following  an  Eligible  Employee’s
Involuntary Termination (except as provided in Section 2.3, below), as follows: No Severance Pay shall commence
(with respect to salary continuation payments) or be paid (with respect to a lump sum) (i) prior to the expiration of the
later of a period that is identified in a severance agreement with the Eligible Employee during which he or she may
consider the execution of the release of claims form (the “Consideration Period”) or a period ending at least seven (7)
days following the execution of the release of claims form (the “Revocation Period”), or (ii) later than sixty (60) days
following the date of Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination. Severance Pay that is paid in the form of salary
continuation shall
5
Proprietary

commence as soon as feasible following expiration of the later of the Consideration Period or the Revocation Period,
which generally shall be the first regularly scheduled payroll date following the expiration of the Consideration Period
or  the  Revocation  Period,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  shall  thereafter  be  paid  in  substantially  equal  installments  in
accordance with the Employer’s regular payroll practice, except as provided in Section 2.3 of the Plan, except that the
first installment paid after the expiration of the later of the Consideration Period or the Revocation Period shall include,
on a retroactive basis, all installments that would have been paid had they started as soon as administratively feasible
after the date of the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination. It is the intent of the Plan that the Severance Period
in  all  cases  be  measured  from  the  date  of  the  Eligible  Employee’s  Involuntary  Termination.  Further,  in  the  Plan
Administrator’s sole discretion, Severance Pay may be paid to any Eligible Employees in a single lump sum, in which
event Severance Pay shall be paid within the period that satisfies the 409A requirements for short-term deferrals under
Section 409A of the Code.
(f)
Withholding.  Any  payment  of  Severance  Pay  to  an  Eligible  Employee  shall  be  subject  to  normal
withholding for state and federal income taxes and Social Security taxes.
(g)
Death.    Upon the death of the Eligible Employee who had an Involuntary Termination and who has not
received all Severance Pay payable under the Plan, the Severance Pay otherwise payable under Section 2.1(b) of the
Plan  shall  be  paid  in  the  form  of  a  lump sum  to  the  Eligible  Employee’s  surviving  legal spouse  or,  if  there is  no
surviving legal spouse, to the Eligible Employee’s estate as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 60 days
following death. Any other severance benefits provided under this Section 2.1 (COBRA assistance and outplacement
services) shall cease upon the Eligible Employee’s death.
2.2    Conditions on Payment of Severance Pay and Benefits. Payment of the Severance Pay and benefits provided in
Section 2.1 of the Plan shall be subject to and conditioned upon the following:
(a)
to the extent an Eligible Employee receives notice of a date selected by the Employer (in its sole
discretion) on which the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination shall occur (a “Designated Termination
Date”),  the  Eligible  Employee  must  continue  to  work  in  a  satisfactory  manner  until  his  or  her  Designated
Termination Date;
(b)
the Eligible Employee must cooperate in transitioning all of the Eligible Employee’s work in
consultation with the Eligible Employee’s supervisor or other designated employee;
(c)
the Eligible Employee must execute and deliver a severance agreement that includes a release of
claims, which agreement shall be in a form specified by the Employer from time to time, which may include
restrictive covenants and a waiver as described in Subsection (d) of this Section 2.2) within the time period
specified under the terms of the applicable severance offer. Further, in no event will Severance Pay be paid with
respect to an Eligible Employee in the event the release of claims form is revoked during the Revocation Period
(described in Section 2.1(e) of the Plan); and
(d)
the Eligible Employee must waive the right to receive any other severance payment relating to
salary  continuation  or  salary  replacement  the  Eligible  Employee  may  otherwise  be  eligible  to  receive  upon
termination of employment under any employment agreement, severance plan, practice, policy or program of
the Employer or an Affiliate.
2.3     Maximum Severance Pay. Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, benefits
paid hereunder (a) shall not exceed two times the lesser of (i) the Eligible Employee’s Compensation (as defined in this
Section 2.3) during the calendar year immediately preceding the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination or (ii) the
maximum amount that may be taken into account under a qualified plan pursuant to Section 401(a)(17) of the Code for the
calendar year in which the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination occurs and (b) shall be paid in full within twenty-
four (24) months after the date the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination occurs. In the event that any Severance
Pay payable to an Eligible Employee would exceed the twenty-four (24) month period provided in the foregoing sentence
if the Severance Pay continued to
6
Proprietary

be paid in accordance with the Employer’s regular payroll practice, any Severance Pay that would otherwise exceed the
twenty-four (24) month time period will be paid to the Eligible Employee in a lump sum on the last regular payroll date
within  the  twenty-four  (24)  month  period.  For  purposes  of  this  Section  2.3,  “Compensation”  shall  mean  the  Eligible
Employee’s total annualized compensation, based upon the annual rate of pay for services provided to the Employer for the
calendar year preceding the calendar year in which the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination occurs, adjusted for
any increase in such preceding calendar year that was expected to continue indefinitely if the Eligible Employee had not
had an Involuntary Termination.
2.4     Cessation  of  Severance  Pay  Upon  Reemployment.  If  an  Eligible  Employee  who  had  an  Involuntary
Termination and who is receiving Severance Pay thereafter accepts reemployment with any Employer during the Severance
Period, such Employee’s Severance Pay shall cease on the Rehire Date and any remaining Severance Pay shall be forfeited.
2.5     Cessation of Severance Pay After Commencement of Payments. If an Eligible Employee is deemed to have
an  Involuntary  Termination  and  begins  to  receive  Severance  Pay  under  the  Plan  and  the  Employer  or  the  Plan
Administrator becomes aware of facts and circumstances that, had the Employer known same at the time of the Eligible
Employee’s termination of employment, would have affected the Employer’s determination as to whether such Employee’s
termination was an Involuntary Termination, the Plan Administrator may suspend any future Severance Pay payments to
the Eligible Employee while the Employer investigates the facts and circumstances and finalizes such investigation, and, if
the Employer determines that the Eligible Employee should have been terminated for Cause, such Eligible Employee’s
Severance Pay shall cease as of the suspension date, any remaining Severance Pay shall be forfeited and any Severance Pay
that has been paid shall be subject to repayment by the Eligible Employee.
2.6     Impact  of  Debt  on  Severance  Pay.  In  the  event  an  Eligible  Employee  is  indebted  to  the  Company  or
Employer (determined in the sole discretion of the Company or Employer, as applicable), the Plan Administrator reserves
the right to reduce, offset, withhold, and/or forfeit the Severance Pay otherwise payable under the Plan.
2.7     Employee  Benefits.  As  of  the  date  of  an  Eligible  Employee’s  Involuntary  Termination,  the  Eligible
Employee’s active participation in any benefit plan, program, or policy sponsored or subsidized by the Employer shall
cease, unless otherwise continued pursuant to the terms of such plan, program or policy.
2.8     Awards. Any award or grant made to the Eligible Employee under any stock option, stock purchase, or stock
appreciation rights plan of the Company or Employer shall be administered and interpreted in accordance with the terms of
the applicable plan documents.
2.9     Paid Time Off. Any pay for accrued paid time off shall be determined under the terms of the Employer's
applicable policies
2.10     Bonuses. Whether any bonuses or other incentive payments are payable to an Eligible Employee shall be
determined based on the terms of any applicable bonus or incentive program, plan, or policy.
2.11     Benefits Not Vested. No one under any circumstance is automatically entitled to Severance Pay or benefits
described in Section 2.1 of the Plan. Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, the Plan Administrator reserves
the right, at its, his or her sole discretion, to increase, decrease, or eliminate Severance Pay and benefits under the Plan.
ARTICLE 3
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN
3.1     Control and Administration. Notwithstanding any other provision in the Plan, and to the full extent permitted
under  ERISA  and  the  Internal  Revenue  Code,  the  Plan  Administrator  shall  have  the  exclusive  right,  power  and  final
authority, in its, his or her sole and absolute discretion, to administer, apply, construe and
7
Proprietary

interpret the terms of the Plan and all related plan documents and all facts surrounding claims for benefits under the Plan
and shall determine all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the Plan, including, but not
limited to, those concerning eligibility for benefits. Accordingly, benefits under the Plan shall be paid only if the Plan
Administrator  decides  in  its,  his  or  her  sole  discretion  that  an  Eligible  Employee  is  entitled  to  benefits,  and  the  Plan
Administrator shall decide all questions regarding the form, amount and duration of benefits. The Plan Administrator may
consult with attorneys, consultants and other persons for advice, counsel and reports to make determinations under the
Plan, and the Plan Administrator may delegate its administrative duties and responsibilities to persons or entities of its
choice,  in  all  cases  who  may  be  employees  of  the  Company.  All  determinations  of  the  Plan  Administrator  shall  be
conclusive and binding on all parties. The Plan Administrator shall be the named fiduciary of the Plan for purposes of
ERISA.
3.2     Claim Procedures.
(a) Procedure for Granting or Denying Claims. An Eligible Employee, or his or her duly authorized representative,
may file a claim for payment of benefits under the Plan within 30 days after termination of employment. Such a claim must
be made in writing and be delivered to the Plan Administrator, in person or by mail, postage paid. Within 90 days after
receipt of such claim, the Plan Administrator shall notify the claimant of the granting or denying, in whole or in part, of
such  claim,  unless  special  circumstances  require  an  extension  of  time  for  processing  the  claim.  In  no  event  may  the
extension exceed 90 days from the end of the initial 90-day period. If such extension is necessary, the claimant will be given
a written notice to this effect prior to the expiration of the initial 90-day period. The Plan Administrator shall have full
discretion to deny or grant a claim in whole or in part.
(b)
Requirement for Notice of Claim Denial. The Plan Administrator shall provide to every claimant who is denied a
claim for benefits a written or electronic notice setting forth in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant:
(i)
The specific reason or reasons for the denial;
(ii)
Specific reference to pertinent Plan provisions on which the denial is based;
(iii)
A description of any additional material or information necessary for the claimant to perfect the
claim and an explanation of why such material is necessary; and
(iv)
An  explanation  of  the  Plan’s  claim  review  procedures  and  the  time  limits  applicable  to  such
procedures, including a statement of the claimant’s right to bring a civil action under Section 502(a)
of ERISA following an adverse determination on review.
(c)
Right  to  Appeal  on  Claim  Denial.  Within  60  days  after  receipt  by  the  claimant  of  written  or  electronic
notification of the denial (in whole or in part) of his or her claim, the claimant or his or her duly authorized representative
may make a written application to the Plan Administrator, in person or by certified mail, postage prepaid, to be afforded a full
and fair review of such denial. The claimant or his or her duly authorized representative may submit written comments,
documents,  records,  and  other  information  relating  to  the  claim  for  benefits.  Moreover,  the  claimant  or  his  or  her  duly
authorized  representative  shall  be  provided,  upon  request  and  free  of  charge,  reasonable  access  to,  and  copies  of,  all
documents, records, and other information relevant to the claimant’s claim for benefits.
(d)
Disposition  of  Disputed  Claims.  Upon  receipt  of  a  request  for  review,  the  Plan  Administrator  shall  make  a
decision on the claim. The review shall take into account all comments, documents, records, and other information submitted
by the claimant relating to the claim, without regard to whether such information was submitted or considered in the initial
benefit determination. The decision on review shall be made not later than 60 days after the Plan Administrator's receipt of a
request for a review, unless special circumstances require an extension of time for processing, in which case a decision shall
be rendered not later than 120 days after receipt of
8
Proprietary

the request for review. If an extension is necessary, the claimant shall be given written notice of the extension prior to the
expiration of the initial 60-day period.
The Plan Administrator shall provide the claimant or his or her duly authorized representative with written or
electronic notification of the Plan Administrator’s determination on review. In the case of an adverse determination, the
notification shall set forth, in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant, the specific reason or reasons for the decision
as well as specific references to the Plan provisions on which the decision was based. The decision shall also include a statement
that the claimant is entitled to receive, upon request and free of charge, reasonable access to, and copies of, all documents, records,
and other information relevant to the claimant’s claim for benefits. Moreover, the decision shall contain a statement of the
claimant’s right to bring an action under Section 502(a) of ERISA.
3.3
Conditions  to  Legal  Action. No legal action may be commenced or maintained against the Plan, the
Company or any Employer prior to the claimant’s exhaustion of the claims procedures set forth in Section 3.2 of the Plan.
In addition, no legal action may be commenced against the Plan more than ninety (90) days after the Plan Administrator’s
final claim determination on review pursuant to Section 3.2(d) of the Plan. Any legal action must be conducted in the
United States District Court for Rhode Island.
3.4
Named Fiduciary.  The  Plan  Administrator  of  the  Plan  shall  be  the  Named  Fiduciary  of  the  Plan  for
purposes of ERISA Section 402(a)(1).
ARTICLE 4
MISCELLANEOUS
4.1      Amendment or Termination. The Plan may be amended, terminated, withdrawn or suspended at any time in
writing by the Management Planning and Development Committee of the Company or any individual designated by such
Committee to take such actions.
4.2      Choice of Law. The validity, interpretation, construction and performance of the obligations created under
the Plan shall be governed by ERISA, and to the extent not preempted by federal law, the laws of the State of Rhode Island
without regard to its conflicts of law principles.
4.3     Validity. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of the Plan shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of any other provision of the Plan, which shall remain in full force and effect.
4.4     Plan Exclusive Source of Rights. The Plan contains all of the terms and conditions with respect to the
benefits provided hereunder, and no employee or former employee of the Company or any Employer may rely on any other
communication or representation, whether oral or written, of the Company or any Employer or any of its subsidiaries, or
any officer or employee thereof, as creating any right or obligation not expressly provided by the Plan.
4.5     Non-assignability. No benefit which shall be payable under the Plan to any Eligible Employee shall be
subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance, or charge (except as
required by law), and any attempt to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber, or charge a benefit shall
be null and void. No benefit shall in any manner be liable for, or subject to, the debts, contracts, liabilities, engagements, or
torts of any Eligible Employee. No benefit shall be subject to legal attachment or legal process for, or against, the Eligible
Employee and the same shall not be recognized under the Plan. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Employer
retains the discretion, in accordance with federal and/or state laws, to reduce the amount of benefits payable under the Plan
to any Eligible Employee to recover any amounts that the Eligible Employee owes to the Employer.
4.6     No Employment Rights. The Plan shall not give any Eligible Employee any right or claim except to the
extent  that  the  right  is  specifically  provided  under  the  terms  of  the  Plan.  The  establishment  of  the  Plan  shall  not  be
construed (a) to give any Eligible Employee a right to continue in the employ of the Employer
9
Proprietary

or (b) to interfere with the right of the Employer to terminate the employment of any Eligible Employee at any time.
4.7     Headings. Article and section headings are for convenience only and the language of the Plan itself will be
controlling.
4.8     Gender and Numbers. Masculine pronouns include the feminine as well as the neuter genders, and the
singular shall include the plural, unless indicated otherwise by the context.
4.9     Code Section 409A. The benefits provided under the terms of the Plan are intended to fall
within the short-term deferral exception, the separation pay exception or another exception to the application of Section
409A of the Code and the applicable guidance issued thereunder. In furtherance of this intent, the Plan shall be interpreted,
operated and administered in a manner consistent with this intention. To the extent the benefits provided under the Plan
become subject to Code Section 409A and applicable guidance issued thereunder, the Plan shall be construed, and benefits
paid hereunder, as necessary to comply with Section 409A of the Code and such guidance. Further, to the extent that an
Eligible Employee becomes entitled to receive Severance Pay under the terms of the Plan, and, at the time of the Eligible
Employee’s  Involuntary  Termination,  he  or  she  is  a  “specified  employee”  within  the  meaning  of  Treasury  Regulation
Section 1.409A- 1(i), any portion of Severance Pay payable to such Eligible Employee that is subject to Code Section
409A and applicable guidance thereunder shall be delayed until the date that is the earlier of (i) the Eligible Employee’s
death or (ii) six months following the date of the Eligible Employee’s Involuntary Termination, at which time the payments
that were delayed for such six month period shall be paid in a lump sum on the date of the next occurring regular payroll
date of the Employer, and any remaining payments shall be paid according to the original schedule provided herein. In
addition, each payment of a salary continuation stream of installment payments hereunder shall be a separate payment for
purposes of Section 409A of the Code.
4.10     Funding. The Plan is not funded, and Severance Pay and benefits under the Plan are paid from the general
assets of the Employer.
4.11     Plan Year. The Plan’s records shall be maintained on the basis of the calendar year.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Management Planning and Development Committee of the Company, or its duly authorized
delegate, has amended the Plan as of the Effective Date pursuant to the execution hereof on its behalf by a duly authorized
officer on October 11, 2021.
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
By:
/s/ Laurie P. Havanec
Date:
October, 26, 2021
Title:
EVP and Chief People
Officer
10
Proprietary

Appendix A
Amount of Severance Pay and Outplacement
Services, effective as of October 11, 2021
Severance Pay is the Weekly Rate payable for the number of weeks listed below, determined by Grade and Years of Service (YOS)
 
 
Tier 1
 
 
Tier 2
 
 
Tier 3
 
 
Tier 4
 
 
Executive Tier 1
 
 
Executive Tier 2
Grades 101,
102, 103, 104,
105, 106, 550,
551, 552, 652,
752
Grades 107, 108,
201, 202, 203, 301,
302, 405, 406, 407,
408, 553, 554, 653,
753, 654, 754
Grades 109, 110, 111,
204, 205, 303, 304, 409,
410, 411, 555, 556, 557,
558, 655, 656, 657, 658,
755, 756, 757, 758
Grades 112, 206,
305, 412, 559,
560, 659, 759
Grades 36 A-Z,
70G
Grades 38 A-Z, 39
A-Z, 71G, 72G
Full
YOS
Number of
Weeks
Number of Weeks
 
Number of Weeks
Number of
Weeks
Number of Weeks Number of Weeks
0
2
4
13
26
52
52
1
4
6
13
26
52
*52 or 78
2
6
8
13
26
52
78
3
8
10
13
26
52
78
4
10
12
13
26
52
78
5
12
14
14
26
52
78
6
13
16
16
26
52
78
7
13
18
18
26
52
78
8
13
20
20
26
52
78
9
13
20
20
26
52
78
10
13
20
20
26
52
78
11
13
20
21
26
52
78
12
13
20
22
26
52
78
13
13
20
23
26
52
78
14
14
20
24
26
52
78
15
15
20
25
28
52
78
16
16
21
26
29
52
78
17
17
22
26
30
52
78
18
18
23
26
31
52
78
19
19
24
26
32
52
78
20
20
25
26
33
52
78
21
21
26
26
34
52
78
22
22
26
26
35
52
78
23
23
26
26
36
52
78
24
24
26
26
37
52
78
25
25
26
26
38
52
78
26
26
26
27
39
52
78
27
26
26
28
39
52
78
28
26
26
29
39
52
78
11
Proprietary

29
26
26
30
39
52
78
 
 
Tier 1
 
 
Tier 2
 
 
Tier 3
 
 
Tier 4
 
 
Executive Tier 1
 
 
Executive Tier 2
Grades 101, 102,
103, 104, 105,
106, 550, 551,
552, 652, 752
Grades 107, 108,
201, 202, 203, 301,
302, 405, 406, 407,
408, 553, 554, 653,
753, 654, 754
Grades 109, 110, 111,
204, 205, 303, 304, 409,
410, 411, 555, 556, 557,
558, 655, 656, 657, 658,
755, 756, 757, 758
Grades 112, 206,
305, 412, 559,
560, 659, 759
Grades 36 A-Z,
70G
Grades 38 A-Z, 39
A-Z, 71G, 72G
Full
YOS
Number of Weeks
Number of Weeks
Number of Weeks
Number of Weeks Number of Weeks Number of Weeks
30
26
26
31
39
52
78
31
26
26
32
39
52
78
32
26
26
33
39
52
78
33
26
26
34
39
52
78
34
26
26
35
39
52
78
35
26
26
36
39
52
78
36+
26
26
39
39
52
78
 
  6-Week Virtual
Outplacement
 
3-Month Virtual
Outplacement
 
3-Month Professional
Outplacement
3-Month
Professional
Outplacement
6-Month
Executive
Outplacement
6-Month
Executive
Outplacement
* Under 18 months of service receives 52 weeks
    
12
Proprietary

Exhibit 10.55
CVS HEALTH CORPORATION
NONQUALIFIED STOCK OPTION AGREEMENT
GRANT DATE: [MERGED FIELD]
1.     GRANT OF AWARD. Pursuant and subject to the provisions of the [MERGED FIELD] of CVS Health Corporation (the “Plan”), on the date
set forth above (the “Grant Date”), CVS Health Corporation (the ”Company”) has granted and hereby evidences the Grant to the person named
below (the “Participant”), subject to the terms and conditions set forth or incorporated in this Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement (“Agreement”),
the right, and option, to purchase from the Company the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock ($.01 par value) of the Company (“Shares”)
set forth below, at the purchase price indicated below (the “Option”), such Option to be exercised as hereinafter provided. The Plan is hereby made
a part hereof and Participant agrees to be bound by all the provisions of the Plan. Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the
meaning assigned to such term(s) in the Plan. The Option is a nonqualified option as defined in the Plan.
Participant:
[MERGED
FIELD]
Employee ID:
[MERGED
FIELD]
Shares:
[MERGED
FIELD]
Option Price:
[MERGED
FIELD]
2.    TERM OF OPTION. The term of this Option shall be for a period of ten (10) years from the Grant Date, subject to the earlier termination of the
Option, as set forth in the Plan and in this Agreement. No portion of the Option shall be exercisable after the term of the Option.
3.    EXERCISE OF OPTION. (a)    The Option, subject to the provisions of the Plan, shall be exercised by submitting a request to exercise to the
Company’s stock option administrator, in accordance with the Company’s current exercise policies and procedures, specifying the number of Shares
to be purchased, which number may not be less than one hundred (100) Shares (unless the number of Shares purchased is the total balance which
is then exercisable). An exercise by Participant of all or part of this Option shall be effected through the Company’s “cashless exercise” procedures.
Otherwise, at the time of exercise, Participant shall tender to the Company cash or cash equivalent for the aggregate option price of the Shares
Participant has elected to purchase or certificates for Shares of Common Stock of the Company owned by Participant for at least six (6) months with
a fair market value at least equal to the aggregate option price of the Shares Participant has elected to purchase, or a combination of the foregoing.
    (b)    Prior to its expiration or termination and except as otherwise provided herein, the Option will become vested in accordance with the vesting
schedule set forth below, each date on which vesting occurs a “Vesting Date”, and any vested Option will be exercisable by Participant prior to the
expiration of its term so long as Participant has maintained continuous employment with the Company or a subsidiary of the Company from the
Grant Date through the exercise date:
(i)    25% of the Option shall vest on the 1st anniversary of the Grant Date.
(ii)    25% of the Option shall vest on the 2nd anniversary of the Grant Date.
(iii)    25% of the Option shall vest on the 3rd anniversary of the Grant Date.
(iv)    25% of the Option shall vest on the 4th anniversary of the Grant Date.
1

4.    TAXES. Upon a cashless exercise of the Option the Company shall withhold from the proceeds of the exercise of the Option any required taxes.
If the Option is exercised other than through a cashless exercise Company shall have the right to require Participant to pay the amount of any
withholding taxes immediately, upon notification from the Company, before the proceeds from the exercise of the Option are delivered to Participant.
Furthermore, the Company may elect to deduct such taxes from any other amounts then payable to Participant in cash or in Shares or from any
other amounts payable any time thereafter to Participant to the extent allowed under applicable law.
5.    NON-TRANSFERABILITY. The Option shall not be transferable by Participant other than by will or by the laws of descent and distribution, and
during Participant’s lifetime shall be exercised only by the Participant during the continuance of Participant’s employment with the Company and any
of its subsidiaries.
6.    FORFEITURE OF OPTION UPON TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT. Unless otherwise provided for in the Plan or in this Agreement, as of
the  date  on  which  Participant’s  employment  with  the  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  terminates,  the  Option,  to  the  extent  unexercised  as  of  the
employment termination date, shall be forfeited immediately in its entirety, provided that, if the Participant’s employment with the Company and its
subsidiaries terminates without Cause, the Option, to the extent vested and unexercised, shall be exercisable at any time on or before the ninetieth
(90 ) day immediately following the employment termination date and, to the extent unvested, shall be forfeited immediately.
7.    TERMINATION OF PARTICIPANT’S EMPLOYMENT WITHOUT CAUSE. In the event that Participant’s employment with the Company and its
subsidiaries  is  terminated  without  Cause  and  Participant  receives  severance  pay  following  Participant’s  employment  pursuant  to  a  written
agreement, vesting of the Option shall continue through the end of the severance period set forth in the agreement providing for such severance
pay. To the extent vested, the Option shall be exercisable at any time during the severance period and on or before the ninetieth (90th) day following
the last day of the severance period, as long as no government regulations or rules are violated by such continued vesting or exercise period;
provided, however, that in no event will the Option be exercisable beyond its original term. Any portion of the Option not vested as of the last day of
the severance  period shall be forfeited  as of the last day of the severance  period.  In the event that  Participant  returns  to employment  with the
Company or any subsidiary prior to the expiration of the severance period, Participant shall be treated as if his or her employment with the Company
or any subsidiary of the Company had continued through the severance period for purposes of determining eligibility for continued vesting.
8.    RETIREMENT OF PARTICIPANT. In the event Participant’s employment with the Company and any subsidiary of the Company terminates by
reason of a Qualified Retirement, Participant (a) shall continue to vest in the Option, to the extent unvested as of the retirement date, for a period of
three (3) years following Participant’s retirement date and (b) may exercise the Option, to the extent vested, at any time within the period of three (3)
years following Participant’s retirement date, but not beyond the original term of the Option, in both cases as long as no government regulations or
rules  are  violated  by  such  continued  vesting  or  exercise  period.  To  the  extent  unvested  or  unexercised  at  the  end  of  the  three  (3)  year  period
following Participant’s retirement date, the Option shall be forfeited. In the event Participant’s termination of employment qualifies as a Qualified
Retirement and Participant also enters into a severance agreement with the Company, the terms of this Section 8 shall apply with respect to the
vesting  and  exercise  of  the  Option  as  of  the  Participant’s  employment  termination  date.  “Qualified  Retirement”  shall  mean  termination  of
employment on or after attainment of age fifty-five (55) with at least ten (10) years of continuous service, or attainment of age sixty (60) with at least
five (5) years of continuous service, provided that:  (i) if Participant elects to terminate his or her employment voluntarily, Participant has provided the
Company with at least twelve (12) months advance notice, in accordance with the provisions of Section 13 below, of his or her retirement date or
such  other  term  of  advance  notice  as  is  determined  by  the  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  of  the  Company;  or  (ii)  if  the  Company  elects  to
terminate Participant’s employment, such termination is without cause.  A Participant shall also be deemed to have
th
2

experienced a Qualified Retirement if the Company elects to terminate Participant’s employment without Cause and Participant shall meet the age
and service requirement set forth above during the severance period set forth in a severance agreement with the Company.
9.    DISABILITY OF PARTICIPANT. In the event Participant’s employment with the Company and any subsidiary of the Company terminates by
reason of total and permanent disability (as defined in the Company’s Long-Term Disability Plan, or, if not defined in such Plan, as defined by the
Social Security Administration), the Option shall vest as of the employment termination date on a pro-rata basis as follows: the Option shall vest with
respect to a total number of Shares as of the employment termination date (which is the last day that Participant is employed by the Company and
any subsidiary of the Company) equal to (i) the number of Shares subject to the Option on the Grant Date multiplied by the following fraction: (A) the
numerator shall be the whole number of months elapsed as of the employment termination date since the Grant Date and (B) the denominator shall
be forty-eight (48), minus (ii) the number of Shares with respect to which the Option vested prior to the employment termination date (whether or not
the Option was previously exercised). For purposes of this calculation, the number of months in the numerator in sub-section (A) above shall include
any partial month in which Participant has worked. For example, if the time elapsed between the Grant Date and the employment termination date is
eight months and five days, the numerator in sub-section (A) above shall be nine. The Option may be exercised to the extent vested at any time
within one (1) year of Participant’s employment termination date but not beyond the original term of the Option. The prorated Option shall vest on the
Participant’s employment termination date.
10.    DEATH OF PARTICIPANT. In the event of Participant’s death while Participant is employed with the Company and any subsidiary of the
Company, the Option shall immediately vest in full, and the Option shall remain exercisable for a period of one (1) year after Participant’s death, or
until the Option expiration date, whichever occurs first, by Participant’s Beneficiary. At the end of said one (1)-year time period, all rights with respect
to any Option that is unexercised shall terminate and the Option shall be cancelled.
11.    TRANSFER OF EMPLOYMENT.     Transfer of Participant’s employment from the Company to a subsidiary of the Company, among or
between subsidiaries of the Company, or from a subsidiary of the Company to the Company shall not be treated as termination of employment.
12.    REQUIRED ACCEPTANCE OF AWARD. The Option may not be exercised unless and until the Company has received the Participant’s
acceptance of the terms and conditions set forth herein. Acceptance shall be submitted electronically as required by the Company.
13.     NOTICE. Any  notice  required  to  be  given  hereunder  to  the  Company  shall  be  in  writing.  If  by  regular  mail,  any  required  notice  shall  be
addressed to: CVS Health Corporation, Attention: Senior Director, Executive Compensation, One CVS Drive, Woonsocket, RI 02895. If by electronic
mail, any notice required shall be sent to: equityadministration@cvshealth.com, with “Retirement Notice” in the subject line. Any notice required to be
given hereunder to Participant shall be addressed to Participant at his or her address as shown on the records of the Company, subject to the right
of either party hereafter to designate in writing to the other some other address.
14.    RECOUPMENT OF OPTION AWARD. The Option subject to this Agreement under the Plan shall be subject to the terms of the Company’s
Recoupment Policy as it exists from time to time, which may require the Participant to immediately repay to the Company the value of any pre-tax
economic  benefit that  he or she may derive from  the Award. By accepting this Award,  Participant  acknowledges that a copy of the Company’s
Recoupment Policy has been made available for the Participant’s reference.
15.    COMMITTEE AUTHORITY. The Committee shall have the authority, in its sole discretion, to make any interpretations, determinations, and/or
take any administrative actions with respect to the Plan and this Agreement, including whether any post-termination payments to Participant shall be
deemed severance pay, the duration of any severance period, and/or whether a termination was without cause.
3

16.    GOVERNING LAW. This Nonqualified Stock Option Agreement and the Option evidenced hereby shall be governed by the laws of Delaware,
without giving effect to principles of conflict of laws.
17.    ACKNOWLEDGEMENT.     This Agreement shall be fully effective only upon the Participant’s formal acceptance of the terms and conditions
set forth above as required by the Company.
BY:
Executive Vice President, Chief Human Resources Officer
CVS Health Corporation            
                    
Stock Option Agreement
4

Exhibit 21.1
Subsidiaries of CVS Health Corporation
Listed below are subsidiaries under CVS Health Corporation at December 31, 2021 with their jurisdictions of organization shown in parentheses. Subsidiaries
excluded from the list below are not insurance companies and would not, in the aggregate, constitute a “significant subsidiary” of CVS Health Corporation, as that
term is defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.
•
CVS Foreign, Inc. (New York)
◦
CVS Caremark Indemnity Ltd. (Bermuda)
◦
CVS International, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (Rhode Island)
•
Aetna Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Health of California Inc. (California)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Florida)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Georgia)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Maine)
◦
Aetna Health of Michigan Inc. (Michigan)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (New York)
▪
Aetna Better Health Inc. (New York)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Texas)
◦
Aetna Better Health of California Inc. (California)
◦
Aetna Health of Ohio Inc. (Ohio)Aetna Better Health of Texas Inc. (Texas)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Washington, Inc. (Washington)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Georgia)
◦
Aetna HealthAssurance Pennsylvania, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Dental of California Inc. (California)
◦
Aetna Dental Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Dental Inc. (Texas)
◦
Aetna Rx Home Delivery, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Health Management, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Ireland Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Cofinity, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
@Credentials Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Illinois Inc. (Illinois)
◦
Aetna Better Health Premier Plan MMAI Inc. (Illinois)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Kansas Inc. (Kansas)
◦
Aetna Better Health, Inc. (Louisiana)
◦
Aetna Florida Inc. (Florida)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Indiana Inc. (Indiana)
1

◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (Ohio)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Oklahoma Inc. (Oklahoma)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Nevada Inc. (Nevada)
◦
Aetna Better Health Inc. (New Jersey)
◦
Aetna Better Health of North Carolina Inc. (North Carolina)
◦
Aetna Network Services LLC (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Risk Assurance Company of Connecticut Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Student Health Agency Inc. (Massachusetts)
◦
Delaware Physicians Care, Incorporated (Delaware)
◦
Schaller Anderson Medical Administrators, Incorporated (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Medicaid Administrators LLC (Arizona)
◦
iTriage, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Medical Examinations of New York, P.C. (New York)
◦
bswift LLC (Illinois)
◦
Prodigy Health Group, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Niagara Re, Inc. (New York)
▪
Performax, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Scrip World, LLC (Utah)
▪
Precision Benefit Services, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
American Health Holding, Inc. (Ohio)
▪
Meritain Health, Inc. (New York)
•
Administrative Enterprises, Inc. (Arizona)
•
U.S Healthcare Holdings, LLC (Ohio)
•
Prime Net, Inc. (Ohio)
•
Professional Risk Management, Inc. (Ohio)
◦
ADMINCO, Inc. (Arizona)
◦
Aetna ACO Holdings Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Pharmacy Management Services LLC (Delaware)
◦
Coventry Transplant Network, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Health of Iowa Inc. (Iowa)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Nebraska, Inc. (Nebraska)
◦
Aetna Health Inc. (Louisiana)
◦
HealthAssurance Pennsylvania, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Coventry Prescription Management Services Inc. (Nevada)
◦
Coventry Health and Life Insurance Company (Missouri)
▪
Aetna Better Health of Kentucky Insurance Company (Kentucky)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Virginia, Inc. (Virginia)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Missouri, Inc. (Missouri)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Missouri LLC (Missouri)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Illinois, Inc. (Illinois)
◦
Coventry Health Care of West Virginia, Inc. (West Virginia)
◦
Coventry HealthCare Management Corporation (Delaware)
◦
Coventry Health Care of Kansas, Inc. (Kansas)
◦
Coventry Health Care National Accounts, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Michigan Inc. (Michigan)
◦
Aetna Health of Utah Inc. (Utah)
◦
Aetna Better Health of Tennessee Inc. (Tennessee)
2

◦
Coventry Health Care National Network, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Coventry Consumer Advantage, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
MHNet Specialty Services, LLC (Maryland)
▪
Mental Health Network of New York IPA, Inc. (New York)
▪
Mental Health Associates, Inc. (Louisiana)
▪
MHNet of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
Group Dental Service, Inc. (Maryland)
▪
Group Dental Service of Maryland, Inc. (Maryland)
◦
Florida Health Plan Administrators, LLC (Florida)
▪
Aetna Better Health of Florida Inc. (Florida)
▪
Carefree Insurance Services, Inc. (Florida)
▪
Coventry Health Plan of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
First Health Group Corp. (Delaware)
▪
First Health Life & Health Insurance Company (Texas)
▪
Claims Administration Corp. (Maryland)
▪
First Choice of the Midwest LLC (South Dakota)
◦
Continental Life Insurance Company of Brentwood, Tennessee (Tennessee)
◦
American Continental Insurance Company (Tennessee)
◦
Aetna Life Insurance Company (Connecticut)
◦
AHP Holdings, Inc. (Connecticut)
▪
Aetna Insurance Company of Connecticut (Connecticut)
▪
AE Fourteen, Incorporated (Connecticut)
▪
Aetna Life Assignment Company (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna ACO Holdings Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Innovation Health Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
•
Innovation Health Insurance Company (Virginia)
◦
Innovation Health Plan, Inc. (Virginia)
▪
Texas Health + Aetna Health Insurance Holding Company LLC (Texas)
•
Texas Health + Aetna Health Insurance Company (Texas)
◦
Texas Health + Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Texas)
◦
Banner Health and Aetna Health Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Banner Health and Aetna Health Insurance Company (Arizona)
◦
Banner Health and Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Arizona)
◦
Sutter Health and Aetna Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Sutter Health and Aetna Administrative Services LLC (Delaware)
▪
Sutter Health and Aetna Insurance Company (California)
◦
Allina Health and Aetna Insurance Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Allina Health and Aetna Insurance Company (Minnesota)
▪
Allina Health and Aetna Health Plan Inc. (Minnesota)
◦
Aetna International LLC (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Life & Casualty (Bermuda) Ltd. (Bermuda)
◦
Aetna International Ex Pat LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Global Holdings Limited (England & Wales)
▪
Aetna Insurance (Hong Kong) Limited (Hong Kong)
▪
Virtual Home Healthcare LLC (Dubai)
▪
Minor Health Enterprise Co, Ltd. (Thailand)
▪
Health Care Management Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
3

•
Aetna Services (Thailand) Limited (Thailand)
•
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
▪
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
▪
Aetna Holdings (Thailand) Limited (Thailand)
•
Health Care Management Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
•
Minor Health Enterprise Co, Ltd. (Thailand)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance (Thailand) Public Company Limited (Thailand)
◦
Aetna Global Benefits (Bermuda) Limited (Bermuda)
▪
Goodhealth Worldwide (Global) Limited (Bermuda)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits (Europe) Limited (England & Wales)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits (Asia Pacific) Limited (Hong Kong)
•
PT Aetna Management Consulting (Indonesia)
▪
Goodhealth Worldwide (Asia) Limited (Hong Kong)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits Limited (DIFC, UAE)
▪
Aetna Global Benefits (Middle East) LLC (UAE)
▪
Pt. Aetna Global Benefits Indonesia (Indonesia)
▪
Spinnaker Topco Limited (Bermuda)
•
Spinnaker Bidco Limited (England and Wales)
◦
Aetna Holdco (UK) Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Global Benefits (UK) Limited (England and Wales)
•
Aetna Insurance Company Limited (England and Wales)
◦
Aetna Insurance (Singapore) Pte. Ltd. (Singapore)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance Company of Europe DAC (Ireland)
◦
Aetna (Shanghai) Enterprise Services Co. Ltd. (China)
▪
Aetna (Beijing) Enterprise Management Services Co., Ltd. (China)
◦
Aetna Global Benefits (Singapore) PTE. LTD. (Singapore)
▪
Indian Health Organisation Private Limited (India)
◦
PT Aetna Management Consulting (Indonesia)
◦
PE Holdings, LLC (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Resources LLC (Delaware)
◦
Canal Place, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Ventures, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Phoenix Data Solutions LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Financial Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Asset Advisors, LLC (Delaware)
◦
U.S. Healthcare Properties, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Capital Management, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Aetna Partners Diversified Fund, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Workers’ Comp Access, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Behavioral Health, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Managed Care Coordinators, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Horizon Behavioral Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Employee Assistance Services, LLC (Kentucky)
▪
Health and Human Resource Center, Inc. (California)
▪
Resources for Living, LLC (Texas)
▪
The Vasquez Group Inc. (Illinois)
▪
Work and Family Benefits, Inc. (New Jersey)
4

◦
Aetna Card Solutions, LLC (Connecticut)
◦
PayFlex Holdings, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
PayFlex Systems USA, Inc. (Nebraska)
◦
Aetna Health and Life Insurance Company (Connecticut)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance Company (Pennsylvania)
◦
Aetna Health Insurance Company of New York (New York)
◦
AUSHC Holdings, Inc. (Connecticut)
◦
PHPSNE Parent Corporation (Delaware)
◦
Active Health Management, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Health Data & Management Solutions, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Integrated Informatics, Inc. (Pennsylvania)
◦
Health Re, Inc. (Vermont)
◦
ASI Wings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Aetna Corporate Services LLC (Delaware)
◦
Echo Merger Sub, Inc. (Delaware)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (continued)
•
Alabama CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Alabama)
•
Alaska CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Alaska)
•
American Drug Stores Delaware, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Arkansas CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Arkansas)
•
CareCenter Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Caremark Rx, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
ACS ACQCO CORP. (Delaware)
◦
Advanced Care Scripts, Inc. (Florida)
◦
CaremarkPCS, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS Health, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark IPA, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
Accordant Health Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
AdvancePCS SpecialtyRx, LLC (Delaware)
◦
AdvanceRx.com, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark PhC, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark Ulysses Holding Corp. (New York)
◦
MemberHealth LLC (Delaware)
◦
UAC Holding, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Caremark, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Arizona Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Arizona)
◦
Caremark Arizona Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Caremark California Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Florida Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Florida)
◦
Caremark Florida Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Florida)
◦
Caremark Hawaii Mail Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Hawaii)
◦
Caremark Hawaii Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Hawaii)
◦
Caremark Illinois Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Illinois)
◦
CVS Caremark Advanced Technology Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Illinois Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Illinois)
5

◦
Caremark Irving Resource Center, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Kansas Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Kansas)
◦
Caremark Logistics, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Caremark Louisiana Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Louisiana)
◦
Caremark Maryland Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Maryland)
◦
Caremark Massachusetts Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Massachusetts)
◦
Caremark Michigan Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Michigan)
◦
Caremark Minnesota Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
Caremark New Jersey Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (New Jersey)
◦
Caremark North Carolina Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (North Carolina)
◦
Caremark Ohio Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
Caremark Pennsylvania Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
Caremark Redlands Pharmacy, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Caremark Repack, LLC (Illinois)
◦
Caremark Tennessee Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Tennessee)
◦
Caremark Texas Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Texas Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Texas)
◦
Caremark Washington Specialty Pharmacy, LLC (Washington)
◦
Central Rx Services, LLC (Nevada)
◦
CVS Caremark TN SUTA, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Generation Health, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
NovoLogix, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CaremarkPCS Alabama Mail Pharmacy, LLC (Alabama)
◦
CVS Caremark Part D Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Eckerd Corporation of Florida, Inc. (Florida)
◦
Express Pharmacy Services of PA, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Ocean Acquisition Sub, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Coram LLC (Delaware)
◦
T2 Medical, Inc. (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Alabama (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Florida (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Greater D.C. (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Greater New York (New York)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Indiana (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Mississippi (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Nevada (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Northern California (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Southern California (Delaware)
•
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Southern Florida (Delaware)
•
Coram Specialty Infusion Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
▪
Coram Rx, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of North Texas (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Utah (Delaware)
▪
Coram Healthcare Corporation of Massachusetts (Delaware)
◦
Coram Alternate Site Services, Inc. (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Management, LLC (Delaware)
6

◦
Part D Holding Company, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Accendo Insurance Company (Utah)
◦
Silverscript Insurance Company (Tennessee)
•
Connecticut CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Connecticut)
•
Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. (Delaware)*
◦
CVS Cabot Holdings Inc. (Delaware)*
◦
CVS Shaw Holdings Inc. (Delaware)*
◦
Omnicare, LLC (Delaware)*
▪
Evergreen Pharmaceutical of California, LLC (California)
▪
JHC Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Pharmacy, LLC (Alaska)
◦
Geneva Woods Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods Retail Pharmacy LLC (Delaware)
▪
Geneva Woods LTC Pharmacy, LLC
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Wyoming, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Washington, LLC (Delaware)
•
Geneva Woods Pharmacy Alaska, LLC (Delaware)
▪
AMC - Tennessee, LLC (Delaware)
▪
CHP Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Home Pharmacy Services, LLC (Missouri)
▪
CP Acquisition, LLC (Oklahoma)
▪
Managed Healthcare, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Medical Arts Health Care, LLC (Georgia)
▪
NIV Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
OCR Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Shore Pharmaceutical Providers, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of Nevada, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacies of the Great Plains Holding, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of Nebraska LLC (Delaware)
▪
Pharmacy Associates of Glenn Falls, LLC (New York)
▪
Sterling Healthcare Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Superior Care Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
▪
TCPI Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
UC Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Weber Medical Systems LLC (Delaware)
▪
Williamson Drug Company, LLC (Virginia)
▪
Med World Acquisition Corp. (Delaware)
▪
MHHP Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
______________________
*Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. – CVS Pharmacy, Inc. 75%/Aetna Life Insurance Company 25%
* CVS Cabot Holdings, Inc. – Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. 99.72%/Aetna Inc. .28%
*CVS Shaw Holdings, Inc. – Coram Clinical Trials, Inc. 99.72%/Aetna Inc. .28%
*Omnicare, LLC – Aetna Inc 0.28%/CVS Cabot Holdings, Inc. 49.86%/CVS Shaw Holdings, Inc. 49.86%
 
7

◦
Omnicare, LLC (continued)
▪
NeighborCare Pharmacy Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
APS Acquisition LLC (Delaware)
▪
ASCO HealthCare, LLC (Maryland)
▪
Badger Acquisition LLC (Delaware)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Minnesota LLC (Delaware)
•
Merwin Long Term Care, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Ohio LLC (Delaware)
◦
Badger Acquisition of Kentucky LLC (Delaware)
▪
Best Care LTC Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Care Pharmaceutical Services, LP (Delaware)
▪
CCRx Holdings, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Continuing Care Rx, LLC (Pennsylvania)
◦
CCRx of North Carolina LLC (Delaware)
▪
Compscript, LLC (Florida)
◦
Campo’s Medical Pharmacy, LLC (Louisiana)
▪
D & R Pharmaceutical Services LLC (Kentucky)
▪
Enloe Drugs, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Evergreen Pharmaceutical, LLC (Washington)
▪
Home Care Pharmacy, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Interlock Pharmacy Systems, LLC (Missouri)
▪
Langsam Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
LCPS Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
•
Omnicare Pharmacy of Tennessee LLC (Delaware)
▪
Lobos Acquisition, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Lo-Med Prescription Services, LLC (Ohio)
◦
ZS Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Main Street Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Maryland)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Illinois, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Iowa, LLC (Ohio)
◦
Martin Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Kansas, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Kentucky, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Montana, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of New Mexico, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of South Carolina, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Tennessee, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Ohio, LLC (Ohio)
▪
NCS Healthcare of Wisconsin, LLC (Ohio)
▪
North Shore Pharmacy Services LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Indiana Partnership Holding Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare of New York, LLC (Delaware)
◦
NeighborCare of Indiana, LLC (Indiana)
•
Grandview Pharmacy, LLC (Indiana)
◦
NeighborCare of Virginia, LLC (Virginia)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacies of Pennsylvania West LLC (Pennsylvania)
8

▪
Omnicare Pharmacy and Supply Services LLC (South Dakota)
▪
Omnicare Pharmacy of the Midwest, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Omnicare Property Management, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Pharmacy Consultants, LLC (South Carolina)
▪
PRN Pharmaceutical Services, LP (Delaware)
▪
Roeschen’s Healthcare LLC (Wisconsin)
◦
PP Acquisition Company LLC (Delaware)
▪
Specialized Pharmacy Services, LLC (Michigan)
▪
Value Health Care Services LLC (Delaware)
▪
VAPS Acquisition Company, LLC (Delaware)
▪
Westhaven Services Co, LLC (Ohio)
▪
Three Forks Apothecary, LLC (Kentucky)
▪
UNI-Care Health Services of Maine, LLC (New Hampshire)
•
CVS Pharmacy, Inc. (continued)
◦
CVS 2948 Henderson, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
CVS AL Distribution, L.L.C. (Alabama)
◦
CVS Albany, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
CVS AOC Services, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CVS AOC Corporation (California)
◦
CVS Care Concierge, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Health Applications, LLC (Rhode Island)
◦
CVS Health Clinical Trial Services LLC (Connecticut)
◦
CVS Health Solutions LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Health Ventures Management, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Health Ventures Fund GP, LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS Health Ventures Fund, LP (Delaware)
◦
CVS Indiana, L.L.C. (Indiana)
◦
CVS International, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
CCI Foreign, S.à R.L. (R.C.S. Luxembourg)
▪
Beauty Holdings, L.L.C. (Delaware)
•
Pamplona Saúde e Beleza LTDA (Brazil)
◦
CVS Kidney Care, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Health Services LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Advanced Technologies LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Kidney Care Home Dialysis LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Kidney Care Home Dialysis of Austin LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Kidney Care Home Dialysis of Los Angeles LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Kidney Care Home Dialysis of Philadelphia LLC (Delaware)
▪
CVS-SHC Renal Holdings LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Management Support, LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Manchester NH, L.L.C. (New Hampshire)
◦
CVS Media Exchange LLC (Delaware)
◦
CVS Michigan, L.L.C. (Michigan)
◦
CVS Orlando FL Distribution, L.L.C. (Florida)
9

◦
CVS PA Distribution, L.L.C. (Pennsylvania)
◦
CVS Pharmacy Overseas Online, LLC
◦
CVS PR Center, Inc. (Delaware)
◦
Puerto Rico CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
Caremark Puerto Rico, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
Caremark Puerto Rico Specialty Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Puerto Rico)
◦
CVS RS Arizona, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Arizona CVS Stores, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS 3268 Gilbert, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS 3745 Peoria, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS Gilbert 3272, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
CVS Rx Services, Inc. (New York)
◦
Busse CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Goodyear CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Sheffield Avenue CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
South Wabash CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Thomas Phoenix CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Washington Lamb CVS, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
CVS SC Distribution, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
CVS State Capital, L.L.C. (Maine)
◦
CVS TN Distribution, L.L.C. (Tennessee)
◦
CVS Transportation, L.L.C. (Indiana)
◦
CVS Vero FL Distribution, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
D.A.W., LLC (Massachusetts)
◦
Delaware CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
District of Columbia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (District of Columbia)
◦
Enterprise Patient Safety Organization, LLC (Rhode Island)
◦
E.T.B., Inc. (Texas)
◦
Garfield Beach CVS, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Georgia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Georgia)
◦
German Dobson CVS, L.L.C. (Arizona)
◦
Grand St. Paul CVS, L.L.C. (Minnesota)
◦
Highland Park CVS, L.L.C. (Illinois)
◦
Holiday CVS, L.L.C. (Florida)
◦
Hook-SupeRx, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
Idaho CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Idaho)
◦
Iowa CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Iowa)
◦
Kansas CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Kansas)
◦
Kentucky CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Kentucky)
◦
Longs Drug Stores California, L.L.C. (California)
◦
Louisiana CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Louisiana)
◦
Maryland CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Maryland)
◦
Melville Realty Company, Inc. (New York)
◦
CVS Bellmore Avenue, L.L.C. (New York)
◦
MinuteClinic, L.L.C. (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Alabama, L.L.C. (Alabama)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Arkansas, LLC (Arkansas)
10

◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Arizona, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Colorado LLC (Colorado)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Florida, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Georgia, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Hawaii, L.L.C. (Hawaii)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Illinois, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Kentucky, L.L.C. (Kentucky)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Louisiana, L.L.C. (Louisiana)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Maine, L.L.C. (Maine)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Maryland, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Massachusetts, LLC (Massachusetts)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Nebraska, L.L.C. (Nebraska)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of New Hampshire, L.L.C. (New Hampshire)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of New Mexico, L.L.C. (New Mexico)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Ohio, LLC (Ohio)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Oklahoma, LLC (Oklahoma)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Oregon, LLC (Oregon)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Pennsylvania, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Rhode Island, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of South Carolina, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Texas, LLC (Minnesota)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Utah, L.L.C. (Utah)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Virginia, LLC (Virginia)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Washington, LLC (Oregon)
◦
MinuteClinic Diagnostic of Wisconsin, L.L.C. (Wisconsin)
◦
MinuteClinic Online Diagnostic Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Physician Practice of Texas (Texas)
◦
MinuteClinic Telehealth Services, LLC (Delaware)
◦
MinuteClinic Telehealth Services of Texas Association (Texas)
◦
Mississippi CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Mississippi)
◦
Missouri CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Missouri)
◦
Montana CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Montana)
◦
Nebraska CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Nebraska)
◦
New Jersey CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (New Jersey)
◦
North Carolina CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (North Carolina)
◦
Ohio CVS Stores, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
Oklahoma CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Oklahoma)
◦
Oregon CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Oregon)
◦
Pennsylvania CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Pennsylvania)
◦
ProCare Pharmacy Direct, L.L.C. (Ohio)
◦
ProCare Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Rhode Island)
◦
Red Oak Sourcing, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Rhode Island CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Rhode Island)
◦
South Carolina CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (South Carolina)
◦
Tennessee CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Tennessee)
◦
Utah CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Utah)
◦
Vermont CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Vermont)
11

◦
Virginia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Virginia)
◦
Warm Springs Road CVS, L.L.C. (Nevada)
◦
Washington CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Washington)
◦
Wellpartner, LLC (Delaware)
◦
West Virginia CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (West Virginia)
◦
Wisconsin CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. (Wisconsin)
◦
Woodward Detroit CVS, L.L.C. (Michigan)
◦
Zinc Health Ventures, LLC (Delaware)
◦
Zinc Health Services, LLC (Delaware)
12

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the following Registration Statements:
(1) Registration Statement (Form S-3ASR No. 333-238506) of CVS Health Corporation, and
(2) Registration  Statements  (Form  S-8  Nos.  333-238507,  333-230035,  333-228622,  333-167746,  333-217853,  333-208805,  333-141481,  333-139470,  333-
63664, 333-91253, 333-49407, 333-34927, and 333-28043) of CVS Health Corporation;
of our reports dated February 9, 2022, with respect to the consolidated financial statements of CVS Health Corporation and the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting of CVS Health Corporation included in this Annual Report (Form 10-K) of CVS Health Corporation for the year ended December 31,
2021.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
Boston, Massachusetts
February 9, 2022

Exhibit 31.1
Certification
I, Karen S. Lynch, President and Chief Executive Officer of CVS Health Corporation, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of CVS Health Corporation;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.     The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
(a)    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date:
February 9, 2022
/S/     KAREN S. LYNCH
Karen S. Lynch
President and Chief Executive Officer

Exhibit 31.2
Certification
I, Shawn M. Guertin, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CVS Health Corporation, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of CVS Health Corporation;
2.     Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.     Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.     The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
(a)    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 9, 2022
/S/     SHAWN M. GUERTIN
Shawn M. Guertin
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the Annual Report of CVS Health Corporation (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the
period ended December 31, 2021 (the “Report”) solely for the purpose of complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
I, Karen S. Lynch, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company, certify that, to the best of my knowledge:
1. the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act; and
2. the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: February 9, 2022
/S/    KAREN S. LYNCH
Karen S. Lynch
President and Chief Executive Officer

Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATION
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the Annual Report of CVS Health Corporation (the "Company") on Form 10-K for the
period ended December 31, 2021 (the “Report”) solely for the purpose of complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
I, Shawn M. Guertin, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company, certify that, to the best of my knowledge:
1. the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act; and
2. the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: February 9, 2022
/S/    SHAWN M. GUERTIN
Shawn M. Guertin
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
