UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 10-K
 
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
OR
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Transition Period from             to             .
Commission file number 001-37713
 
eBay Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Delaware
77-0430924
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
2025 Hamilton Avenue
San Jose , California
95125
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(408) 376-7008
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading symbol
Name of exchange on which registered
Common stock
EBAY
The Nasdaq Global Select Market
6.00% Notes due 2056
EBAYL
The Nasdaq Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.     Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    Yes ☐  No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).  Yes ☒  No ☐

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large
accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant
to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).   Yes  ☐  No  ☒
As of June 30, 2019, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $31,354,367,947 based on the closing sale price as reported on The Nasdaq Global
Select Market.
796,080,826 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of January 27, 2020.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference from the definitive proxy statement for the registrant’s Annual Meeting of Stockholders expected to be held on June 16, 2020.

eBay Inc.
Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
Item 1.
Business
4
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
10
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
29
Item 2.
Properties
30
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
31
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
32
Part II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
33
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
35
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
37
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
57
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
59
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
59
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
59
Item 9B.
Other Information
59
Part III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
60
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
60
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
60
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
60
Item 14.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
60
Part IV
Item 15.
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule
61
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
61
3

PART I
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future business, future results of operations or financial condition, new or planned features or services, management strategies or timing and other
expectations regarding our sale of StubHub to viagogo). You can identify these forward-looking statements by words such as “may,” “will,” “would,”
“should,”  “could,”  “expect,”  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “estimate,”  “intend,”  “plan”  and  other  similar  expressions.  These  forward-looking  statements
involve  risks  and  uncertainties  that  could  cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied  in  our  forward-looking
statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as
well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  or  the  SEC.  We  do  not  intend,  and  undertake  no  obligation,  to  update  any  of  our  forward-looking
statements after the date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are
cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
ITEM 1: BUSINESS
Overview
eBay  Inc.  was  formed  as  a  sole  proprietorship  in  September  1995  and  was  incorporated  in  California  in  May  1996.  In  April  1998,  we
reincorporated in Delaware, and in September 1998, we completed the initial public offering of our common stock. Our principal executive offices are
located at 2025 Hamilton Avenue, San Jose, California 95125, and our telephone number is (408) 376-7008. Unless otherwise expressly stated or
the  context  otherwise  requires,  when  we  refer  to  “we,”  “our,”  “us”  or  “eBay”  in  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  we  mean  eBay  Inc.  and  its
consolidated subsidiaries. When we refer to “eBay Inc.” we mean our Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds platforms. On November 24, 2019, we
entered into a definitive agreement for eBay to sell StubHub to viagogo, with closing of the transaction expected to occur in the first quarter of 2020.
eBay Inc. is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds platforms. Collectively, we connect millions
of buyers and sellers around the world, empowering people and creating opportunity. Our technologies and services are designed to give buyers
choice  and  a  breadth  of  relevant  inventory  and  to  enable  sellers  worldwide  to  organize  and  offer  their  inventory  for  sale,  virtually  anytime  and
anywhere. Our Marketplace platforms include our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts, including off-platform
businesses in Korea, Japan and Turkey and the eBay suite of mobile apps. We believe that these are among the world’s largest and most vibrant
marketplaces for discovering great value and unique selection. StubHub platforms include the online ticket platform located at www.stubhub.com, its
localized counterparts and the StubHub mobile apps. These platforms connect fans with their favorite sporting events, shows and artists and enable
them to buy and sell millions of tickets annually, whenever and wherever they want. Our Classifieds platforms include a collection of brands such as
mobile.de, Kijiji, Gumtree, Marktplaats, eBay Kleinanzeigen and others. Offering online classifieds around the world, these platforms help people
find what they are looking for in their local communities.
Our platforms are accessible through a traditional online experience (e.g., desktop and laptop computers), mobile devices (e.g., smartphones
and tablets) and our application programming interfaces or APIs (platform access for third party software developers). Our multi-screen approach
offers downloadable, easy-to-use applications for iOS and Android mobile devices that allow access to ebay.com and some of our other websites
and vertical shopping experiences. Our platform is increasingly based on open source technologies that provide industry-standard ways for software
developers and merchants to access our APIs and develop software and solutions for commerce. In 2019, we launched new API capabilities to give
third-party developers access to eBay programs like managed payments.
Agreement to Sell StubHub
On November 24, 2019, following a strategic review of our assets, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell StubHub to viagogo for a
purchase price of $4.05 billion in cash. Please see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “The closing of the proposed sale of
StubHub is subject to various risks and uncertainties, may not be completed in accordance with expected plans or on the currently contemplated
timeline, or at all, and the pending sale may be disruptive to StubHub.”
4

Our Strategy
Delivering the best choice, the most relevance and the most powerful selling platform
Our strategy is to drive the best choice, the most relevance and the most powerful selling platform for our buyers and sellers. We focus on
connecting buyers and sellers through simplified experiences to make it easier for users to list, buy and sell items, and we are working to serve our
customers in an authentically eBay way.
On our Marketplace platform, our strategy is to drive the best choice by attracting and retaining sellers and brands that bring differentiated
inventory to eBay and provide our consumers with great selection and value. This includes new, everyday items as well as rare and unique goods,
many of which are available with free shipping and delivery in three business days or less. Our vision is to provide buyers with value and selection
through the spectrum of value of the inventory. We continue to invest in product and initiatives to evolve the customer experience, making it easier
for buyers to find inventory on the platform.
 
As a trusted ticket marketplace, StubHub brings the joy of live events to fans globally. In 2019, over 268 million visitors came to StubHub to
buy or sell tickets to live sports, music, theater and other events. StubHub business partners include more than 100 leagues, teams, venues, events
or other major third-party companies in the U.S. and internationally across major sports leagues such as the NFL, MLB, MLS, NBA, NHL, and the
NCAA. StubHub is a leader in mobile innovation, with roughly 60% of its orders coming from mobile in 2019.
A world leader in online classifieds, eBay Classifieds is designed to help people list their products and services, generally for free, find what
they  are  looking  for  in  their  local  communities  and  trade  at  a  local  level.  eBay  Classifieds  Group’s  brands  offer  both  horizontal  and  vertical
experiences, such as motors, real estate and jobs. We offer a personalized classifieds experience and focus on expanding our value proposition by
leveraging data and analytics to improve customer relevance and grow the classifieds opportunity on mobile.
Business model and pricing
On  eBay  and  StubHub,  our  business  model  and  pricing  are  designed  so  that  our  business  is  successful  primarily  when  our  sellers  are
successful. We make money primarily through fees collected on successfully closed sales. On our Classifieds platform, we monetize our business
primarily through advertising.
In 2019, managed payments adoption accelerated in the U.S. and the service launched in Germany. Since we began intermediating payments
in  2018,  we  processed  over  $2.0  billion  in  payments  for  nearly  25,000  sellers  through  December  31,  2019.  Our  advertising  business  remains
focused on growing our promoted listing fees (first-party advertising business) while reducing non-strategic third-party advertising in a manner that is
conducive to growth in our core Marketplace; over 1 million sellers used the product, promoting over 320 million live listings in 2019.
Our offerings for buyers and sellers
We provide a number of features for our buyers and sellers that are designed to build trust, help users feel more comfortable buying and
selling on our platforms and reward our top sellers for their loyalty. We believe that, through our sellers, eBay offers some of the best value and
deals available for a number of consumer products. Buyers seek out eBay because they can find an enormous breadth of inventory and a spectrum
of value from the brand new to the hard-to-find.
On the Marketplace platform, we continue to explore new tools and features that are intended to create a better buying experience on eBay,
including Visual Shopping via Computer Vision, Right Offer at the Right Time, and Buy Again.
In order to remain competitive and create a vibrant seller experience, eBay continuously invests in tools and programs to grow the seller
ecosystem  because  we  only  win  when  our  sellers  succeed.  In  2019,  we  added  analytics  and  merchandising  tools  to  our  Seller  Hub  that  are
designed so that sellers know what to sell, when to sell it and at what price. The 2019 additions of Multi-User Account Access, along with the
Terapeak integration, enable sellers to better manage their business and add additional analytics insights into the platform. We also established new
seller protections, including two new financial protections for top-rated sellers located in the U.S. who offer 30-day returns. First, eBay will issue a
seller invoice credit to cover return label cost if a buyer makes a false “item not as described”
5

claim. Second, eBay now allows these sellers to issue partial refunds for all items that are returned damaged. eBay also has processes that allow
sellers to report buyers who violate policies.
eBay  is  committed  to  maintaining  a  safe  and  trusted  marketplace.  In  order  to  further  strengthen  our  buyers’  confidence  and  trust  in  our
services, we offer eBay Money Back Guarantee, which allows buyers to get their money back if the item they ordered does not arrive, is faulty or
damaged,  or  if  it  does  not  match  the  listing.  eBay  Money  Back  Guarantee  covers  most  items  purchased  on  the  eBay  platform  in  a  number  of
countries, including the U.S., the U.K., Germany and Australia, through a qualifying payment method. Some purchases, including some vehicles, are
not covered. We also offer eBay Authenticate, through which sellers can have their high-end handbags, luxury watches and jewelry authenticated.
The program is available in the United States as well as in the U.K. and Germany. We also provide our customers with a Best Price Guarantee,
which offers buyers in the United States 110 percent of the price difference if they find an item for less on a competitor’s website within 48 hours of
making a purchase. In Australia, Best Price Guarantee beats deals from approved retailers by 5%, and in U.K., offers price matching.
For buyers, we want to create greater confidence in our ability to meet their delivery and buying expectations and to improve the reliability of
our shipping times and tracking. The majority of our transactions on the eBay Marketplace in the U.S., the U.K., and Germany include free shipping,
and we encourage sellers to offer free returns. Through eBay Guaranteed Delivery, we provide faster and more precise delivery dates on millions of
eligible items.
Our Impact and Responsibility
eBay’s purpose is to empower people and create economic opportunity for all. Every day, people build businesses on eBay, and we are driven
to support them. Both in our community and through our technology, we work to create economic opportunity. Our impact efforts are divided into
four programs that align with our purpose: eBay for Charity, eBay Foundation, Retail Revival, and Responsible Business.
eBay for Charity empowers eBay buyers and sellers to support charities around the world. Since its inception, eBay for Charity has raised
more than $1 billion for more than 83,000 charities.
eBay’s Foundation  helps build economically  vibrant  and thriving  communities  through  several  key initiatives  like Global Give,  which is an
annual  employee-led  grantmaking  program  that  deploys  the  talents  and  passions  of  eBay  employees.  Through  the  program,  employees  come
together to create teams, partner with local nonprofits, and develop projects that support small businesses and entrepreneurs in their communities.
In 2019, the eBay Foundation awarded approximately $1 million through Global Give.
Retail Revival, which launched in early 2018, also demonstrates eBay’s commitment to economic development and entrepreneurialism. Retail
Revival empowers local businesses to compete on a global scale and thrive in an online economy. In close partnership with local governments and
stakeholders, eBay onboards cohorts of small businesses and supports their growth through months of in-depth training, individual coaching, and
promotional support, all provided at no cost to the participants or partner cities. Since launch, eBay has welcomed new U.S. cities to the Retail
Revival program, including: Lansing, Michigan; Greensboro, North Carolina; and Baton Rouge, Louisiana; and scaled the program internationally to
Canada, the UK, Ireland, Italy, Israel, Russia, and Bulgaria.
Finally, as a part of the company’s Responsible Business efforts, eBay strives to operate in an environmentally and socially sustainable way -
creating a safe, trusted, and diverse environment in which our employees, buyers, sellers, suppliers, and partners can thrive. In 2019, eBay made
several  partnership  announcements,  working  to  reach  its  goal  of  100%  renewable  energy  by  2025.  This  includes  two  local  renewable  energy
programs  with  energy  providers  in  Draper,  Utah,  and  San  Jose,  California.  These  two  locations  join  Dreilinden,  Germany;  Dublin,  Ireland;  and
Portland, Oregon in 100% renewable energy sourcing.
6

Financial Information
We measure our footprint in our addressable market according to Gross Merchandise Volume (“GMV”). GMV consists of the total value of all
successfully closed transactions between users on our Marketplace or StubHub platforms during the applicable period, regardless of whether the
buyer  and  seller  actually  completed  the  transaction.  In 2019,  we  generated  over  $90  billion  in  GMV,  of  which  approximately 60  percent was
generated outside the U.S. Despite GMV’s divergence from revenue during 2019, we still believe that GMV provides a useful measure of the overall
volume of closed transactions that flow through our platforms in a given period, notwithstanding the inclusion in GMV of closed transactions that are
not ultimately consummated.
At the end of 2019, our Marketplace and StubHub platforms had more than 180 million active buyers and over one billion live listings globally.
The term “active buyer” means, as of any date, all buyer accounts that successfully closed a transaction on our Marketplace or StubHub platforms
within the previous 12-month period. Buyers may register more than once and, as a result, may have more than one account.
We generate revenue primarily from the transactions we successfully enable and through marketing services, including classifieds and our
growth  initiatives  of  payments  and  advertising.  The  majority  of  our  revenue  comes  from  a  take  rate  on  the  GMV  of  transactions  closed  on  our
Marketplace and StubHub platforms. We define “take rate” as net transaction revenues divided by GMV.
The  size  and  scale  of  our  platforms  are  designed  to  enable  our  buyers  and  sellers  to  leverage  our  economies  of  scale  and  capital
investments, such as in sales and marketing, mobile, customer acquisition, technology innovation and customer service.
Notable Business Transactions in 2019
We  regularly  review  and  manage  our  investments  to  ensure  that  they  support  eBay’s  strategic  direction  and  complement  our  disciplined
approach to value creation, profitability and capital allocation. In the first quarter of 2019, we completed the acquisition of Motors.co.uk, a U.K.-
based classifieds site, for $93 million. The Motors.co.uk team joined Gumtree UK, an eBay Classifieds business. In the second quarter of 2019, we
invested $160 million in Paytm Mall, an eCommerce marketplace in India. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell
StubHub; see “Agreement to Sell StubHub” section for more details.
Competition
We encounter vigorous competition in our business from numerous sources. Our users can list, sell, buy, and pay for similar items through a
variety of competing online, mobile and offline channels. These include, but are not limited to, retailers, distributors, liquidators, import and export
companies,  auctioneers,  catalog  and  mail-order  companies,  classifieds,  directories,  search  engines,  commerce  participants  (consumer-to-
consumer, business-to-consumer and business-to-business), shopping channels and networks. As our product offerings continue to broaden into
new categories of items and new commerce formats, we expect to face additional competition from other online, mobile and offline channels for
those new offerings. We compete on the basis of price, product selection and services, and global scale.
For  more  information  regarding  risks  of  competition,  see  the  information  in  “Item  1A:  Risk  Factors”  under  the  captions  “Substantial  and
increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business” and “We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation
under competition laws that could adversely impact our business.”
To compete effectively, we will need to continue to expend significant resources in technology and marketing. These efforts require substantial
expenditures, which could reduce our margins and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, operating results and cash
flows  and  reduce  the  market  price  of  our  common  stock  and  outstanding  debt  securities.  Despite  our  efforts  to  preserve  and  expand  the  size,
diversity  and transaction  activity  of our buyers  and sellers and to enhance the user experience, we may not be able to effectively  manage our
operating expenses, to increase or maintain our revenue or to avoid a decline in our consolidated net income or a net loss.
Government Regulation
Government regulation impacts key aspects of our business. In particular, we are subject to laws and regulations that affect the ecommerce
industry in many countries where we operate. With the continued state adoption of Internet
7

sales tax laws in 2019, more buyers across the U.S. are encountering sales tax for the first time on the eBay platform. To date, more than 30 states
have implemented Internet sales tax and digital service tax legislation. Tax collection responsibility and the additional costs associated with complex
sales and use tax collection, remittance and audit requirements could create additional burdens for buyers and sellers on our websites and mobile
platforms.
For more information regarding regulatory risks, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “Our business is subject to
extensive government regulation and oversight” and “Our business and its users are subject to Internet sales tax and sales reporting and record-
keeping obligations.”
Seasonality
We expect transaction activity patterns on our platforms to mirror general consumer buying patterns. Please see the additional information in
“Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under the caption “Seasonality.”
Technology
eBay Inc.’s platforms use a combination of proprietary technologies and services as well as technologies and services provided by others. We
have developed intuitive user interfaces, buyer, seller and developer tools and transaction processing, database and network applications that help
enable our users to reliably and securely complete transactions on our sites. Our technology infrastructure simplifies the storage and processing of
large amounts of data, eases the deployment and operation of large-scale global products and services and automates much of the administration
of large-scale clusters of computers. Our infrastructure has been designed around industry-standard architectures to reduce downtime in the event
of outages or catastrophic occurrences.
For information regarding technology-related  risks, see the information in “Item  1A: Risk Factors”  under the captions “Systems failures or
cyberattacks and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or services
could harm our business” and “Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.”
In support of our ongoing commitment to innovation and a better customer experience, we have been on a multi-year evolution to modernize
our marketplace. Through technologies like artificial intelligence, which is woven into all aspects of the eBay marketplace, we are anticipating the
needs of buyers, sellers and developers empowering entrepreneurs looking to grow their business, and making the platform more accessible to
everyone. We aim to create highly personalized and inspiring shopping experiences powered by advanced technologies.
Intellectual Property
We  regard  the  protection  of  our  intellectual  property,  including  our  trademarks  (particularly  those  covering  the  eBay  name),  patents,
copyrights, domain names, trade dress and trade secrets as critical to our success. We aggressively protect our intellectual property rights by relying
on federal, state and common law rights in the U.S. and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual
restrictions to protect our proprietary rights in products and services. We routinely enter into confidentiality and invention assignment agreements
with our employees and contractors and nondisclosure agreements with parties with whom we conduct business to limit access to and disclosure of
our proprietary information.
 
We pursue the registration of our domain names, trademarks and service marks in the U.S. and internationally. Additionally, we have filed
U.S.  and international  patent applications  covering  certain  aspects  of our proprietary  technology.  Effective  trademark,  copyright,  patent,  domain
name, trade dress and trade secret protection is typically expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We must protect our intellectual property
rights  and  other  proprietary  rights  in  an  increasing  number  of  jurisdictions,  a  process  that  is  expensive  and  time  consuming  and  may  not  be
successful.
 
We have registered our core brands as trademarks and domain names in the U.S. and a large number of other jurisdictions and have in place
an active program to continue to secure trademarks and domain names that correspond to our brands in markets of interest. If we are unable to
register or protect our trademarks or domain names, we could be adversely affected in any jurisdiction in which our trademarks or domain names
are  not  registered  or  protected.  We  have  licensed  in  the  past,  and  expect  to  license  in  the  future,  certain  of  our  proprietary  rights,  such  as
trademarks or copyrighted material, to others.
8

 
From time to time, third parties have claimed - and others will likely claim in the future - that we have infringed their intellectual property rights.
We are typically involved in a number of such legal proceedings at any time. Please see the information in “Item 3: Legal Proceedings” and in “Item
1A: Risk Factors” under the captions “The listing or sale by our users of items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners,
including pirated or counterfeit items, may harm our business,” and “We may be unable to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property
rights and face ongoing risk from patent litigation and allegations by third parties that we are infringing their intellectual property rights.”
Employees
As of December 31, 2019, we employed approximately 13,300 people globally. Approximately 6,600 of our employees were located in the
U.S.
Available Information
Our Internet address is www.ebay.com. Our investor relations website is located at investors.ebayinc.com. We make available free of charge
on our investor relations website under the heading “Financial Information - SEC Filings” our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on
Form  10-Q,  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  and  amendments  to  those  reports  as  soon  as  reasonably  practicable  after  such  materials  are
electronically filed with (or furnished to) the SEC.
We  webcast  our  earnings  calls  and  certain  events  we  participate  in  or  host  with  members  of  the  investment  community  on  our  investor
relations  website.  Additionally,  we  provide  notifications  of  news  or  announcements  regarding  our  financial  performance,  including  SEC  filings,
investor  events,  press  and  earnings  releases,  and  blogs  on  our  investor  relations  website.  Company  sustainability  information  for  investors  is
available  on  our  investor  relations  website  under  the  heading  “ESG  Investors.”  Corporate  governance  information,  including  our  governance
guidelines for our Board of Directors (“Board”), Board committee charters and code of conduct, is also available on our investor relations website
under the heading “Corporate Governance.”
The contents of our websites and webcasts and information that can be accessed through our websites and webcasts are not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or in any other report or document we file with (or furnish to) the SEC, and any references to our
websites and webcasts are intended to be inactive textual references only.
9

Item 1A: RISK FACTORS
You should carefully review the following discussion of the risks that may affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, as
well  as  our  consolidated  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  and  the  other  information  appearing  in  this  report,  for  important  information
regarding risks that affect us. Current global economic events and conditions may amplify many of these risks. These risks are not the only risks that
may affect us. Additional risks that we are not aware of or do not believe are material at the time of this filing may also become important factors that
adversely affect our business.
Risk Factors That May Affect our Business, Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Our operating and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows, as well as the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
Our operating and financial results have varied on a quarterly basis during our operating history and may continue to fluctuate significantly as a
result of a variety of factors, including as a result of the risks set forth in this “Risk Factors” section. It is difficult for us to forecast the level or source
of our revenues or earnings (loss) accurately. In view of the rapidly evolving nature of our business, period-to-period comparisons of our operating
results may not be meaningful, and you should not rely upon them as an indication of future performance. We do not have backlog, and substantially
all of our net revenues each quarter come from transactions involving sales during that quarter. Due to the inherent difficulty in forecasting revenues,
it is also difficult to forecast expenses as a percentage of net revenues. Quarterly and annual expenses as a percentage of net revenues reflected in
our consolidated financial statements may be significantly different from historical or projected percentages. Our operating results in one or more
future quarters may fall below the expectations of securities analysts and investors. The trading price of our common stock and debt securities could
decline, perhaps substantially, as a result of the factors described in this paragraph and the other risks set forth in this “Risk Factors” section.
Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business.
The businesses and markets in which we operate are intensely competitive. We currently and potentially compete with a wide variety of online
and offline companies providing goods and services to consumers and merchants. The Internet and mobile networks provide new, rapidly evolving
and intensely competitive channels for the sale of all types of goods and services. We compete in two-sided markets, and must attract both buyers
and sellers to use our platforms. Consumers who purchase or sell goods and services through us have more and more alternatives, and merchants
have more channels to reach consumers. We expect competition to continue to intensify. Online and offline businesses increasingly are competing
with each other and our competitors include a number of online and offline retailers with significant resources, large user communities and well-
established  brands.  Moreover,  the  barriers  to  entry  into  these  channels  can  be  low,  and  businesses  easily  can  launch  online  sites  or  mobile
platforms and applications at nominal cost by using commercially available software or partnering with any of a number of successful ecommerce
companies. As we respond to changes in the competitive environment, we may, from time to time, make pricing, service or marketing decisions or
acquisitions that may be controversial  with and lead to dissatisfaction  among sellers, which could reduce activity on our platform and harm our
profitability.
We face  increased competitive  pressure  online and offline.  In  particular,  the  competitive  norm  for,  and the  expected  level of  service  from,
ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce  has  significantly  increased  due  to,  among  other  factors,  improved  user  experience,  greater  ease  of  buying
goods,  lower  (or  no)  shipping  costs,  faster  shipping  times  and  more  favorable  return  policies.  In  addition,  certain  platform  businesses,  such  as
Alibaba, Amazon,  Apple, Facebook  and Google,  many  of  whom  are  larger  than  us or have greater  capitalization,  have a dominant  and secure
position in other industries or certain significant markets, and offer other goods and services to consumers and merchants that we do not offer. If we
are  unable  to  change  our  products,  offerings  and  services  in  ways  that  reflect  the  changing  demands  of  ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce
marketplaces, particularly the higher growth of sales of fixed-price items and higher expected service levels (some of which depend on services
provided by sellers on our platforms), or compete effectively with and adapt to changes in larger platform businesses, our business will suffer.
Competitors with other revenue sources may also be able to devote more resources to marketing and promotional campaigns, adopt more
aggressive pricing policies and devote more resources to website, mobile platforms and applications and systems development than we can. Other
competitors may offer or continue to offer faster and/or
10

free  shipping,  delivery  on  Sunday,  same-day  delivery,  favorable  return  policies  or  other  transaction-related  services  which  improve  the  user
experience on their sites and which could be impractical or inefficient for our sellers to match. Competitors may be able to innovate faster and more
efficiently, and new technologies may increase the competitive pressures by enabling competitors to offer more efficient or lower-cost services.
Some of our  competitors  control  other  products  and services  that  are  important  to our  success,  including credit  card interchange,  Internet
search, and mobile operating systems. Such competitors could manipulate pricing, availability, terms or operation of service related to their products
and services in a manner that impacts our competitive offerings. For example, Google, which operates a shopping platform service, has from time to
time made changes to its search algorithms that reduced the amount of search traffic directed to us from searches on Google. If we are unable to
use or adapt to operational changes in such services, we may face higher costs for such services, face integration or technological barriers or lose
customers, which could cause our business to suffer.
Consumers who might use our sites to buy goods have a wide variety of alternatives, including traditional department, warehouse, boutique,
discount and general merchandise stores (as well as the online and mobile operations of these traditional retailers), online retailers and their related
mobile offerings, online and offline classified services and other shopping channels, such as offline and online home shopping networks. In the
United States, these include, but are not limited to, Amazon, Facebook, Google, Walmart, Target, Macy’s, Etsy, Shopify, Wayfair, Costco, Rakuten,
QVC and HSN, among others. In addition, consumers have a large number of online and offline channels focused on one or more of the categories
of products offered on our site.
Consumers also can turn to many companies that offer a variety of services that provide other channels for buyers to find and buy items from
sellers of all sizes, including social media, online aggregation and classifieds platforms, such as websites operated by Schibsted ASA or Naspers
Limited and others such as craigslist, Oodle.com, Facebook. Consumers also can turn to shopping-comparison sites, such as Google Shopping. In
certain  markets,  our  fixed-price  listing  and  traditional  auction-style  listing  formats  increasingly  are  being  challenged  by  other  formats,  such  as
classifieds.
Our Classifieds platforms offer classifieds listings in a variety of international markets. In many markets in which they operate, our Classifieds
platforms compete for customers and for advertisers against more established online and offline classifieds platforms or other competing websites.
We use product search engines and paid search advertising to help users find our sites, but these services also have the potential to divert
users  to  other  online  shopping  destinations.  Consumers  may  choose  to  search  for  products  and  services  with  a  horizontal  search  engine  or
shopping  comparison  website,  and  such  sites  may  also  send  users  to  other  shopping  destinations.  In  addition,  sellers  are  increasingly  utilizing
multiple sales channels, including the acquisition of new customers by paying for search-related advertisements on horizontal search engine sites,
such as Google, Naver and Baidu.
Consumers and merchants who might use our sites to sell goods also have many alternatives, including general ecommerce sites, such as
Amazon, Alibaba, Zalando and Coupang and more specialized sites, such as Etsy. Our international sites also compete for sellers with general and
specialized ecommerce sites. Sellers may also choose to sell their goods through other channels, such as classifieds platforms. Consumers and
merchants also can create and sell through their own sites, and may choose to purchase online advertising instead of using our services. In some
countries, there are online sites that have larger customer  bases and greater brand recognition,  as well as competitors  that may have a better
understanding  of  local  culture  and  commerce.  We  may  increasingly  compete  with  local  competitors  in  developing  countries  that  have  unique
advantages, such as a greater ability to operate under local regulatory authorities.
In addition, certain manufacturers may limit or cease distribution of their products through online channels, such as our sites. Manufacturers
may attempt to use contractual obligations or existing or future government regulation to prohibit or limit ecommerce in certain categories of goods
or services. Manufacturers may also attempt to enforce minimum resale price maintenance or minimum advertised price arrangements to prevent
distributors from selling on our platforms or on the Internet generally, or drive distributors to sell at prices that would make us less attractive relative
to other alternatives. The adoption by manufacturers of policies, or their use of laws or regulations, in each case discouraging or restricting the sales
of goods or services over the Internet, could force our users to stop selling certain products on our platforms, which could adversely affect our
results of operations and result in loss of market share and diminished value of our brands.
11

The principal competitive factors for us include the following:
    
•
ability to attract, retain and engage buyers and sellers;
•
volume of transactions and price and selection of goods;
•
trust in the seller and the transaction;
•
customer service;
•
brand recognition;    
•
community cohesion, interaction and size;
•
website, mobile platform and application ease-of-use and accessibility;
•
system reliability and security;
•
reliability of delivery and payment, including customer preference for fast delivery and free shipping and returns;
•
level of service fees; and
•
quality of search tools.
We  may  be  unable  to  compete  successfully  against  current  and  future  competitors.  Some  current  and  potential  competitors  have  longer
operating histories, larger customer bases and greater brand recognition in other business and Internet sectors than we do.
Global and regional economic conditions could harm our business.
Our operations and performance depend significantly on global and regional economic conditions. Economic conditions, including inflation,
recession, or other adverse economic events or changes, could have a negative and adverse impact on companies and customers with which we do
business and could have a material adverse effect on our business, including a reduction in the volume and prices of transactions on our commerce
platforms. These events and conditions, including uncertainties and instability in economic and market conditions caused by the United Kingdom’s
vote to exit the European Union (known as “Brexit”)  and any outcomes  resulting  from  that vote,  could have a negative and adverse  impact  on
companies and customers with which we do business or cause us to write down our assets or investments. Because we have global operations,
including in the United Kingdom and the European Union, we face risks due to the uncertainty and the potential disruptions surrounding Brexit,
including potential financial, legal, tax and trade implications.
We are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, which could negatively impact our financial results.
Because we generate the majority of our revenues outside the United States but report our financial results in U.S. dollars, our financial results
are impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, or foreign exchange rates. The results of operations of many of our internationally
focused platforms are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations as the financial results of the applicable subsidiaries are translated from the
local currency into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. If the U.S. dollar weakens against foreign currencies, the translation of these foreign
currency denominated revenues or expenses will result in increased U.S. dollar denominated revenues and expenses. Similarly, if the U.S. dollar
strengthens  against  foreign  currencies,  particularly  the  euro,  British  pound,  Korean  won  or  Australian  dollar,  our  translation  of  foreign  currency
denominated revenues or expenses will result in lower U.S. dollar denominated net revenues and expenses. In addition to this translation effect, a
strengthening U.S. dollar will typically adversely affect the volume of goods being sold by U.S. sellers to Europe and Australia more than it positively
affects the volume of goods being sold by sellers in those geographies to buyers in the United States, thereby further negatively impacting our
financial results.
While from time to time we enter into transactions to hedge portions of our foreign currency translation exposure, it is impossible to predict or
eliminate  the  effects  of  this  exposure.  Fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  could  significantly  impact  our  financial  results,  which  may  have  a
significant impact on the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
Our international operations are subject to increased risks, which could harm our business.
Our international businesses, especially in the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia and Korea, and cross-border business from greater China,
have generated a majority of our net revenues in recent years. In addition to uncertainty about our ability to generate revenues from our foreign
operations and expand into international markets, there are risks inherent in doing business internationally, including:
12

•
uncertainties and instability in economic and market conditions caused by the United Kingdom’s vote to exit the European Union and any
outcomes resulting from that vote;
•
uncertainty regarding how the United Kingdom’s access to the European Union Single Market and the wider trading, legal, regulatory and
labor  environments,  especially  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  European  Union,  will  be  impacted  by  the  United  Kingdom’s  vote  to  exit  the
European Union and any outcomes resulting from that vote, including the resulting impact on our business and that of our clients;
•
expenses  associated  with  localizing  our  products  and  services  and  customer  data,  including  offering  customers  the  ability  to  transact
business in the local currency and adapting our products and services to local preferences (e.g., payment methods) with which we may
have limited or no experience;
•
trade barriers and changes in trade regulations;
•
difficulties  in  developing,  staffing,  and  simultaneously  managing  a  large  number  of  varying  foreign  operations  as  a  result  of  distance,
language, and cultural differences;
•
stringent local labor laws and regulations;
•
credit risk and higher levels of payment fraud;
•
profit  repatriation  restrictions,  foreign  currency  exchange  restrictions  or  extreme  fluctuations  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates  for  a
particular currency;
•
political or social unrest, economic instability, repression, or human rights issues;
•
geopolitical events, including natural disasters, public health issues, acts of war, and terrorism;
•
import or export regulations;
•
compliance with U.S. laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and foreign laws prohibiting corrupt payments to government officials,
as well as U.S. and foreign laws designed to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities;
•
antitrust and competition regulations;
•
potentially adverse tax developments and consequences;
•
economic uncertainties relating to sovereign and other debt;
•
different, uncertain, or more stringent user protection, data protection, privacy, and other laws;
•
risks related to other government regulation or required compliance with local laws;
•
national or regional differences in macroeconomic growth rates;
•
payment intermediation regulations;
•
local licensing and reporting obligations; and
•
increased difficulties in collecting accounts receivable.
 
Violations of the complex foreign and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international operations may result in fines, criminal actions,
or sanctions against us, our officers, or our employees; prohibitions on the conduct of our business; and damage to our reputation. Although we
have  implemented  policies  and  procedures  designed  to  promote  compliance  with  these  laws,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  our  employees,
contractors, or agents will not violate our policies. These risks inherent in our international operations and expansion increase our costs of doing
business internationally and could harm our business.
Any factors that reduce cross-border trade or make such trade more difficult could harm our business.
Cross-border  trade  is  an  important  source  of  both  revenue  and  profits  for  us.  Cross-border  trade  also  represents  our  primary  (or  in some
cases, only) presence in certain important markets, such as Brazil, Latin America, China, and various other countries. In addition, our cross-border
trade is also subject to, and may be impacted by, foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
The interpretation and application of specific national or regional laws, such as those related to intellectual property rights of authentic products,
selective distribution networks, and sellers in other countries listing items on the Internet, and the potential interpretation and application of laws of
multiple jurisdictions (e.g., the jurisdiction of the buyer, the seller, and/or the location of the item being sold) are often extremely complicated in the
context of cross-border trade. The interpretation and/or application of such laws could impose restrictions on, or increase the costs of, purchasing,
selling, shipping, or returning goods across national borders.
  
The shipping of goods across national borders is often more expensive and complicated than domestic shipping. Customs and duty procedures
and reviews, including duty-free thresholds in various key markets, the interaction of national postal systems, and security related governmental
processes at international borders, may increase costs, discourage cross-border purchases, delay transit and create shipping uncertainties. Any
factors that increase the costs
13

of cross-border trade or restrict, delay, or make cross-border trade more difficult or impractical would lower our revenues and profits and could harm
our business.
Our business may be adversely affected by geopolitical events, natural disasters, seasonal factors and other factors that cause our users to
spend less time on our websites or mobile platforms and applications, including increased usage of other websites.
Our  users  may  spend  less  time  on  our  websites  and  our  applications  for  mobile  devices  as  a  result  of  a  variety  of  diversions,  including:
geopolitical events, such as war, the threat of war, or terrorist activity; natural disasters or the effects of climate change (such as drought, flooding,
wildfires,  increased  storm  severity,  and  sea  level  rise);  power  shortages  or  outages,  major  public  health  issues,  including  pandemics;  social
networking or other entertainment websites or mobile applications; significant local, national or global events capturing the attention of a large part of
the population; and seasonal fluctuations due to a variety of factors. If any of these, or any other factors, divert our users from using our websites or
mobile applications, our business could be materially adversely affected.
Our success depends to a large degree on our ability to successfully address the rapidly evolving market for transactions on mobile devices.
Mobile devices are increasingly used for ecommerce transactions. A significant and growing portion of our users access our platforms through
mobile devices. We may lose users if we are not able to continue to meet our users’ mobile and multi-screen experience expectations. The variety of
technical  and  other  configurations  across  different  mobile  devices  and  platforms  increases  the  challenges  associated  with  this  environment.  In
addition,  a  number  of  other  companies  with  significant  resources  and  a  number  of  innovative  startups  have  introduced  products  and  services
focusing on mobile markets.
Our  ability  to  successfully  address  the  challenges  posed  by  the  rapidly  evolving  market  for  mobile  transactions  is  crucial  to  our  continued
success, and any failure to continuously increase the volume of mobile transactions effected through our platforms could harm our business.
If we cannot keep pace with rapid technological developments or continue to innovate and create new initiatives to provide new programs,
products and services, the use of our products and our revenues could decline.
Rapid,  significant  technological  changes  continue  to  confront  the  industries  in  which  we  operate  and  we  cannot  predict  the  effect  of
technological changes on our business. We also continuously strive to create new initiatives and innovations that offer growth opportunities, such as
our new payments and advertising offerings. In addition to our own initiatives and innovations, we rely in part on third parties, including some of our
competitors, for the development of and access to new technologies. We expect that new services and technologies applicable to the industries in
which  we  operate  will  continue  to  emerge.  These  new  services  and  technologies  may  be  superior  to,  or  render  obsolete,  the  technologies  we
currently use in our products and services. Incorporating new technologies into our products and services may require substantial expenditures and
take considerable time, and ultimately may not be successful. In addition, our ability to adopt new services and develop new technologies may be
inhibited  by  industry-wide  standards,  new  laws  and  regulations,  resistance  to  change  from  our  users,  clients  or  merchants,  or  third  parties’
intellectual property rights. Our success will depend on our ability to develop new technologies and adapt to technological changes and evolving
industry standards.
Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight.
We  are  subject  to  laws  and  regulations  affecting  our  domestic  and  international  operations  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  consumer
protection, data privacy requirements, intellectual property ownership and infringement, prohibited items and stolen goods, resale of event tickets,
tax,  antitrust  and  anti-competition,  export  requirements,  anti-corruption,  labor,  advertising,  digital  content,  real  estate,  billing,  ecommerce,
promotions, quality of services, telecommunications, mobile communications and media, environmental, and health and safety regulations, as well
as laws and regulations intended to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities. In addition, we are, or may become, subject to
further regulation in some of the above-mentioned areas or new areas as a result of the continued development and expansion of our payments
capabilities.
14

Compliance with these laws, regulations, and similar requirements may be onerous and expensive, and variances and inconsistencies from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction may further increase the cost of compliance and doing business. Any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of
changes in these laws and regulations or in their interpretation, could individually or in the aggregate make our products and services less attractive
to our customers, delay the introduction of new products or services in one or more regions, or cause us to change or limit our business practices.
We have implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance
that our employees, contractors, or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or our policies and procedures.  
Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.
We are subject to laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security, and transfer of personally identifiable information about our users
around  the  world.  Much  of  the  personal  information  that  we  collect,  especially  financial  information,  is  regulated  by  multiple  laws.  User  data
protection  laws  may  be  interpreted  and  applied  inconsistently  from  country  to  country.  In  many  cases,  these  laws  apply  not  only  to  third-party
transactions, but also to transfers of information between or among ourselves, our subsidiaries, and other parties with which we have commercial
relations. These laws continue to develop in ways we cannot predict and that may harm our business.
Regulatory scrutiny of privacy, user data protection, use of data and data collection is increasing on a global basis. We are subject to a number
of privacy and similar laws and regulations in the countries in which we operate and these laws and regulations will likely continue to evolve over
time, both through regulatory and legislative action and judicial decisions. In addition, compliance with these laws may restrict our ability to provide
services to our customers that they may find to be valuable. For example, the General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) became effective in
May 2018. The GDPR, which applies to all of our activities conducted from an establishment in the European Union or related to products and
services  offered  in  the  European  Union,  imposes  a  range  of  new  compliance  obligations  regarding  the  handling  of  personal  data.  The  GDPR
imposes significant new obligations and compliance with these obligations depends in part on how particular regulators interpret and apply them. If
we fail to comply with the GDPR, or if regulators assert we have failed to comply with the GDPR, it may lead to regulatory enforcement actions,
which  can  result  in  monetary  penalties  of  up  to  4%  of  worldwide  revenue,  private  lawsuits,  or  reputational  damage.  In  the  U.S.,  California  has
adopted the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (“CCPA”), which became effective January 1, 2020 and which provides a new private right of
action for data breaches and requires companies that process information on California residents to make new disclosures to consumers about their
data collection, use and sharing practices and allow consumers to opt out of certain data sharing with third parties. In addition to the CCPA, several
other U.S. states are considering adopting laws and regulations imposing obligations regarding the handling of personal data. Compliance with the
GDPR, the CCPA, and other current and future applicable international and U.S. privacy, cybersecurity and related laws can be costly and time-
consuming. Complying with these varying national and international requirements could cause us to incur substantial costs or require us to change
our business practices in a manner adverse to our business and violations of privacy-related laws can result in significant penalties.
A determination that there have been violations of laws relating to our practices under communications-based laws could also expose us to
significant damage awards, fines and other penalties that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business. In particular, because
of the enormous number of texts, emails and other communications we send to our users, communications laws that provide a specified monetary
damage award or fine for each violation (such as those described below) could result in particularly large awards or fines.
For example, the Federal Communications Commission amended certain of its regulations under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, or
TCPA, in 2012 and 2013 in a manner that could increase our exposure to liability for certain types of telephonic communication with customers,
including but not limited to text messages to mobile phones. Under the TCPA, plaintiffs may seek actual monetary loss or statutory damages of $500
per violation, whichever is greater, and courts may treble the damage award for willful or knowing violations. We are regularly subject to class-action
lawsuits, as well as individual lawsuits, containing allegations that our businesses violated the TCPA. These lawsuits, and other private lawsuits not
currently alleged as class actions, seek damages (including statutory damages) and injunctive relief, among other remedies. Given the enormous
number of communications we send to our users, a determination that there have been violations of the TCPA or other communications-based
statutes could expose us to significant damage awards that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business.
We post on our websites our privacy policies and practices concerning the collection, use and disclosure of user data. Any failure, or perceived
failure, by us to comply with our posted privacy policies or with any regulatory requirements
15

or orders or other federal, state or international privacy or consumer protection-related laws and regulations, including the GDPR and the CCPA,
could result in proceedings or actions against us by governmental entities or others (e.g., class action privacy litigation), subject us to significant
penalties and negative publicity, require us to change our business practices, increase our costs and adversely affect our business. Data collection,
privacy and security have become the subject of increasing public concern. If Internet and mobile users were to reduce their use of our websites,
mobile platforms, products, and services as a result of these concerns, our business could be harmed. As noted above, we are also subject to the
possibility of security breaches, which themselves may result in a violation of these laws.
Other laws and regulations could harm our business.
It  is  not  always  clear  how  laws  and  regulations  governing  matters  relevant  to  our  business,  such  as  property  ownership,  copyrights,
trademarks, and other intellectual property issues, parallel imports and distribution controls, taxation, libel and defamation, and obscenity apply to
our businesses. Many of these laws were adopted prior to the advent of the Internet, mobile, and related technologies and, as a result, do not
contemplate or address the unique issues of the Internet and related technologies. Many of these laws, including some of those that do reference
the Internet are subject to interpretation by the courts on an ongoing basis and the resulting uncertainty in the scope and application of these laws
and  regulations  increases  the  risk  that  we  will  be  subject  to  private  claims  and  governmental  actions  alleging  violations  of  those  laws  and
regulations.
As our activities, the products and services we offer, and our geographical scope continue to expand, regulatory agencies or courts may claim
or  hold  that  we  or  our  users  are  subject  to  additional  requirements  (including  licensure)  or  prohibited  from  conducting  our  business  in  their
jurisdiction, either generally or with respect to certain actions. Financial and political events have increased the level of regulatory scrutiny on large
companies,  and regulatory  agencies may view matters  or interpret  laws and regulations  differently  than they have in the past and in a manner
adverse  to  our  businesses.  Our  success  and  increased  visibility  have  driven  some  existing  businesses  that  perceive  us  to  be  a  threat  to  their
businesses to  raise concerns  about our  business models  to policymakers  and regulators.  These  businesses  and their trade  association  groups
employ significant resources in their efforts to shape the legal and regulatory regimes in countries where we have significant operations. They may
employ these resources in an effort to change the legal and regulatory regimes in ways intended to reduce the effectiveness of our businesses and
the  ability  of  users  to  use  our  products  and  services.  These  established  businesses  have  raised  concerns  relating  to  pricing,  parallel  imports,
professional seller obligations, selective distribution networks, stolen goods, copyrights, trademarks and other intellectual property rights and the
liability  of  the  provider  of  an  Internet  marketplace  for  the  conduct  of  its  users  related  to  those  and  other  issues.  Any  changes  to  the  legal  or
regulatory regimes in a manner that would increase our liability for third-party listings could negatively impact our business.
Numerous U.S. states and foreign jurisdictions, including the State of California, have regulations regarding “auctions” and the handling of
property by “secondhand dealers” or “pawnbrokers.” Several states and some foreign jurisdictions have attempted to impose such regulations upon
us or our users, and others may attempt to do so in the future. Attempted enforcement of these laws against some of our users appears to be
increasing and we could be required to change the way we or our users do business in ways that increase costs or reduce revenues, such as
forcing us to prohibit listings of certain items or restrict certain listing formats in some locations. We could also be subject to fines or other penalties,
and any of these outcomes could harm our business.
A number of the lawsuits against us relating to trademark issues seek to have our platforms subject to unfavorable local laws. For example,
“trademark exhaustion” principles provide trademark owners with certain rights to control the sale of a branded authentic product until it has been
placed on the market by the trademark holder or with the holder’s consent. The application of “trademark exhaustion” principles is largely unsettled
in the context of the Internet, and if trademark owners are able to force us to prohibit listings of certain items in one or more locations, our business
could be harmed.
As we expand and localize our international activities,  we are increasingly  becoming obligated to comply with the laws of the countries or
markets in which we operate. In addition, because our services are accessible worldwide and we facilitate sales of goods and provide services to
users worldwide, one or more jurisdictions may claim that we or our users are required to comply with their laws based on the location of our servers
or one or more of our users, or the location of the product or service being sold or provided in an ecommerce transaction. For example, we were
found liable in France, under French law, for transactions on some of our websites worldwide that did not involve French buyers or sellers. Laws
regulating Internet, mobile and ecommerce technologies outside of the United States are generally less favorable to us than those in the United
States. Compliance may be more costly or may require us to
16

change our business practices or restrict our service offerings, and the imposition of any regulations on us or our users may harm our business. In
addition, we may be subject to multiple overlapping legal or regulatory regimes that impose conflicting requirements on us (e.g., in cross-border
trade). Our alleged failure to comply with foreign laws could subject us to penalties ranging from criminal prosecution to significant fines to bans on
our services, in addition to the significant costs we may incur in defending against such actions.
We are regularly subject to general litigation, regulatory disputes, and government inquiries.
We are regularly subject to claims, lawsuits (including class actions and individual lawsuits), government investigations, and other proceedings
involving competition and antitrust, intellectual property, privacy, consumer protection, accessibility claims, securities, tax, labor and employment,
commercial disputes, content generated by our users, services and other matters. The number and significance of these disputes and inquiries have
increased as our company has grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope and geographic reach, and our products and services have
increased in complexity.
The  outcome  and  impact  of  such  claims,  lawsuits,  government  investigations,  and  other  proceedings  cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty.
Regardless  of  the  outcome,  such  investigations  and  proceedings  can  have  an  adverse  impact  on  us  because  of  legal  costs,  diversion  of
management  resources,  and  other  factors.  Determining  reserves  for  our  pending  litigation  and  other  proceedings  is  a  complex,  fact-intensive
process that is subject to judgment calls. It is possible that a resolution of one or more such proceedings could require us to make substantial
payments to satisfy judgments, fines or penalties or to settle claims or proceedings, any of which could harm our business. These proceedings could
also result in reputational harm, criminal sanctions, consent decrees, or orders preventing us from offering certain products, or services, or requiring
a change in our business practices in costly ways, or requiring development of non-infringing or otherwise altered products or technologies. Any of
these consequences could harm our business.
We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business.
We are subject to scrutiny by various government agencies under U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including antitrust and competition
laws.  Some  jurisdictions  also  provide  private  rights  of  action  for  competitors  or  consumers  to  assert  claims  of  anti-competitive  conduct.  Other
companies and government agencies have in the past and may in the future allege that our actions violate the antitrust or competition laws of the
United  States,  individual  states,  the  European  Union  or  other  countries,  or  otherwise  constitute  unfair  competition.  An  increasing  number  of
governments are regulating competition law activities, including increased scrutiny in large markets such as China. Our business partnerships or
agreements  or  arrangements  with  customers  or  other  companies  could  give  rise  to  regulatory  action  or  antitrust  litigation.  Some  regulators,
particularly those outside of the United States, may perceive our business to be used so broadly that otherwise uncontroversial business practices
could be deemed anticompetitive. Certain competition authorities have conducted market studies of our industries. Such claims and investigations,
even if without foundation, may be very expensive to defend, involve negative publicity and substantial diversion of management time and effort and
could result in significant judgments against us or require us to change our business practices.
Fluctuations in interest rates, and changes in regulatory guidance related to such interest rates, could adversely impact our financial results.
Some of our borrowings bear interest at floating rates and we have entered into agreements intended to convert the interest rate on some of
our fixed rate debt instruments to floating rates. To the extent that prevailing rates increase, our interest expense under these debt instruments will
increase.
Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of
our fixed-rate investment securities may be adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates. In general, fixed-rate securities with longer maturities
are subject to greater interest-rate risk than those with shorter maturities. While floating rate securities generally are subject to less interest-rate risk
than fixed-rate securities, floating-rate securities may produce less income than expected if interest rates decrease and may also suffer a decline in
market  value  if interest  rates  increase.  Due in part  to  these  factors,  our investment  income  may  decline  or  we may  suffer  losses  in principal  if
securities are sold that have declined in market value due to changes in interest rates. In addition, relatively low interest rates limit our investment
income. Fluctuations in interest rates that increase the cost
17

of our current or future indebtedness, cause the market value of our assets to decline or reduce our investment income could adversely affect our
financial results.
Our tickets business is subject to regulatory, competitive and other risks that could harm this business.
Our tickets business, which includes StubHub, is subject to numerous risks, including:
•
Some  jurisdictions,  in  particular  jurisdictions  outside  the  United  States,  prohibit  the  resale  of  event  tickets  (anti-scalping  laws)  at  prices
above the face value of the tickets or at all, or highly regulate the resale of tickets, and new laws and regulations or changes to existing laws
and regulations imposing these or other restrictions could limit or inhibit our ability to operate, or our users’ ability to continue to use, our
tickets business.
•
Regulatory agencies or courts may claim or hold that we are responsible for ensuring that our users comply with these laws and regulations.
•
In many jurisdictions, our tickets business depends on commercial partnerships with event organizers or licensed ticket vendors, which we
must develop and maintain on acceptable terms for our tickets business to be successful.
•
Our tickets business is subject to seasonal fluctuations and the general economic and business conditions that impact the sporting events
and live entertainment industries.
•
A portion of the tickets inventory sold by sellers on the StubHub platform is processed by StubHub in digital form. Systems failures, security
breaches, theft or other disruptions that result in the loss of such sellers’ tickets inventory, could result in significant costs and a loss of
consumer confidence in our tickets business.
•
Lawsuits  alleging  a variety  of  causes  of actions  have in the  past,  and may  in the  future,  be filed  against  StubHub  and eBay  by venue
owners, competitors, ticket buyers, and unsuccessful ticket buyers. Such lawsuits could result in significant costs and require us to change
our business practices in ways that negatively affect our tickets business.
•
Our tickets business also faces significant competition from a number of sources, including ticketing service companies, event organizers,
ticket brokers, and online and offline ticket resellers. Some ticketing service companies, event organizers, and professional sports teams
have  begun  to  issue  event  tickets  through  various  forms  of  electronic  ticketing  systems  that  are  designed  to  restrict  or  prohibit  the
transferability (and by extension, the resale) of such event tickets either to favor their own resale affiliates or to discourage resale or restrict
resale  of  season  tickets  to  a preferred,  designated  website.  Ticketing  service  companies  have  also  begun  to  use  market-based  pricing
strategies or dynamic pricing to charge much higher prices, and impose additional restrictions on transferability, for premium tickets.
•
Some sports teams have threatened to revoke the privileges of season ticket owners if they resell their tickets through a platform that is not
affiliated with, or approved by, such sports teams.
•
To the extent that StubHub holds ticket inventory, we may be exposed to losses associated with such inventory.
The listing or sale by our users of items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners, including pirated or counterfeit
items, may harm our business.
The listing or sale by our users of unlawful, counterfeit or stolen goods or unlawful services, or sale of goods or services in an unlawful manner,
has resulted and may continue to result in allegations of civil or criminal liability for  unlawful activities  against us (including the employees  and
directors of our various entities) involving activities carried out by users through our services. In a number of circumstances, third parties, including
government regulators and law enforcement officials, have alleged that our services aid and abet violations of certain laws, including laws regarding
the sale of counterfeit  items,  laws restricting  or  prohibiting  the  transferability  (and  by extension,  the  resale)  of  digital goods (e.g.,  event  tickets,
books, music and software), the fencing of stolen goods, selective distribution channel laws, customs laws, distance selling laws, anti-scalping laws
with respect to the resale of tickets, and the sale of items outside of the United States that are regulated by U.S. export controls.
In addition, allegations of infringement of intellectual property rights, including but not limited to counterfeit items, have resulted in threatened
and actual litigation from time to time by rights owners, including the following luxury brand owners: Tiffany & Co. in the United States; Rolex S.A.
and Coty Prestige Lancaster Group GmbH in Germany; Louis Vuitton Malletier and Christian Dior Couture in France; and L’Oréal SA, Lancôme
Parfums et Beauté & Cie, and Laboratoire Garnier & Cie in several European countries.  Plaintiffs in these and similar suits seek, among other
remedies, injunctive relief and damages. Statutory damages for copyright or trademark violations could range up to $150,000 per copyright violation
and $2,000,000 per trademark violation in the United States, and may be even higher in other jurisdictions. In the past, we have paid substantial
amounts in connection with resolving certain trademark and
18

copyright suits. These and similar suits may also force us to modify our business practices in a manner that increases costs, lowers revenue, makes
our  websites  and  mobile  platforms  less  convenient  to  customers,  and  requires  us  to  spend  substantial  resources  to  take  additional  protective
measures  or  discontinue  certain  service  offerings  in  order  to  combat  these  practices.  In  addition,  we  have  received  significant  media  attention
relating to the listing or sale of illegal or counterfeit goods, which could damage our reputation, diminish the value of our brand names, and make
users reluctant to use our products and services.
We are subject to risks associated with information disseminated through our services.
Online  services  companies  may  be  subject  to  claims  relating  to  information  disseminated  through  their  services,  including  claims  alleging
defamation, libel, breach of contract, invasion of privacy, negligence, copyright or trademark infringement, among other things. The laws relating to
the liability of online services companies for information disseminated through their services are subject to frequent challenges both in the United
States and foreign jurisdictions. Any liabilities incurred as a result of these matters could require us to incur additional costs and harm our reputation
and our business.
Our potential liability to third parties for the user-provided content on our sites, particularly in jurisdictions outside the United States where laws
governing Internet transactions are unsettled, may increase. If we become liable for information provided by our users and carried on our service in
any jurisdiction in which we operate, we could be directly harmed and we may be forced to implement new measures to reduce our exposure to this
liability, including expending substantial resources or discontinuing certain service offerings, which could harm our business.
Changes to our programs to protect buyers and sellers could increase our costs and loss rate.
Our eBay Money Back Guarantee program represents the means by which we compensate users who believe that they have been defrauded,
have not received the item that they purchased or have received an item different from what was described. In addition, as we expand our payments
capabilities, we may be exposed to losses associated with compensating our sellers for fraudulent payments. We expect to continue to receive
communications  from  users  requesting  reimbursement  or  threatening  or commencing  legal action  against us if no reimbursement  is made. Our
liability for these sorts of claims is slowly beginning to be clarified in some jurisdictions and may be higher in some non-U.S. jurisdictions than it is in
the  United  States.  Litigation  involving  liability  for  any  such  third-party  actions  could  be  costly  and  time  consuming  for  us,  divert  management
attention, result in increased costs of doing business, lead to adverse judgments or settlements or otherwise harm our business. In addition, affected
users will likely complain to regulatory agencies that could take action against us, including imposing fines or seeking injunctions.
Development of our payments system requires ongoing investment, is subject to evolving laws, regulations, rules, and standards, and involves
risk, including risks related to our dependence on third-party providers.
We have invested and plan to continue to invest internal resources into our payments tools in order to maintain existing availability, expand into
additional markets and offer new payment methods and tools to our buyers and sellers. If we fail to invest adequate resources into payments on our
platform, or if our investment efforts are unsuccessful or unreliable, our payments services may not function properly or keep pace with competitive
offerings,  which  could  negatively  impact  their  usage  and  our  marketplaces.  Further,  our  ability  to  expand  our  payments  services  into  additional
countries is dependent upon the third-party providers we use to support this service. As we expand the availability of our payments services to
additional markets or offer new payment methods to our sellers and buyers in the future, we may become subject to additional regulations and
compliance requirements, and exposed to heightened fraud risk, which could lead to an increase in our operating expenses.
We rely on third-party service providers to perform services related to compliance, credit card processing, payment disbursements, currency
exchange, identity verification, sanctions screening, and fraud analysis and detection. As a result, we are subject to a number of risks related to our
dependence on third-party service providers. If any or some of these service providers fail to perform adequately or if any such service provider
were to terminate or modify its relationship with us unexpectedly, our sellers’ ability to use our platform to receive orders or payments could be
adversely affected, which would increase costs, drive sellers away from our marketplaces, result in potential legal liability, and harm our business. In
addition, we and our third-party service providers may experience service outages from time to time that could adversely impact payments made on
our  platform.  Additionally,  any  unexpected  termination  or  modification  of  those  third-party  services  could  lead  to  a  lapse  in  the  effectiveness  of
certain fraud prevention and detection tools.
19

Our third-party service providers may increase the fees they charge us in the future, which would increase our operating expenses. This could,
in turn, require us to increase the fees we charge to sellers and cause some sellers to reduce listings on our marketplaces or to leave our platform
altogether by closing their accounts.
Payments  are  governed  by  complex  and  continuously  evolving  laws  and  regulations  that  are  subject  to  change  and  vary  across  different
jurisdictions in the United States and globally. As a result, we are required to spend significant time and effort to determine whether various licensing
and registration laws relating to payments apply to us and to comply with applicable laws and licensing and registration regulations. In addition, there
can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or retain any necessary licenses or registrations. Any failure or claim of failure on the part of the
Company  or  its  third-party  service  providers  to  comply  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  payments  could  require  us  to  expend
significant  resources,  result  in  liabilities,  limit  or  preclude  our  ability  to  enter  certain  markets  and  harm  our  reputation.  In  addition,  changes  in
payment regulations, including changes to the credit or debit card interchange rates in the United States or other markets, could adversely affect
payments on our platform and make our payments systems less profitable.
Further, we are indirectly subject to payment card association operating rules and certification requirements pursuant to agreements with our
third-party payment processors. These rules and requirements, including the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard and rules governing
electronic funds transfers, are subject to change or reinterpretation, making it difficult for us to comply. Any failure to comply with these rules and
certification  requirements  could  impact  our  ability  to  meet  our  contractual  obligations  to  our  third-party  payment  processors  and  could  result  in
potential fines. In addition, changes in these rules and requirements, including any change in our designation by major payment card providers,
could require a change in our business operations and could result in limitations on or loss of our ability to accept payment cards, any of which could
negatively impact our business. Such changes could also increase our costs of compliance, which could lead to increased fees for us or our sellers
and adversely affect payments on our platform or usage of our payments services and marketplaces.
We may be unable to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights and face ongoing risks from patent litigation and allegations
by third parties that we are infringing their intellectual property rights.
We believe the protection of our intellectual property, including our trademarks, patents, copyrights, domain names, trade dress, and trade
secrets, is critical to our success. We seek to protect our intellectual property rights by relying on applicable laws and regulations in the United
States and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual restrictions to protect our proprietary rights
when offering or procuring products and services, including confidentiality and invention assignment agreements entered into with our employees
and contractors and confidentiality agreements with parties with whom we conduct business.
However, effective intellectual property protection may not be available in every country in which our products and services are made available,
and contractual arrangements and other steps we have taken to protect our intellectual property may not prevent third parties from infringing or
misappropriating  our  intellectual  property  or  deter  independent  development  of  equivalent  or  superior  intellectual  property  rights  by  others.
Trademark, copyright, patent, domain name, trade dress and trade secret protection is very expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We
must protect our intellectual property rights and other proprietary rights in an increasing number of jurisdictions, a process that is expensive and time
consuming and may not be successful in every jurisdiction. Also, we may not be able to discover or determine the extent of any unauthorized use of
our proprietary rights. We have licensed in the past, and expect to license in the future, certain of our proprietary rights, such as trademarks or
copyrighted material, to others. These licensees may take actions that diminish the value of our proprietary rights or harm our reputation. Any failure
to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights, or significant costs incurred in doing so, could materially harm our business.
20

Additionally, we have repeatedly been sued for allegedly infringing other parties’ patents. We are a defendant in a number of patent suits and
have been notified of several other potential patent disputes. We expect that we will increasingly be subject to patent infringement claims because,
among other reasons:
•
our products and services continue to expand in scope and complexity;
•
we continue to expand into new businesses, including through acquisitions and licenses; and
•
the universe of patent owners who may claim that we, any of the companies that we have acquired, or our customers infringe their
patents, and the aggregate number of patents controlled by such patent owners, continues to increase.
As the number of patent owners and products in the software industry increases and the functionality of these products further overlap, and as
we acquire technology through acquisitions or licenses, litigation may be necessary to determine the validity and scope of the intellectual property
rights  of  others  and  we  may  become  increasingly  subject  to  patent  suits  and  other  infringement  claims,  including  copyright,  and  trademark
infringement claims. Such claims may be brought directly against us and/or against our customers whom we may indemnify either because we are
contractually obligated to do so or we choose to do so as a business matter. We believe that an increasing number of these claims against us and
other technology companies have been, and continue to be, initiated by third parties whose sole or primary business is to assert such claims. In
addition, we have seen significant patent disputes between operating companies in some technology industries. Patent claims, whether meritorious
or not, are time-consuming and costly to defend and resolve, and could require us to make expensive changes in our methods of doing business,
enter into costly royalty or licensing agreements, make substantial payments to satisfy adverse judgments or settle claims or proceedings, or cease
conducting certain operations, which would harm our business
The ultimate outcome of any allegation or litigation is uncertain and, regardless of the outcome, any of the claims described above, with or
without  merit,  may  be  time-consuming,  result  in  costly  litigation,  divert  management’s  time  and  attention  from  our  business,  require  us  to  stop
selling, delay roll-out, or redesign our products, or require us to pay substantial amounts to satisfy judgments or settle claims or lawsuits or to pay
substantial  royalty  or  licensing  fees,  or  to  satisfy  indemnification  obligations  that  we  have  with  some  of  our  customers.  Our  failure  to  obtain
necessary license or other rights, or litigation or claims arising out of intellectual property matters, may harm our business.
Failure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our platforms would increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely
diminish merchant and consumer confidence in and use of our services.
We face risks with respect to fraudulent activities on our platforms and periodically receive complaints from buyers and sellers who may not
have received the goods that they had contracted to purchase or payment for the goods that a buyer had contracted to purchase. In some European
and Asian jurisdictions, buyers may also have the right to withdraw from a sale made by a professional seller within a specified time period. While
we can, in some cases, suspend the accounts of users who fail to fulfill their payment or delivery obligations to other users, we do not have the
ability to require users to make payment or deliver goods, or otherwise make users whole other than through our buyer protection program, which in
the United States we refer to as the eBay Money Back Guarantee, or as we roll out our new payments capabilities, by compensating our sellers for
fraudulent payments. Although we have implemented measures to detect and reduce the occurrence  of fraudulent activities,  combat bad buyer
experiences and increase buyer satisfaction, including evaluating sellers on the basis of their transaction history and restricting or suspending their
activity,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  these  measures  will  be  effective  in  combating  fraudulent  transactions  or  improving  overall  satisfaction
among sellers, buyers, and other participants. Additional measures to address fraud could negatively affect the attractiveness of our services to
buyers or sellers, resulting in a reduction in the ability to attract new users or retain current users, damage to our reputation, or a diminution in the
value of our brand names.
We have substantial indebtedness, and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, and we may not generate sufficient
cash flow from our business to service our indebtedness. Failure to comply with the terms of our indebtedness could result in the acceleration of our
indebtedness, which could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and liquidity.
We have a substantial amount of outstanding indebtedness and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, including under
our commercial paper program and revolving credit facility or through public or private offerings of debt securities. Our outstanding indebtedness
and any additional indebtedness we incur may have significant consequences, including, without limitation, any of the following:
21

    
•
requiring us to use a significant portion of our cash flow from operations and other available cash to service our indebtedness, thereby
reducing the amount of cash available for other purposes, including capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, and acquisitions;
•
our  indebtedness  and  leverage  may  increase  our  vulnerability  to  downturns  in  our  business,  to  competitive  pressures,  and  to  adverse
changes in general economic and industry conditions;
•
adverse changes in the ratings assigned to our debt securities by credit rating agencies will likely increase our borrowing costs;
•
our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, share repurchases, dividends or other general
corporate and other purposes may be limited; and
•
our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and our industry may be limited.
These risks increase as the level of our debt increases. Our ability to make payments of principal of and interest on our indebtedness depends
upon  our  future  performance,  which  will  be  subject  to  general  economic  conditions,  industry  cycles  and  financial,  business  and  other  factors
affecting our results of operations and financial condition, many of which are beyond our control. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow
from operations in the future to service our debt, we may be required to, among other things:
    
•
incur the tax cost of repatriating funds to the United States;
•
seek additional financing in the debt or equity markets;
•
refinance or restructure all or a portion of our indebtedness;
•
sell selected assets; or
•
reduce or delay planned capital or operating expenditures.
Such measures might not be sufficient to enable us to service our debt. In addition, any such financing, refinancing or sale of assets might not
be available on economically favorable terms or at all.
Our revolving credit facility and the indenture pursuant to which certain of our outstanding debt securities were issued contain, and any debt
instruments we enter into in the future may contain, financial and other covenants that restrict or could restrict, among other things, our business and
operations. If we fail to pay amounts due under, or breach any of the covenants in, a debt instrument, then the lenders would typically have the right
to demand immediate repayment of all borrowings thereunder (subject in certain cases to grace or cure period). Moreover, any such acceleration
and required repayment of or default in respect of any of our indebtedness could, in turn, constitute an event of default under other debt instruments,
thereby resulting in the acceleration and required repayment of that other indebtedness. Any of these events could materially adversely affect our
liquidity and financial condition.
A downgrade in our credit ratings could materially adversely affect our business.
The credit ratings assigned to our debt securities could change based upon, among other things, our results of operations, financial condition
or dispositions and acquisitions. These ratings are subject to ongoing evaluation by credit rating agencies, and there can be no assurance that such
ratings will not be lowered, suspended or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency or placed on a so-called “watch list” for a possible downgrade or
assigned a negative ratings outlook if, in any rating agency’s judgment, circumstances so warrant. Actual or anticipated changes or downgrades in
our credit ratings, including any announcement that our ratings are under review for a downgrade or have been assigned a negative outlook, would
likely increase our borrowing costs, which could in turn have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows
and could harm our business.
Our business may be subject to sales and other taxes.
The application of indirect taxes such as sales and use tax, value-added tax (“VAT”), goods and services tax (including the “digital services
tax”),  business  tax  and  gross  receipt  tax  to  ecommerce  businesses  is  a  complex  and  evolving  issue.  Many  of  the  fundamental  statutes  and
regulations that impose these taxes were established before the adoption and growth of the Internet and ecommerce. In many cases, it is not clear
how existing statutes apply to ecommerce services. In addition, many state and foreign governments are looking for ways to increase revenues,
which has resulted in legislative action,  including new taxes  on services  and gross  revenues and through  other indirect  taxes. There are many
transactions that occur during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
22

From time to time, some taxing authorities in the United States have notified us that they believe we owe them certain taxes imposed on our
services. These notifications have not resulted in any significant tax liabilities to date, but there is a risk that some jurisdiction may be successful in
the future, which would harm our business.
Similar issues exist outside of the United States, where the application of VAT or other indirect taxes on ecommerce providers is complex and
evolving. While we attempt to comply in those jurisdictions where it is clear that a tax is due, some of our subsidiaries have, from time to time,
received claims relating to the applicability of indirect taxes to our fees. Additionally, we pay input VAT on applicable taxable purchases within the
various countries in which we operate. In most cases, we are entitled to reclaim this input VAT from the various countries. However, because of our
unique business model, the application of the laws and rules that allow such reclamation is sometimes uncertain. A successful assertion by one or
more countries that we are not entitled to reclaim VAT could harm our business.
In certain jurisdictions, we collect and remit indirect taxes on our fees and pay taxes on our purchases of goods and services. However, tax
authorities may raise questions about our calculation, reporting and collection of these taxes and may ask us to remit additional taxes. Should any
new taxes become applicable to our services or if the taxes we pay are found to be deficient, our business could be harmed.
We may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities.
The determination of our worldwide provision for income taxes and other tax liabilities requires estimation and significant judgment, and there
are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Like many other multinational corporations, we are subject
to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign jurisdictions and have structured our operations to reduce our effective tax rate. Our determination of our tax
liability  is  always  subject  to  audit  and  review  by  applicable  domestic  and  foreign  tax  authorities,  and  we  are  currently  undergoing  a  number  of
investigations, audits and reviews by taxing authorities throughout the world, including with respect to our business structure. Any adverse outcome
of any such audit or review could harm our business, and the ultimate tax outcome may differ from the amounts recorded in our financial statements
and may materially affect our financial results in the period or periods for which such determination is made. While we have established reserves
based on assumptions and estimates that we believe are reasonable to cover such eventualities, these reserves may prove to be insufficient.
In addition, our future income taxes could be adversely affected by a shift in our jurisdictional earning mix, by changes in the valuation of our
deferred tax assets and liabilities, as a result of gains on our foreign exchange risk management program, or changes in tax laws, regulations, or
accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items.
In light of continuing fiscal challenges in certain U.S. states and in many countries in Europe, various levels of government are increasingly
focused  on  tax  reform  and  other  legislative  action  to  increase  tax  revenue,  including  corporate  income  taxes.  A  number  of  U.S.  states  have
attempted to increase corporate tax revenues by taking an expansive view of corporate presence to attempt to impose corporate income taxes and
other  direct  business  taxes  on companies  that  have  no  physical  presence  in  their  state,  and  taxing  authorities  in  foreign  jurisdictions  may  take
similar actions. Many U.S. states are also altering their apportionment formulas to increase the amount of taxable income or loss attributable to their
state from certain out-of-state businesses. Similarly, in Europe, and elsewhere in the world, there are various tax reform efforts underway designed
to ensure that corporate entities are taxed on a larger percentage of their earnings. Companies that operate over the Internet, such as eBay, are a
target of some of these efforts. If more taxing authorities are successful in applying direct taxes to Internet companies that do not have a physical
presence in their respective jurisdictions, this could increase our effective tax rate.
Our business and its users are subject to Internet sales tax and sales reporting and record-keeping obligations.
The application of sales tax and other indirect taxes on cross border sales by remote sellers is continuing to change and evolve. On June 21,
2018, the U.S. Supreme Court decided South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc. et al, a case challenging the current law under which online retailers are not
required to collect sales and use tax unless they have a physical presence in the buyer’s state. This decision allows states to adopt new or enforce
existing  laws  requiring  sellers  to  collect  and  remit  sales  and  use  tax,  even  in  states  in  which  the  seller  has  no  presence.  The  adoption  or
enforcement of any such legislation could result in a sales and use tax collection responsibility for certain of our sellers. This collection responsibility
and the additional costs associated with complex sales and use tax collection, remittance and audit requirements could create additional burdens for
buyers and sellers on our websites and mobile platforms and could harm our business. Moreover, the application of such taxes on our commerce
platforms could cause a marketplace to be less attractive to current and prospective buyers, which could adversely impact our business, financial
23

performance, and growth. The majority of U.S. states have enacted laws or have pending legislation that require marketplace facilitators to collect
and remit sales tax for some or all sellers using these marketplaces.
Similar laws imposing tax collection responsibility on foreign sellers are being considered in other countries as well. We are now jointly liable for
U.K. VAT and German VAT for certain sellers who fail to fulfill their VAT obligations unless we suspend their eBay activity until the seller resolves
the matter with the corresponding VAT authority. Other jurisdictions are considering similar legislation.
Multiple jurisdictions have enacted laws which require marketplaces to report user activity or collect and remit taxes on certain items sold on
the marketplace. For example, we are collecting Australian GST on certain imports into Australia and remitting the GST to the Australian Tax Office.
The European Union has also adopted a VAT reform package which starting in 2021 requires marketplaces such as eBay to collect and remit VAT
on most imports from outside the European Union.
One  or  more  states,  the  U.S.  federal  government  or  foreign  countries  may  seek  to  impose  reporting  or  record-keeping  obligations  on
companies that engage in or facilitate ecommerce. Such an obligation could be imposed by legislation intended to improve tax compliance or if one
of our companies was ever deemed to be the legal agent of the users of our services by a jurisdiction in which it operates. Certain of our companies
are required to report to the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) and most states on customers subject to U.S. income tax if they reach certain
payment thresholds. As a result, we are required to request tax identification numbers from certain payees, track payments by tax identification
number and, under certain conditions, withhold a portion of payments and forward such withholding to the IRS. These obligations can increase
operational costs and change our user experience. Any failure by us to meet these requirements could result in substantial monetary penalties and
other sanctions and could harm our business. Imposition of an information reporting requirement could decrease seller or buyer activity on our sites
and would harm our business.
We have periodically received requests from tax authorities for information regarding the transactions of large classes of sellers on our sites,
and in some cases we have been legally obligated to provide this data. The imposition of any requirements on us to disclose transaction records for
all or a class of sellers to tax or other regulatory authorities or to file tax forms on behalf of any sellers, especially requirements that are imposed on
us but not on alternative means of ecommerce, and any use of those records to investigate, collect taxes from or prosecute sellers or buyers, could
decrease activity on our sites and harm our business.
Our business is subject to online security risks, including security breaches and cyberattacks.
Our businesses involve the storage and transmission of users’ personal financial information. In addition, a significant number of our users
authorize us to bill their payment card accounts directly for all transaction and other fees charged by us or, in certain cases, third-party service
providers utilized in our payment services. An increasing number of websites, including those owned by several other large Internet and offline
companies, have disclosed breaches of their security, some of which have involved sophisticated and highly targeted attacks on portions of their
websites  or  infrastructure.  The  techniques  used  to  obtain  unauthorized  access,  disable,  or  degrade  service,  or  sabotage  systems,  change
frequently,  may be difficult  to detect  for a long time,  and often  are not recognized  until launched against a target.  Certain  efforts  may be state
sponsored and supported by significant financial and technological resources and therefore may be even more difficult to detect. As a result, we
may be unable to anticipate these techniques or to implement adequate preventative measures. Unauthorized parties may also attempt to gain
access to our systems or facilities through various means, including hacking into our systems or facilities, fraud, trickery or other means of deceiving
our  employees,  contractors  and  temporary  staff.  A  party  that  is  able  to  circumvent  our  security  measures,  or  those  of  our  third-party  service
providers, could misappropriate our or our users’ personal information, cause interruption or degradations in our operations, damage our computers
or those of our users, or otherwise damage our reputation. In addition, our users have been and likely will continue to be targeted by parties using
fraudulent  “spoof”  and  “phishing”  emails  to  misappropriate  user  names,  passwords,  payment  card  numbers,  or  other  personal  information  or  to
introduce viruses or other malware through “trojan horse” programs to our users’ computers. Our information technology and infrastructure may be
vulnerable to cyberattacks or security incidents and third parties may be able to access our users’ proprietary information and payment card data
that are stored on or accessible through our systems. Any security breach at a company providing services to us or our users could have similar
effects.
In  May  2014,  we  publicly  announced  that  criminals  were  able  to  penetrate  and  steal  certain  data,  including  usernames,  encrypted  user
passwords and other non-financial user data. Upon making this announcement, we required
24

all buyers and sellers on our platform to reset their passwords in order to log into their account. The breach and subsequent password reset have
negatively impacted the business. In July 2014, a putative class action lawsuit was filed against us for alleged violations and harm resulting from the
breach. The lawsuit was dismissed with leave to amend. In addition, we have received requests for information and became subject to investigations
regarding this incident from numerous regulatory and other government agencies across the world.
We may also need to expend significant additional resources to protect against security breaches or to redress problems caused by breaches.
These issues are likely to become more difficult and costly as we expand the number of markets where we operate. Additionally, our insurance
policies carry low coverage limits, which may not be adequate to reimburse us for losses caused by security breaches and we may not be able to
fully collect, if at all, under these insurance policies.
Systems  failures  or  cyberattacks  and  resulting  interruptions  in  the  availability  of  or  degradation  in  the  performance  of  our  websites,
applications, products or services could harm our business.
Our systems may experience service interruptions or degradation due to of hardware and software defects or malfunctions, computer denial-of-
service  and  other  cyberattacks,  human  error,  earthquakes,  hurricanes,  floods,  fires,  natural  disasters,  power  losses,  disruptions  in
telecommunications services, fraud, military or political conflicts, terrorist attacks, computer viruses, or other events. Our systems are also subject to
break-ins,  sabotage  and  intentional  acts  of  vandalism.  Some  of  our  systems  are  not  fully  redundant  and  our  disaster  recovery  planning  is  not
sufficient for all eventualities.
We have experienced and will likely continue to experience system failures, denial-of-service attacks and other events or conditions from time
to time that interrupt the availability or reduce the speed or functionality of our websites and mobile applications, including our payments services.
These events have resulted and likely will result in loss of revenue. A prolonged interruption in the availability or reduction in the speed or other
functionality of our websites and mobile applications or payments services could materially harm our business. Frequent or persistent interruptions
in our services could cause current or potential users to believe that our systems are unreliable, leading them to switch to our competitors or to avoid
our sites, and could permanently harm our reputation and brands. Moreover, to the extent that any system failure or similar event results in damages
to  our  customers  or  their  businesses,  these  customers  could  seek  significant  compensation  from  us  for  their  losses  and  those  claims,  even  if
unsuccessful, would likely be time-consuming and costly for us to address. We also rely on facilities, components and services supplied by third
parties and our business may be materially adversely affected to the extent these components or services do not meet our expectations or these
third parties cease to provide the services or facilities. In particular, a decision by any of our third-party hosting providers to close a facility that we
use could cause system interruptions and delays, result in loss of critical data and cause lengthy interruptions in our services. We do not carry
business interruption insurance sufficient to compensate us for losses that may result from interruptions in our service as a result of systems failures
and similar events.
The closing of the proposed sale of StubHub is subject to various risks and uncertainties, may not be completed in accordance with expected
plans or on the currently contemplated timeline, or at all, and the pending sale may be disruptive to StubHub.
As previously announced, on November 24, 2019, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of viagogo to sell StubHub.
The sale is expected to close by the end of the first quarter of 2020. The completion, on our expected timeline, of the proposed sale of StubHub
is subject to closing conditions and viagogo’s ability to obtain debt and equity financing on a timely basis. If the conditions to the closing of the sale
of StubHub are neither satisfied nor, where permissible, waived on a timely basis or at all, we may be unable to complete the sale of StubHub or
such  completion  may  be  delayed  beyond  our  expected  timeline. We  are  also  subject  to  risks  regarding  the  failure  of  the  buyer  to  obtain  the
necessary financing to complete the transactions contemplated by the stock purchase agreement and risks related to the equity and debt financing
and related guarantee arrangements entered in connection with the stock purchase agreement. 
Whether  or  not  the  proposed  sale  of  StubHub  is  completed,  the  announcement  and  pendency  of  the  StubHub  sale  may  be  disruptive  to
StubHub and may adversely affect StubHub’s relationships with current and prospective employees and business partners and buyers and sellers
on its platform. Uncertainties related to the pending sale of
25

StubHub may impair StubHub’s ability to attract, retain and motivate key personnel and could divert the attention of StubHub’s management and
other employees from its day-to-day business and operations in preparation for and during the sale. If we are unable to effectively manage these
risks, StubHub’s business, results of operations, financial condition and prospects would be adversely affected.
If the proposed sale of StubHub is delayed or not completed for any reason, including due to the inability to satisfy the closing conditions or due
to the buyer’s inability to obtain the necessary financing or industry or economic conditions outside of our control, investor confidence could decline
and  we  could  face  negative  publicity  and  possible  litigation.  In  addition,  in  the  event  of  a  failed  transaction,  we  will  have  expended  significant
management resources in an effort to complete the sale and, although in some circumstances the buyer may be obligated to pay us a termination
fee of $200 million, will have incurred significant transaction costs. Accordingly, if the proposed sale of StubHub is not completed on the terms set
forth in the stock purchase agreement or at all, our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows and stock price may be adversely
affected.
Acquisitions, dispositions, joint ventures, strategic partnerships and strategic investments could result in operating difficulties and could harm
our business or impact our financial results.
We have acquired a significant number of businesses of varying size and scope, technologies, services, and products, disposed of significant
businesses (including PayPal and our Enterprise business in 2015), and in November 2019 we have entered into an agreement to sell our StubHub
business to viagogo. We expect to continue to evaluate and consider a wide array of potential strategic transactions as part of our overall business
strategy, including business combinations, acquisitions, and dispositions of businesses, technologies, services, products, and other assets, as well
as strategic investments and joint ventures.
These transactions may involve significant challenges and risks, including:
•
the  potential  loss  of  key  customers,  merchants,  vendors  and  other  key  business  partners  of  the  companies  we  acquire,  or  dispose  of,
following and continuing after announcement of our transaction plans;
•
declining employee morale and retention issues affecting employees of companies that we acquire or dispose of, which may result from
changes in compensation, or changes in management, reporting relationships, future prospects or the direction of the acquired or disposed
business;
•
difficulty making new and strategic hires of new employees;
•
diversion of management time and a shift of focus from operating the businesses to the transaction,  and in the case of an acquisition,
integration and administration;
•
the need to provide transition services to a disposed of company, which may result in the diversion of resources and focus;
•
the need to integrate the operations, systems (including accounting, management, information, human resource and other administrative
systems), technologies, products and personnel of each acquired company, which is an inherently risky and potentially lengthy and costly
process;
•
the  inefficiencies  and  lack  of  control  that  may  result  if  such  integration  is  delayed  or  not  implemented,  and  unforeseen  difficulties  and
expenditures that may arise as a result;
•
the need to implement or improve controls,  procedures  and policies appropriate for a larger public company at companies that prior to
acquisition may have lacked such controls, procedures and policies or whose controls, procedures and policies did not meet applicable
legal and other standards;
•
risks associated with our expansion into new international markets;
•
derivative lawsuits resulting from the acquisition or disposition;
•
liability for activities of the acquired or disposed of company before the transaction, including intellectual property and other litigation claims
or disputes, violations of laws, rules and regulations, commercial disputes, tax liabilities and other known and unknown liabilities and, in the
case of dispositions, liabilities to the acquirors of those businesses under contractual provisions such as representations, warranties and
indemnities;
•
the potential loss of key employees following the transaction;
•
the acquisition of new customer and employee personal information by us or a third-party acquiring assets or businesses from us, which in
and of itself may require regulatory approval and or additional controls, policies and procedures and subject us to additional exposure; and
•
our dependence on the acquired business’ accounting, financial reporting, operating metrics and similar systems, controls and processes
and the risk that errors or irregularities in those systems, controls and processes will lead to errors in our consolidated financial statements
or make it more difficult to manage the acquired business.
26

At any given time, we may be engaged in discussions or negotiations with respect to one or more of these types of transactions and any of
these transactions could be material to our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, it may take us longer than expected to fully
realize the anticipated benefits of these transactions, and those benefits may ultimately be smaller than anticipated or may not be realized at all,
which could adversely  affect  our business and operating  results.  Any acquisitions or dispositions  may also require us to issue additional equity
securities, spend our cash, or incur debt (and increased interest expense), liabilities, and amortization expenses related to intangible assets or write-
offs of goodwill, which could adversely affect our results of operations and dilute the economic and voting rights of our stockholders.
    
We have made certain investments, including through joint ventures, in which we have a minority equity interest and/or lack management and
operational control. The controlling joint venture partner in a joint venture may have business interests, strategies, or goals that are inconsistent with
ours, and business decisions or other actions or omissions of the controlling joint venture partner or the joint venture company may result in harm to
our reputation or adversely affect the value of our investment in the joint venture. Our strategic investments may also expose us to additional risks.
Any circumstances, which may be out of our control, that adversely affect the value of our investments, or cost resulting from regulatory action or
lawsuits in connection with our investments, could harm our business or negatively impact our financial results.
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that entitles us to acquire a fixed number of
shares of the Adyen’s common stock subject to certain milestones being met. This warrant is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC
Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Changes in Adyen’s common stock price and equity volatility may have a significant impact on the value of this
warrant. We report this warrant on a quarterly basis at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets, and changes in the fair value of this warrant are
recognized in our consolidated statement of income. Fluctuations in Adyen’s common stock or other changes in assumptions could result in material
changes in the fair value that we report in our consolidated balance sheets and our consolidated statement of income, which could have a material
impact on our financial results.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties related to the strategic review of our asset portfolio, as well as the execution of our plan for operating
efficiency.
In March 2019, we announced that we initiated, with the assistance of external financial advisors, a strategic review of our asset portfolio,
including but not limited to StubHub and eBay Classifieds Group. In November 2019, as an outcome of our strategic review, we entered into an
agreement to sell our StubHub business to viagogo. Our strategic review efforts continue, however, there can be no assurance that the strategic
review will result in any further sale, spin-off or other business combination involving our assets. We will incur expenses in connection with the
review and our future results may be affected by the pursuit or consummation of any specific transaction or other strategic alternative resulting from
the strategic review. While this review is ongoing, we are exposed to certain risks and uncertainties, including retaining and attracting employees
during  the  review  process;  the  diversion  of  management’s  time  to  the  review;  and  exposure  to  potential  litigation  in  connection  with  the  review
process or any specific transaction or other strategic alternative resulting therefrom, all of which could disrupt and negatively affect our business.
Speculation  regarding  any  developments  related  to  the  review  of  strategic  alternatives  and  perceived  uncertainties  related  to  the  future  of  the
Company could cause our stock price to fluctuate significantly. There is no finite timetable for completion of the strategic review, and we can provide
no  assurance  that  any  transaction  or  other  strategic  alternative  we  pursue  will  have  a  positive  impact  on  our  results  of  operations  or  financial
condition.
In addition, we announced that our operating review has resulted in a three-year plan for operating efficiency, which is expected to enhance our
operating margins and create capacity for reinvestment initiatives. The execution of this plan is subject to various risks and uncertainties, and there
can be no assurance that we will be able to achieve the anticipated results of this plan.
Our success largely depends on key personnel. Because competition for our key employees is intense, we may not be able to attract, retain,
and develop the highly skilled employees we need to support our business. The loss of senior management or other key personnel could harm our
business.
Our future performance depends substantially on the continued services of our senior management and other key personnel, including key
engineering and product development personnel, and our ability to attract, retain, and motivate key personnel. Competition for key personnel is
intense, especially in the Silicon Valley where our corporate
27

headquarters  are  located,  and  we  may  be  unable  to  successfully  attract,  integrate  or  retain  sufficiently  qualified  key  personnel.  In  making
employment decisions, particularly in the Internet and high-technology industries, job candidates often consider the value of the equity awards they
would  receive  in  connection  with  their  employment  and fluctuations  in our  stock  price  may  make  it  more  difficult  to  attract,  retain  and  motivate
employees. In addition, we do not have long-term employment agreements with any of our key personnel and do not maintain any “key person” life
insurance policies. The loss of the services of any of our senior management or other key personnel, or our inability to attract highly qualified senior
management and other key personnel, could harm our business.
On September 25, 2019, we announced the appointment of an interim Chief Executive Officer. Our Board of Directors is actively undertaking a
search for our next Chief Executive Officer. This search and any eventual transition to a Chief Executive Officer may result in disruptions to our
business and uncertainty among investors, employees and others concerning our future direction and performance. Any such disruptions and
uncertainty, as well as a delay or failure in successfully identifying, attracting or retaining a permanent Chief Executive Officer, could have an
adverse effect on our business and financial results.
Problems with or price increases by third parties who provide services to us or to our sellers could harm our business.
A  number  of  third  parties  provide  services  to  us  or  to  our  sellers.  Such  services  include  seller  tools  that  automate  and  manage  listings,
merchant  tools  that  manage  listings  and interface  with  inventory  management  software,  storefronts  that  help  our  sellers  list  items  and shipping
providers  that  deliver  goods  sold  on  our  platform,  among  others.  Financial  or  regulatory  issues,  labor  issues  (e.g.,  strikes,  lockouts,  or  work
stoppages), or other problems that prevent these companies from providing services to us or our sellers could harm our business.
Price increases by, or service terminations, disruptions or interruptions at, companies that provide services to us and our sellers and clients
could also reduce the number of listings on our platforms or make it more difficult for our sellers to complete transactions, thereby harming our
business. Some third parties who provide services to us or our sellers may have or gain market power and be able to increase their prices to us
without competitive constraint. While we continue to work with global carriers to offer our sellers a variety of shipping options and to enhance their
shipping experience, postal rate increases may reduce the competitiveness of certain sellers’ offerings, and postal service changes could require
certain sellers to utilize alternatives which could be more expensive or inconvenient, which could in turn decrease the number of transactions on our
sites, thereby harming our business.
We have outsourced certain functions to third-party providers, including some customer support and product development functions, which are
critical  to  our  operations.  If  our  service  providers  do  not  perform  satisfactorily,  our  operations  could  be  disrupted,  which  could  result  in  user
dissatisfaction and could harm our business.
There can be no assurance that third parties who provide services directly to us or our sellers will continue to do so on acceptable terms, or at
all. If any third parties were to stop providing services to us or our sellers on acceptable terms, including as a result of bankruptcy, we may be
unable to procure alternatives from other third parties in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at all.
Our developer platforms, which are open to merchants and third-party developers, subject us to additional risks.
We provide third-party developers with access to application programming interfaces, software development kits and other tools designed to
allow them to produce applications for use, with a particular focus on mobile applications. There can be no assurance that merchants or third-party
developers will develop and maintain applications and services on our open platforms on a timely basis or at all, and a number of factors could
cause  such  third-party  developers  to  curtail  or  stop  development  for  our  platforms.  In  addition,  our  business  is  subject  to  many  regulatory
restrictions. It is possible that merchants and third-party developers who utilize our development platforms or tools could violate these regulatory
restrictions and we may be held responsible for such violations, which could harm our business.
We cannot provide assurance that we will continue to pay dividends on our common stock.
 
In January 2019, we initiated a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock. The timing, declaration, amount and payment of any future
dividends fall within the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend on many factors, including our available cash, working capital, financial
condition, results of operations, capital requirements, covenants in our debt instruments, applicable law and other considerations that our Board of
Directors considers relevant. A
28

reduction  in  the  amount  of  cash  dividends  on  our  common  stock,  the  suspension  of  those  dividends  or  a  failure  to  meet  market  expectations
regarding  potential  dividend  increases  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  market  price  of  our  common  stock.  If  we  do  not  pay  cash
dividends on our common stock in the future, realization of a gain on an investment in our common stock will depend entirely on the appreciation of
the price of our common stock, which may not occur.
 
We could incur significant liability if the Distribution is determined to be a taxable transaction.
We have received an opinion from outside tax counsel to the effect that our distribution of 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal to
our stockholders on July 17, 2015 (the “Distribution”) qualifies as a transaction that is described in Sections 355 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal
Revenue Code. The opinion relies on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from PayPal and us regarding the past and
future conduct of the companies’ respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are
incorrect or not satisfied, our stockholders and we may not be able to rely on the opinion of tax counsel and could be subject to significant tax
liabilities.  Notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  tax  counsel  we  have  received,  the  IRS  could  determine  on  audit  that  the  Distribution  is  taxable  if  it
determines that any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are not correct or have been violated or if it disagrees with the
conclusions in the opinion. If the Distribution is determined to be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes, our stockholders that are subject to
U.S. federal income tax and we could incur significant U.S. federal income tax liabilities.
We may be exposed to claims and liabilities as a result of the Distribution.
We  entered  into  a  separation  and  distribution  agreement  and  various  other  agreements  with  PayPal  to  govern  the  Distribution  and  the
relationship of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us
and PayPal. The indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us. In addition, our indemnity
obligations to PayPal may be significant and these risks could negatively affect our results of operations and financial condition.
ITEM 1B: UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not applicable.
29

ITEM 2: PROPERTIES    
We  own  and  lease  various  properties  in  the  U.S.  and  31  other  countries  around  the  world.  We  use  the  properties  for  executive  and
administrative offices, data centers, product development offices, fulfillment centers and customer service offices. Our headquarters are located in
San Jose, California and occupies approximately 0.5 million square feet. Our owned data centers are solely located in Utah. As of December 31,
2019, our owned and leased properties provided us with aggregate square footage as follows (in millions):
United States
Other Countries
Total
Owned facilities
1.3
—
1.3
Leased facilities
0.8
3.9
4.7
Total facilities
2.1
3.9
6.0
From time to time we consider various alternatives related to our long-term facilities needs. While we believe that our existing facilities, which
are used by all of our reportable segments, are adequate to meet our immediate needs, it may become necessary to develop and improve land that
we own or lease or acquire additional or alternative space to accommodate any future growth.
30

ITEM 3: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS    
Overview
We are involved in legal and regulatory proceedings on an ongoing basis. Many of these proceedings are in early stages and may seek an
indeterminate amount of damages. If we believe that a loss arising from such matters is probable and can be reasonably estimated, we accrue the
estimated liability in our financial statements. If only a range of estimated losses can be determined, we accrue an amount within the range that, in
our judgment, reflects the most likely outcome; if none of the estimates within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the
low  end  of  the  range.  For  those  proceedings  in  which  an  unfavorable  outcome  is  reasonably  possible  but  not  probable,  we  have  disclosed  an
estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses or we have concluded that an estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses
arising directly from the proceeding (i.e., monetary damages or amounts paid in judgment or settlement) is not material. If we cannot estimate the
probable or reasonably possible loss or range of losses arising from a proceeding, we have disclosed that fact. In assessing the materiality of a
proceeding, we evaluate, among other factors, the amount of monetary damages claimed, as well as the potential impact of non-monetary remedies
sought by plaintiffs (e.g., injunctive relief) that may require us to change our business practices in a manner that could have a material adverse
impact on our business. With respect to the matters disclosed in this Item 3, we are unable to estimate the possible loss or range of losses that
could potentially result from the application of such non-monetary remedies.
Amounts  accrued  for  legal  and  regulatory  proceedings  for  which  we  believe  a  loss  is  probable  were  not  material  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2019. Except as otherwise noted for the proceedings described in this Item 3, we have concluded, based on currently  available
information,  that  reasonably  possible  losses  arising  directly  from  the  proceedings  (i.e.,  monetary  damages  or  amounts  paid  in  judgment  or
settlement) in excess of our recorded accruals are also not material. However, legal and regulatory proceedings are inherently unpredictable and
subject to significant uncertainties. If one or more matters were resolved against us in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s
expectations,  the  impact  on  our  operating  results  or  financial  condition  for  that  reporting  period  could  be  material.  Legal  fees  are  expensed  as
incurred.
General Matters
Third parties have from time to time claimed, and others may claim in the future, that we have infringed their intellectual property rights. We
are subject to patent disputes, and expect that we could be subject to additional patent infringement claims involving various aspects of our business
as our products  and services continue to expand in scope and complexity.  Such claims may be brought  directly or indirectly  against us and/or
against our customers (who may be entitled to contractual indemnification under their contracts with us), and we are subject to increased exposure
to such claims as a result of our acquisitions and divestitures and in cases where we are entering new lines of business. We have in the past been
forced to litigate such claims. We may also become more vulnerable to third-party claims as laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, the
Lanham Act and the Communications Decency Act are interpreted by the courts, and as we expand the scope of our business (both in terms of the
range of products and services that we offer and our geographical operations) and become subject to laws in jurisdictions where the underlying laws
with respect to the potential liability of online intermediaries like ourselves are either unclear or less favorable. We believe that additional lawsuits
alleging that we have violated patent, copyright or trademark laws will be filed against us. Intellectual property claims, whether meritorious or not, are
time consuming and costly to defend and resolve, could require expensive changes in our methods of doing business or could require us to enter
into costly royalty or licensing agreements on unfavorable terms.
From time to time, we are involved in other disputes or regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business, including suits by our
users (individually or as class actions) alleging, among other things, improper disclosure of our prices, rules or policies, that our practices, prices,
rules, policies or customer/user agreements violate applicable law or that we have acted unfairly and/or not acted in conformity with such practices,
prices,  rules,  policies  or  agreements.  Further,  the  number  and  significance  of  these  disputes  and  inquiries  are  increasing  as  the  political  and
regulatory landscape changes and, as we have grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope (both in terms of the range of products and
services  that  we  offer  and  our  geographical  operations)  and  our  products  and  services  have  increased  in  complexity.  Any  claims  or  regulatory
actions against us, whether meritorious or not, could be time consuming, result in costly litigation, damage awards (including statutory damages for
certain  causes  of  action  in  certain  jurisdictions),  injunctive  relief  or  increased  costs  of  doing  business  through  adverse  judgment  or  settlement,
require us to change our business practices in expensive ways, require significant amounts of management time, result in the diversion of significant
operational resources or otherwise harm our business.
31

Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us and PayPal,
which may be significant. In addition, the indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us and our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application-programming-interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision.
To date, losses recorded in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant,
either individually or collectively.
ITEM 4: MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
32

PART II
ITEM 5: MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES        
Common Stock
Our  common  stock  has  been  traded  on  The  Nasdaq  Global  Select  Market  under  the  symbol  “EBAY”  since  September  24,  1998.  As  of
January 27, 2020, there were approximately 3,524 holders of record of our common stock, although we believe that there are a significantly larger
number of beneficial owners of our common stock.
Dividend Policy
During 2019, the company paid a total of $473 million in cash dividends. In January 2020, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.16 per
share of common stock to be paid on March 20, 2020 to stockholders of record as of March 2, 2020. The timing, declaration, amount and payment
of any future cash dividends are at the discretion of the Board of Directors and will depend on many factors, including our available cash, working
capital,  financial  condition,  results  of  operations,  capital  requirements,  covenants  in  our  credit  agreement,  applicable  law  and  other  business
considerations that our Board of Directors considers relevant. See “We cannot provide assurance that we will continue to pay dividends on our
common stock” under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Performance Measurement Comparison
The graph below shows the cumulative total stockholder return of an investment of $100 (and the reinvestment of any dividends thereafter) on
December 31, 2014 (the last trading day for the year ended December 31, 2014) in (i) our common stock, (ii) the Nasdaq Composite Index, (iii) the
S&P 500 Index and (iv)  the S&P 500 Information  Technology Index.  For the purpose of this graph,  the distribution  of 100% of the outstanding
common stock of PayPal Holdings, Inc. (“PayPal”) to our stockholders, pursuant to which PayPal became an independent company, is treated as a
non-taxable  cash  dividend  of  $41.46,  an  amount  equal  to  the  opening  price  of  PayPal  common  stock  on  July  20,  2015  which  was  deemed
reinvested in eBay common stock at the opening price on July 20, 2015.
 
Our stock price performance shown in the graph below is not indicative of future stock price performance. The graph and related information
shall not be deemed “soliciting material” or be deemed to be “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be incorporated by reference into any
past or future filing with the SEC, except to the extent that such filing specifically states that such graph and related information are incorporated by
reference into such filing.
33

Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Stock repurchase activity during the three months ended December 31, 2019 was as follows:
Period Ended
Total Number of 
Shares 
Purchased
Average Price Paid 
per Share (2)
Total Number of 
Shares Purchased 
as Part of Publicly 
Announced 
Programs
Maximum Dollar 
Value that May Yet 
be Purchased Under 
the Programs (1)
October 31, 2019
9,212,301
$
37.77
9,212,301
$
2,803,012,054
November 30, 2019
8,942,446
$
35.29
8,942,446
$
2,487,397,753
December 31, 2019
9,475,674
$
35.50
9,475,674
$
2,150,987,394
27,630,421
27,630,421
(1)
In January 2018 our Board authorized a $6.0 billion stock repurchase program and in January 2019 our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase
program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and, subject to market conditions
and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding share count. Any share repurchases under our
stock  repurchase  programs may be  made  through  open  market  transactions,  block  trades,  privately negotiated  transactions  (including accelerated  share  repurchase
transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
During  the  three  months  ended December  31,  2019,  we  repurchased  approximately $1.0  billion of  our  common  stock  under  our  stock  repurchase  program.  As  of
December 31, 2019, a total of approximately $2.2 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase program. During
January 2020, our Board authorized an additional $5.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
We expect, subject to market conditions and other uncertainties, to continue making opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock. However, our
stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of
factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
34

ITEM 6: SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto
and  “Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of  Operations”  appearing  elsewhere  in  this  Annual  Report  on
Form 10-K. The consolidated statement of income data for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016 are derived from our audited
consolidated  financial  statements.  The  consolidated  balance  sheet  data  as  of  December  31,  2019  and  2018  are  derived  from  our  audited
consolidated financial statements. The consolidated balance sheet data as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 has been derived from our audited
consolidated financial statements adjusted for the adoption of the ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). The consolidated
statement  of  income  data  and  consolidated  balance  sheet  data  as  of  and  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015  is  derived  from  our  audited
consolidated financial statements, which have not been adjusted for ASC 606.
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018 (6)
2017 (4)(7)
2016 (4)(8)
2015
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Consolidated Statement of Income Data: (1)
Net revenues
$
10,800
$
10,746
$
9,927
$
9,298
$
8,592
Gross profit
8,292
8,364
7,706
7,294
6,821
Income from operations
2,321
2,222
2,264
2,325
2,197
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
2,207
2,718
2,275
3,651
2,406
Income (loss) from continuing operations
1,792
2,528
(1,013)
7,285
1,947
Income (loss) per share from continuing operations:
Basic
$
2.11
$
2.58
$
(0.95)
$
6.43
$
1.61
Diluted
$
2.10
$
2.55
$
(0.95)
$
6.37
$
1.60
Weighted average shares:
Basic
849
980
1,064
1,133
1,208
Diluted
856
991
1,064
1,144
1,220
35

 
As of December 31,
 
2019
2018 (6)
2017 (4) (7)
2016 (4) (8)
2015
 
(In millions)
Consolidated Balance Sheet Data: (1)
Cash and cash equivalents
$
975
$
2,202
$
2,120
$
1,816
$
1,832
Short-term investments
1,850
2,713
3,743
5,333
4,299
Long-term investments
1,316
3,778
6,331
3,969
3,391
Working capital - continuing operations
640
2,672
4,185
5,010
5,641
Working capital total (2)(3)
640
2,672
4,185
5,010
5,641
Total assets - continuing operations
18,174
22,819
25,986
23,851
17,785
Total assets
18,174
22,819
25,986
23,851
17,785
Short-term debt
1,022
1,546
781
1,451
—
Long-term debt
6,738
7,685
9,234
7,509
6,779
Total stockholders’ equity (5)
2,870
6,281
8,049
10,526
6,576
Dividends declared per share:
$
0.56
$
—
$
—
$
—
$
—
(1)
Includes the impact of acquisitions and dispositions. For a summary of recent significant acquisitions and dispositions, please see “Note 3 - Business Combinations” to the
consolidated financial statements included in this report.
(2)
Working capital is calculated as the difference between total current assets and total current liabilities.
(3)
Reflects the impact of the adoption of the new lease accounting standard in 2019 which was adopted prospectively.
(4)
Reflects the impact of the adoption of the new revenue recognition accounting standard in 2018. Periods prior to 2016 have not been revised.
(5)
Includes the impact of the Distribution of PayPal on July 17, 2015.
(6)
The  consolidated  balance  sheet  data  as  of  December  31,  2018  includes  the  impact  of  a  $463  million  reduction  to  the  provisional  current  and  deferred  tax  liabilities
recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 and a $120 million reduction in 2018 to the deferred tax asset recognized in 2017 as a result of a tax rate change. The consolidated
statement of income data for the year ended December 31, 2018 includes a $463 million income tax benefit and $120 million tax expense associated with such current
and deferred tax liabilities and assets, respectively.
(7)
The consolidated balance sheet data as of December 31, 2017 includes the impact of a $695 million deferred tax asset recognized in 2017 as a result of our voluntary
domiciling our Classifieds intangible assets into a new jurisdiction. The consolidated statement of income data for the year ended December 31, 2017 includes a $695
million income tax benefit associated with such deferred tax asset, $376 million caused by the foreign exchange remeasurement of our deferred tax assets and a $3.1
billion provisional tax expense associated with the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
(8)
The consolidated balance sheet data for the year ended December 31, 2016 includes the impact of a $4.6 billion deferred tax asset recognized in 2016 as a result of our
election to terminate an existing tax ruling and finalize a new agreement with the foreign tax authority. The consolidated statement of income data for the year ended
December 31, 2016 includes a $4.6 billion income tax benefit associated with such deferred tax asset.
36

ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future business, future results of operations or financial condition, new or planned features or services, management strategies or timing and other
expectations regarding our sale of StubHub to viagogo). You can identify these forward-looking statements by words such as “may,” “will,” “would,”
“should,”  “could,”  “expect,”  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “estimate,”  “intend,”  “plan”  and  other  similar  expressions.  These  forward-looking  statements
involve  risks  and  uncertainties  that  could  cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied  in  our  forward-looking
statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as
well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with
the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-looking statements after the
date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. You should read the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report.
OVERVIEW
 
Business
eBay Inc., a global commerce leader, includes Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds platforms. Collectively, eBay connects millions of buyers
and sellers around the world, empowering people and creating opportunity for all. Founded in 1995 in San Jose, California, eBay is one of the
world’s largest and most vibrant marketplaces for discovering great value and unique selection. Our technologies and services are designed to give
buyers choice and a breadth of relevant inventory and to enable sellers worldwide to organize and offer their inventory for sale, virtually anytime and
anywhere. In 2019, eBay enabled over $90 billion of Gross Merchandise Volume.
Presentation
In addition to the corresponding measures under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), management uses non-GAAP measures
in reviewing our financial results. The foreign exchange neutral (“FX-Neutral”), or constant currency, net revenue amounts discussed below are non-
GAAP financial measures and are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Accordingly, the FX-
Neutral information appearing in the following discussion of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information provided
below  in  “Non-GAAP  Measures  of  Financial  Performance,”  which  includes  reconciliations  of  FX-Neutral  financial  measures  to  the  most  directly
comparable  GAAP  measures.  We  calculate  the  year-over-year  impact  of  foreign  currency  movements  using  prior  period  foreign  currency  rates
applied to current year transactional currency amounts.
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the euro, British
pound, Korean won and Australian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency risk which may impact our financial results. Because of this and the fact
that  we generate  a  majority  of  our  net  revenues  internationally,  including  during  the  years  ended  December  31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, we are
subject to the risks related to doing business in foreign countries as discussed under “Item 1A: Risk Factors.”
The effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements during 2019 was primarily attributable to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against
the euro, British pound and Korean won.
Fiscal Year Highlights
Net  revenues  increased 1% to $10.8  billion in 2019 compared  to 2018,  primarily  driven  by  Marketplace  net  transaction  revenues  and
Classifieds marketing services and other revenues. FX-Neutral net revenue (as defined above) increased 2% in 2019 compared to 2018. Operating
margin increased to 21.5% in 2019 compared to 20.7% in 2018.
37

We generated cash flow from continuing operating activities of $3.1 billion in 2019 compared to $2.7 billion in 2018, ending the year with cash,
cash equivalents and non-equity investments of $3.8 billion.
In the first quarter of 2019, we completed the acquisition of the U.K. based classifieds site, Motors.co.uk for $93 million in cash. During the
third quarter of 2019, $400 million of floating rate notes and $1.15 billion of 2.200% fixed rate notes matured and were repaid. During the year ended
December 31, 2019 we paid $473 million in cash dividends.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell StubHub to viagogo for a purchase price of $4.05 billion in cash.
The sale is expected to close in the first quarter of 2020, subject to regulatory approval and closing conditions.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $2.10 in 2019 compared to diluted earnings per share of $2.55 in 2018. In January
2020, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.16 per share of common stock to be paid on March 20, 2020 to stockholders of record as of
March 2, 2020.
38

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Revenues
Seasonality
We  expect  transaction  activity  patterns  on  our  platforms  to  mirror  general  consumer  buying  patterns  and  expect  that  these  trends  will
continue.  The following table sets  forth,  for  the  periods  presented,  our total  net  revenues  and the  sequential  quarterly  movements  of these  net
revenues (in millions, except percentages):
 
Quarter Ended
 
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2017
Net revenues
$
2,303
$
2,419
$
2,498
$
2,707
Percent change from prior quarter
(7)%
5%
3 %
8%
2018
Net revenues
$
2,580
$
2,640
$
2,649
$
2,877
Percent change from prior quarter
(5)%
2%
0 %
9%
2019
Net revenues
$
2,643
$
2,687
$
2,649
$
2,821
Percent change from prior quarter
(8)%
2%
(1)%
7%
Net Revenues by Geography
Revenues are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays
advertising, other service provider or customer, as the case may be, is located. The following table presents net revenues by geography for the
periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
2018
% Change
2017
U.S.
$
4,337
  
(1)%
4,373
  
4%
$
4,187
Percentage of net revenues
40%
41%
42%
International
6,463
1 %
6,373
11%
5,740
Percentage of net revenues
60%
59%
58%
Total net revenues
$
10,800
1 %
$
10,746
8%
$
9,927
Net revenues included $81 million of hedging gains and $8 million and $28 million of hedging losses during the years ended December 31,
2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The hedging activity in net revenues specifically relates to hedges of net transaction revenues generated by our
Marketplace segment. Foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact of $211 million, a favorable impact of $174
million and unfavorable impact of $39 million on net revenues for the years December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The effect of foreign
currency exchange rate movements in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily attributable to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the euro,
British pound and Korean won. The effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily attributable to the
weakening of the U.S. dollar against the euro, British pound and Korean won.
39

Net Revenues by Type and Segment
We generate two types of net revenues:
Net transaction revenues primarily include final value fees, feature fees, including fees to promote listings, and listing fees from sellers
on our Marketplace platforms and final value fees from sellers and buyers on our StubHub platforms. Our net transaction revenues also
include store subscription and other fees often from large enterprise sellers. Our net transaction revenues are reduced by incentives,
including discounts, coupons and rewards, provided to our customers.
Marketing services and other ("MS&O") revenues consist of Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds revenues principally from the sale
of advertisements, classifieds fees, revenue sharing arrangements and first-party inventory programs.
The following table presents net revenues by type and segment (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
2018
% Change
2017
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace
$
7,578
2 %
$
7,416
9 %
$
6,809
StubHub
1,057
(1)%
1,068
6 %
1,011
Total net transaction revenues
8,635
2 %
8,484
8 %
7,820
Marketing services and other revenues:
Marketplace
1,060
(13)%
1,225
3 %
1,192
Classifieds
1,061
4 %
1,022
14 %
897
StubHub
64
**
15
(17)%
18
Elimination of inter-segment net revenues
(20)
**
—
— %
—
Total marketing services and other revenues
2,165
(4)%
2,262
7 %
2,107
Total net revenues
$
10,800
1 %
$
10,746
8 %
$
9,927
**
Not meaningful
Net Transaction Revenues
Key Operating Metrics
Gross Merchandise Volume (“GMV”) and take rate are significant factors that we believe affect our net transaction revenues.
GMV consists of the total value of all successfully closed transactions between users on our Marketplace or StubHub platforms during the
applicable  period,  regardless  of  whether  the  buyer  and  seller  actually  consummated  the  transaction.  Despite  GMV’s  divergence  from
revenue during 2019, we still believe that GMV provides a useful measure of the overall volume of closed transactions that flow through
our platforms in a given period, notwithstanding the inclusion in GMV of closed transactions that are not ultimately consummated.
Take rate is defined as net transaction revenues divided by GMV.
40

The following table presents GMV and take rate by segment for the periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
2018
% Change
2017
GMV:
Marketplace
$
85,510
(5)%
$
89,829
7%
$
83,883
StubHub
4,700
(1)%
4,751
5%
4,520
Total
$
90,210
(5)%
$
94,580
7%
$
88,403
Transaction take rate:
Marketplace
8.86%
0.61 %
8.25%
0.13%
8.12%
StubHub
22.49%
0.01 %
22.48%
0.11%
22.37%
Total transaction take rate
9.57%
0.60 %
8.97%
0.12%
8.85%
Marketplace Net Transaction Revenues
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2019
2018
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2018
2017
As Reported
FX-Neutral
Marketplace net
transaction revenues (1)
7,578
7,416
2 %
4 %
7,416
6,809
9%
7%
Marketplace GMV
85,510
89,829
(5)%
(2)%
89,829
83,883
7%
5%
Marketplace take rate
8.86%
8.25%
0.61 %
8.25%
8.12%
0.13%
(1)
Marketplace net transaction revenues were net of $81 million, $8 million and $28 million hedging activity during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
respectively.
Marketplace net transaction revenues increased in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to growth in promoted listing fees and a higher take
rate. Marketplace transaction take rate was higher in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to growth in promoted listing fees, which along with final
value fees are calculated as a percentage of an item’s sale price, and category mix. The increase in Marketplace net transaction revenues in 2019
compared  to  2018  was  due  to  take  rate  considerations  discussed  above,  despite  declining  Marketplace  GMV.  We  expect  that  the  divergence
between  Marketplace  net  transaction  revenues  and  Marketplace  GMV  will  continue.  Despite  GMV’s  divergence  from  net  transaction  revenues
during the year, we still believe the metric provides a useful measure of overall volume of closed transactions that flow through the platform in a
given period.
The increase in Marketplace net transaction revenues in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to an increase in Marketplace GMV and a
favorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar. Marketplace transaction take rate was higher in 2018 compared to
2017, primarily due to growth in promoted listing fees, which along with final value fees are calculated as a percentage of an items sale price, and a
decrease in seller incentives, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from final value fees attributable to pricing and category mix.
StubHub Net Transaction Revenues
The following table presents StubHub net transaction revenues and supplemental operating data (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2019
2018
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2018
2017
As Reported
FX-Neutral
StubHub net transaction
revenues
1,057
1,068
(1)%
(1)%
1,068
1,011
6%
6%
StubHub GMV
4,700
4,751
(1)%
(1)%
4,751
4,520
5%
5%
StubHub take rate
22.49%
22.48%
0.01 %
22.48%
22.37%
0.11%
41

StubHub net transaction revenues in 2019 compared to 2018 decreased slightly primarily driven by lower GMV from concerts and theater,
partially  offset  by  an  increase  in  sporting  events  and  a  slightly  higher  take  rate.  The  slight  increase  in  StubHub  transaction  take  rate  in  2019
compared to 2018 was primarily due to pricing changes partially offset by event mix.
The increase in StubHub net transaction revenues in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to an increase in StubHub GMV. The increase
in StubHub GMV in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily driven by concerts and sporting events. The increase in StubHub transaction take rate in
2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to pricing changes on the platform.
Marketing Services and Other Revenues
The following table presents MS&O revenues (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2019
2018
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2018
2017
As Reported
FX-Neutral
Marketplace
$
1,060
$
1,225
(13)%
(11)%
$
1,225
$
1,192
3 %
1 %
Classifieds
1,061
1,022
4 %
9 %
1,022
897
14 %
10 %
StubHub
64
15
**
**
15
18
(17)%
(18)%
Elimination of
inter-segment
net revenues
$
(20)
$
—
**
**
$
—
$
—
— %
— %
Total MS&O
revenues
$
2,165
$
2,262
(4)%
(1)%
$
2,262
$
2,107
7 %
5 %
Percentage of
net revenues
20%
21%
21%
21%
**
Not meaningful
Marketplace MS&O Revenues
The decrease in Marketplace MS&O revenues during 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to a decrease in advertising revenues that
was driven by our ongoing shift to promoted listing fees, which are recognized in net transaction revenues and lower revenues resulting from the
sale of brands4friends. These decreases were partially offset by increases in first-party inventory program in Korea in 2019 compared to 2018.
The increase in Marketplace MS&O revenues in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily driven by an increase in revenues attributable to our
first-party inventory program in Korea and revenue sharing arrangements, particularly shipping, partially offset by a decrease in advertising revenues
that was driven by our ongoing shift to promoted listing fees, which are recognized in net transaction revenues.
Classifieds MS&O Revenues
The increases in Classifieds MS&O revenues in 2019 compared to 2018 and in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily driven by increased
revenue from our Classifieds horizontal and vertical motors platforms primarily in Germany.
StubHub MS&O Revenues
The increase in StubHub MS&O revenues in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily related to growth in revenues from first-party inventory sales
from sporting events. The change in StubHub MS&O revenue in 2018 compared to 2017 was relatively flat.
42

Cost of Net Revenues
Cost  of  net  revenues  primarily  consists  of  costs  associated  with  customer  support,  site  operations,  costs  of  goods  sold  and  payment
processing. Significant components of these costs include employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs, depreciation of equipment and
amortization  expense,  first  party  inventory  costs,  bank  transaction  fees,  and  credit  card  interchange  and  assessment  fees.  The  following  table
presents cost of net revenues (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
  
2018
% Change
  
2017
Cost of net revenues
$
2,508
5%
  $
2,382
7%
  $
2,221
As a percentage of net revenues
23.2%
22.2%
22.4%
The increase in cost of net revenues in 2019 compared to 2018 and 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to an increase in site operation
and payment processing costs as we increased our investments in our business, and an increase in costs of goods sold driven by our first-party
inventory program in Korea.
 
Cost of net revenues, net of immaterial hedging activities, was favorably impacted by $56 million attributable to foreign currency movements
relative to the U.S. dollar in 2019 compared to 2018. Cost of net revenues was unfavorably impacted by $34 million attributable to foreign currency
movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2018. There was no hedging activity within cost of net revenues in 2018.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
2018
% Change
2017
Sales and marketing
$
3,194
(6)%
$
3,391
18%
$
2,878
Percentage of net revenues
30%
32%
29%
Product development
1,240
(4)%
1,285
5%
1,224
Percentage of net revenues
11%
12%
12%
General and administrative
1,189
5 %
1,131
10%
1,030
Percentage of net revenues
11%
11%
10%
Provision for transaction losses
300
5 %
286
5%
272
Percentage of net revenues
3%
3%
3%
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
48
(1)%
49
27%
38
Total operating expenses
$
5,971
(3)%
$
6,142
13%
$
5,442
Foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact of $118 million on operating expenses in 2019 compared to
2018. Operating expenses were unfavorably impacted by $68 million attributable to foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2018
compared to 2017. There was no hedging activity within operating expenses in 2019 and 2018.
43

Sales and Marketing
 
Sales  and  marketing  expenses  primarily  consist  of  advertising  and  marketing  program  costs  (both  online  and  offline),  employee
compensation,  certain  user  coupons  and  rewards,  contractor  costs,  facilities  costs  and  depreciation  on  equipment.  Online  marketing  expenses
represent traffic acquisition costs in various channels such as paid search, affiliates marketing and display advertising. Offline advertising primarily
includes brand campaigns and buyer/seller communications.
The  decrease  in  sales  and marketing  expense  in  2019  compared  to  2018  was  primarily  due  to  a  favorable  impact  from  foreign  currency
movements relative to the U.S. dollar and decreases in offline advertising spend and employee-related costs. These costs were partially offset by
online marketing spend and user coupons and rewards largely driven by our Japan platform acquired in the second quarter of 2018.
The increase in sales and marketing expense in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to an increase in user coupons and rewards and
traffic acquisition costs.
Product Development
 
Product development expenses primarily consist of employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs and depreciation on equipment.
Product  development  expenses  are  net  of  required  capitalization  of  major  platform  and  other  product  development  efforts,  including  the
development and maintenance of our technology platform. Our top technology priorities include payment intermediation capabilities and improved
seller tools and buyer experiences built on a foundation of structured data.
Capitalized internal use and platform development costs were $137 million and $147 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, and are primarily
reflected as a cost of net revenues when amortized in future periods.
The decrease in product development expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to decreases in employee-related costs, foreign
currency movement relative to the U.S. dollar and depreciation on equipment. The increase in product development expenses in 2018 compared to
2017 was primarily due to an increase in employee-related costs, partially offset by a decrease in depreciation on equipment.
General and Administrative
 
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs, depreciation of equipment,
employer  payroll  taxes  on  stock-based  compensation,  legal  expenses,  restructuring,  insurance  premiums  and  professional  fees.  Our  legal
expenses, including those related to various ongoing legal proceedings, may fluctuate substantially from period to period.
The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to severance costs incurred in 2019 related
to our CEO transition.
The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to restructuring costs related to our global
workforce reduction and an increase in employee-related costs. For additional details related to the restructuring, refer to “Note 18 – Restructuring”
to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
  
Provision for Transaction Losses
Provision for transaction losses primarily consists of transaction loss expense associated with our buyer protection programs, fraud and bad
debt expense associated with our accounts receivable balance. We expect our provision for transaction losses to fluctuate depending on many
factors, including changes to our protection programs and the impact of regulatory changes.
The  increase  in  provision  for  transaction  losses  in  2019  compared  to  2018  was  primarily  due  to  an  increase  in  bad  debt  expense.  The
increase in provision for transaction losses in 2018 compared to 2017 was not significant.
44

Income from Operations
The following table presents income from operations (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
  
2018
% Change
  
2017
Income from operations
$
2,321
4%
$
2,222
(2)%
$
2,264
Operating margin
21.5%
20.7%
22.8%
The increase in income from operations in 2019 compared 2018 was primarily due to an increase in income from our Marketplace segment.
Income  from  our  StubHub  and  Classifieds  segments  was  not  a  significant  contributor  to  the  increase  in  total  income  from  operations  in  2019
compared to 2018. The decrease in income from operations in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to global workforce reduction and an
increase in employee related costs, partially offset by an increase in income from our Marketplace and Classifieds segments.
Interest and Other, Net
 
Interest  and  other,  net  primarily  consists  of  interest  earned  on  cash,  cash  equivalents  and  investments,  as  well  as  foreign  exchange
transaction gains and losses, gains and losses due to changes in fair value of the warrant received from Adyen, our portion of operating results from
investments  accounted  for  under  the  equity  method  of  accounting,  investment  gain/loss  on  acquisitions  or  disposals  and  interest  expense,
consisting of interest charges on any amounts borrowed and commitment fees on unborrowed amounts under our credit agreement and interest
expense on our outstanding debt securities and commercial paper, if any. The following table presents interest and other, net (in millions, except
percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
% Change
  
2018
% Change
  
2017
Interest income
$
120
(32)%   $
176
(1)%   $
177
Interest expense
(311)
(5)%
(326)
12 %
(292)
Gains on investments and sale of business
80
**
663
**
115
Other
(3)
**
  
(17)
**
  
11
Total interest and other, net
$
(114)
**
  $
496
**
  $
11
The decrease in interest and other, net in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily attributable to the gain recognized on the sale of our
investment in Flipkart of $313 million and the relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in Giosis of $266 million that did not occur in
2019, the loss recorded upon the divestiture of brands4friends of $52 million partially offset by the gain recognized due to the change in fair value of
the Adyen warrant of $133 million that occurred in 2019.
The increase in interest and other, net in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily attributable to the $313 million gain recognized on the sale of
our investment in Flipkart and $266 million gain recognized upon relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in Giosis and $104 million
gain recognized due to the change in fair value of the warrant.
45

Income Tax Provision
The following table presents provision for income taxes (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
415
$
190
$
3,288
Effective tax rate
18.8%   
7.0%   
144.5%
The increase in our effective tax rate in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to a reduction in 2018 to the provisional tax amounts
recorded in 2017 related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the gain recognized from the relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in
Giosis that was not subject to U.S.  federal income tax on a current  basis that did not recur in 2019, and certain expenses in 2019 including a
negotiated reduction in the tax basis of the intangible assets in our Classifieds platforms. These impacts were partially offset in 2019 by the effective
settlements of audits, reduction in the U.S. deferred tax liability for minimum tax on foreign earnings, related to the above reduction in tax basis of
intangible assets, and a benefit due to the enacted New York state legislation regarding the taxability of foreign earnings.
The decrease in our effective tax rate in 2018 compared to 2017 was primarily due to the $3.1 billion provisional tax charge related to the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act” or “U.S. tax reform”) recorded in 2017. In 2018, as we completed our analysis of U.S. tax reform, we recorded a $463
million reduction to the provisional tax amounts recorded in 2017. Further, the 2018 effective tax rate was favorably impacted by U.S. tax reform and
the gain recognized from the relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in Giosis in the second quarter 2018 that is not subject to U.S.
federal income tax on a current basis.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was enacted. U.S. tax reform, among other things, reduced the U.S. federal income tax
rate from 35% to 21% beginning in 2018, instituted a dividends received deduction for foreign earnings with a related tax for the deemed repatriation
of  unremitted  foreign  earnings  in  2017  and  created  a  new  U.S.  minimum  tax  on  earnings  of  foreign  subsidiaries.  We  recognized  a  provisional
income tax charge of $3.1 billion in the fourth quarter of 2017, which was included as a component of the income tax provision on our consolidated
statement of income. We completed our analysis of the impacts of U.S. tax reform in the fourth quarter of 2018 and recognized a $463 million
reduction to the provisional tax amounts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017, which is included as a component of income tax expense from
continuing operations in 2018.
Included in the 2017 provisional amount was $1.4 billion for the income tax on the deemed repatriation of unremitted foreign earnings. We
completed the computation of this amount as part of the 2017 income tax return filing and reduced the provisional amount by $18 million and we
utilized $213 million of foreign tax credits to reduce the net liability, both in 2018.
The remaining provisional amount of $1.7 billion was for the deferred income tax effects of the Act, primarily the impact of the new U.S.
minimum tax on foreign earnings, partially offset by the reversal of our existing deferred tax liability associated with repatriation of unremitted foreign
earnings. We completed our analysis of the components of the deferred tax computation in the fourth quarter of 2018 and recognized a tax benefit of
$445 million as a reduction to the provisional amounts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 for the deferred income tax effects of the Act. This
amount  includes  a  $389  million  tax  benefit  as  a  result  of  clarification  by  Swiss  tax  authorities  regarding  the  applicability  of  withholding  tax  to
repatriated earnings in October 2018.
As a result of U.S. tax reform, our earnings in foreign jurisdictions are taxed at substantially the same rate as the U.S. federal statutory tax
rate of 21%. In 2017, our provision for income taxes differed from the provision computed by applying the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% primarily
due to lower tax rates associated with certain earnings from our operations in jurisdictions outside the U.S. The impact on our provision for income
taxes of foreign income being taxed at different rates that the U.S. federal statutory rate was a benefit of approximately $217 million in 2017. The
foreign jurisdictions with lower tax rates that had the most significant impact on our provision for income taxes in 2017 include Switzerland. See
“Note 15 - Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on our tax rate reconciliation.
46

From time to time we engage in certain intercompany transactions. We consider many factors when evaluating these transactions. These
transactions may impact our tax rate and/or result in additional cash tax payments. The impact in any period may be significant. These transactions
are complex and the impact of such transactions on future periods may be difficult to estimate.
We are regularly under examination by tax authorities both domestically and internationally. We believe that adequate amounts have been
reserved for any adjustments that may ultimately result from these examinations, although we cannot assure you that this will be the case given the
inherent uncertainties in these examinations. Due to the ongoing tax examinations, it is generally impractical to determine the amount and timing of
these adjustments. However, we expect several tax examinations to close within the next twelve months. See “Note 15 – Income Taxes” to the
consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on estimated settlements within the next twelve months.
Non-GAAP Measures of Financial Performance
To  supplement  our  consolidated  financial  statements  presented  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  we  use  FX-
Neutral net revenues, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses the foregoing non-GAAP measures in reviewing our financial
results. We define FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the exchange rate effect. We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year
impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional currency amounts, excluding
hedging activity.
These  non-GAAP  measures  are  not  in  accordance  with,  or  an  alternative  to,  measures  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP  and  may  be
different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not based on any comprehensive set of
accounting rules or principles. Non-GAAP measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of
operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. These measures should only be used to evaluate our results of operations in conjunction with
the corresponding GAAP measures.
These non-GAAP measures are provided to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our current financial performance and its prospects
for the future. Specifically, we believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to both management and investors by excluding the
foreign currency exchange rate impact that may not be indicative of our core operating results and business outlook. In addition, because we have
historically reported certain non-GAAP results to investors, we believe that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures provide consistency in our
financial reporting.
47

The following tables set forth a reconciliation of FX-Neutral GMV and FX-Neutral net revenues (each as defined below) to our reported GMV
and net revenues for the periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended 
December 31, 2019
Year Ended 
December 31, 2018
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate Effect
(1)
FX-Neutral (2)
As Reported
As Reported % Change
FX-Neutral
% Change
GMV:
Marketplace
$
85,510
$
(2,745)
$
88,255
$
89,829
(5)%
(2)%
StubHub
4,700
(17)
4,717
4,751
(1)%
(1)%
Total GMV
$
90,210
$
(2,762)
$
92,972
$
94,580
(5)%
(2)%
Net Revenues
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace (3)
$
7,578
$
(123)
$
7,701
$
7,416
2 %
4 %
StubHub
1,057
(3)
1,060
1,068
(1)%
(1)%
Total
8,635
(126)
8,761
8,484
2 %
3 %
Marketing services and other
revenues:
Marketplace
1,060
(30)
1,090
1,225
(13)%
(11)%
Classifieds
1,061
(55)
1,116
1,022
4 %
9 %
StubHub
64
—
64
15
**
**
Elimination of inter-segment net
revenue
(20)
—
(20)
—
**
**
Total
2,165
(85)
2,250
2,262
(4)%
(1)%
Total net revenues
$
10,800
$
(211)
$
11,011
$
10,746
1 %
2 %
 
Year Ended 
December 31, 2018
Year Ended 
December 31, 2017
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate Effect
(1)
FX-Neutral (2)
As Reported
As Reported % Change
FX-Neutral
% Change
GMV:
Marketplace
$
89,829
$
1,659
$
88,170
$
83,883
7 %
5 %
StubHub
4,751
5
4,746
4,520
5 %
5 %
Total GMV
$
94,580
$
1,664
$
92,916
$
88,403
7 %
5 %
Net Revenues
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace (3)
$
7,416
$
118
$
7,298
$
6,809
9 %
7 %
StubHub
1,068
1
1,067
1,011
6 %
6 %
Total
8,484
119
8,365
7,820
8 %
7 %
Marketing services and other
revenues:
Marketplace
1,225
22
1,203
1,192
3 %
1 %
Classifieds
1,022
33
989
897
14 %
10 %
StubHub
15
—
15
18
(17)%
(18)%
Total
2,262
55
2,207
2,107
7 %
5 %
Total net revenues
$
10,746
$
174
$
10,572
$
9,927
8 %
6 %
** Not meaningful
(1)
We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional
currency amounts, excluding hedging activity.
(2)
We define FX-Neutral GMV as GMV minus the exchange rate effect. We define the non-GAAP financial measures of FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the
exchange rate effect.
(3)
Marketplace net transaction revenues were net of $81 million and $8 million of hedging activity in 2019 and 2018, respectively.     
48

Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
 
(In millions)
Net cash provided by (used in):
 
 
Continuing operating activities
$
3,114
$
2,661
$
3,146
Investing activities
2,787
2,894
(1,295)
Financing activities
(7,091)
(5,398)
(1,784)
Effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
(33)
(75)
238
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents - discontinued operations
—
(3)
—
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
$
(1,223)
$
79
$
305
 
Continuing Operating Activities
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $3.1 billion in 2019 was primarily attributable to net income of $1.8 billion with adjustments
of $681 million in depreciation and amortization, $505 million in stock-based compensation, $300 million in provision for transaction losses, $117
million for deferred income taxes, $52 million loss on the sale of a business, partially offset by a decrease of $200 million in changes in assets and
liabilities, net of acquisition effects, and $133 million for changes in the fair value of the Adyen warrant.
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $2.7 billion in 2018 was primarily attributable to net income of $2.5 billion with adjustments
of $696 million in depreciation and amortization,  $538 million in stock-based  compensation and $286 million in provision for transaction  losses,
partially offset by a decrease of $577 million in changes in assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects, and adjustments of $572 million for gain
on investments, $153 million for deferred income taxes and $104 million for changes in fair value of the Adyen warrant.
The net cash provided by continuing operating activities of $3.1 billion in 2017 was primarily due to $1.1 billion of changes in assets and
liabilities,  net  of acquisition  effects,  and a net  loss  of  $1.0  billion offset  by  adjustments  of  $1.7  billion in deferred  income  taxes,  $676 million  in
depreciation and amortization and $483 million in stock-based compensation.
Cash paid for income taxes in 2019, 2018 and 2017 was $333 million, $597 million and $308 million, respectively. Cash paid for income taxes
in 2018 included tax payments related to our liability for deemed repatriation of foreign earnings under U.S. tax reform of $168 million, including a
prepayment of $72 million.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $2.8 billion in 2019 was primarily attributable to proceeds of $50.5 billion from the maturities and sales
of investments, partially offset by cash paid for purchases of investments of $47.0 billion, property and equipment of $554 million, equity investment
in Paytm Mall of $160 million and acquisitions of $93 million.
Cash provided by investing activities of $2.9 billion in 2018 was primarily attributable to proceeds of $30.9 billion from the maturities and sales
of investments and $1.0 billion from the sale of equity investment in Flipkart, partially offset by cash paid for purchases of investments of $28.1
billion, property and equipment of $651 million and acquisitions of $302 million.
The net cash used in investing activities of $1.3 billion in 2017 was primarily due to cash paid for property and equipment of $666 million and
cash paid for our equity investment in Flipkart of $514 million.
The  largely  offsetting  effects  of  purchases  of  investments  and  maturities  and  sale  of  investments  results  from  the  management  of  our
investments. As our immediate cash needs change, purchase and sale activity will fluctuate.
49

Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities of $7.1 billion in 2019 was primarily used to repurchase $5.0 billion of common stock, repay outstanding debt
of $1.6 billion and pay $473 million of cash dividends.
Cash used in financing activities of $5.4 billion in 2018 was primarily used to repurchase $4.5 billion of common stock and repay $750 million
of our outstanding senior notes.
The net cash used in financing activities of $1.8 billion in 2017 was primarily due to $2.7 billion of cash used to repurchase common stock and
$1.5 billion of cash used to repay outstanding debt, partially offset by $2.5 billion of cash proceeds from debt issuances.
The negative effect of exchange rate movements on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was due to the strengthening of the U.S.
dollar against other currencies, primarily the Korean won, euro and British pound during 2019. The negative effect of exchange rate movements on
cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against other currencies, primarily the euro, Korean won
and British pound, during 2018. The positive effect of exchange rate movements on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was due to the
weakening of the U.S. dollar against other currencies, primarily the euro and Korean won, during 2017.
Stock Repurchases
In January 2018, our Board authorized a $6.0 billion stock repurchase program and in January 2019, our Board authorized an additional $4.0
billion  stock  repurchase  program.  These  stock  repurchase  programs  have  no  expiration  from  the  date  of  authorization.  Our  stock  repurchase
programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and, subject to market conditions
and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding share count. Any share
repurchases under our stock repurchase programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately negotiated transactions
(including accelerated share repurchase transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems appropriate and will be
funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
During 2019, we repurchased approximately $5.0 billion of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. As of December 31,
2019, a total of approximately $2.2 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. In
January 2020, our Board authorized an additional $5.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
We  expect,  subject  to  market  conditions  and  other  uncertainties,  to  continue  making  opportunistic  and  programmatic  repurchases  of  our
common  stock.  However,  our  stock  repurchase  programs  may  be  limited  or  terminated  at  any  time  without  prior  notice.  The  timing  and  actual
number  of  shares  repurchased  will  depend  on  a  variety  of  factors,  including  corporate  and  regulatory  requirements,  price  and  other  market
conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash.  
Dividends
The company paid a total of $473 million in cash dividends during the year ended December 31, 2019. No cash dividends were paid in 2018
and 2017. In January 2020, we declared a cash dividend of $0.16 per share of common stock to be paid on March 20, 2020 to stockholders of
record as of March 2, 2020.
Shelf Registration Statement and Debt
As of December 31, 2019, we had an effective shelf registration statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission that allows
us to issue various types of debt securities, as well as common stock, preferred stock, warrants, depositary shares representing fractional interest in
shares  of  preferred  stock,  purchase  contracts  and  units  from  time  to  time  in  one  or  more  offerings.  Each  issuance  under  the  shelf  registration
statement  will  require  the  filing  of  a  prospectus  supplement  identifying  the  amount  and  terms  of  the  securities  to  be  issued.  The  registration
statement does not limit the amount of securities that may be issued thereunder. Our ability to issue securities is subject to market conditions and
other factors including, in the case of our debt securities, our credit ratings and compliance with the covenants in our credit agreement.
50

Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2019, we had floating- and fixed-rate senior notes outstanding for an aggregate principal amount of $7.8 billion. The net
proceeds from the issuances of these senior notes are used for general corporate purposes, including, among other things, capital expenditures,
share repurchases, repayment of indebtedness and possible acquisitions. The floating rate notes are not redeemable prior to maturity. On and after
March 1, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056 at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity, at a
redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. We may redeem some or all
of the other fixed rate notes of each series at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price plus
accrued and unpaid interest. If a change of control triggering event occurs with respect to the 2.150% fixed rate notes due 2020, the 3.800% fixed
rate notes due 2022, the floating rate notes due 2023, the 2.750% fixed rate notes due 2023, the 3.600% fixed rate notes due 2027 or the 6.000%
fixed rate notes due 2056, we must, subject to certain exceptions, offer to repurchase all of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to
101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest. For additional details related to our senior notes, please see “Note 10 – Debt” to the
consolidated financial statements included in this report.
To help achieve our interest rate risk management objectives, in connection with the previous issuance of certain senior notes, we entered
into interest rate swap agreements that effectively converted $2.4 billion of the fixed rate notes to floating rate debt based on the London InterBank
Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a spread. These swaps were designated as fair value hedges against changes in the fair value of certain fixed rate
senior notes resulting from changes in interest rates. As of December 31, 2019, we had no interest rate swaps outstanding as $1.15 billion related to
our  2.200%  senior  notes  of  the  $2.4  billion  aggregate  notional  amount  matured.  In  addition,  during  the  year  ended  December  31,  2019,  we
terminated the interest rate swaps related to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due
July 2024. As a result of the early termination, hedge accounting was discontinued prospectively and the gain on termination was recorded as an
increase to the long-term debt balance and is being recognized over the remaining life of the underlying debt as a reduction to interest expense. The
gain recognized  during the year  ended December  31, 2019 was immaterial. For additional details related  to the interest  rate  swap termination,
please see, “Note 10 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default.
Commercial Paper
We have a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes in an aggregate principal amount at maturity
of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time with maturities of up to 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2019, there were no
commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In November 2015, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year revolving credit facility. We may
also, subject to the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase the commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to an aggregate amount
of $1 billion. Funds borrowed under the credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, acquisitions and other
general corporate purposes.
As of December 31, 2019, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and therefore maintain $1.5 billion of available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order
to repay commercial paper borrowings in the event we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due. As a result,
$500 million of borrowing capacity was available as of December 31, 2019 for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement.  
Loans under the credit agreement bear interest at either (i) LIBOR plus a margin (based on our public debt credit ratings) ranging from 0.875
percent to 1.5 percent or (ii) a formula based on the agent bank’s prime rate, the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5 percent or LIBOR plus 1.0
percent, plus a margin (based on our public debt credit ratings) ranging from zero percent to 0.5 percent. The credit agreement will terminate and all
amounts owing thereunder will be due and payable on November 9, 2020, unless (a) the commitments are terminated earlier, either at our request
51

or, if an event of default occurs, by the lenders (or automatically in the case of certain bankruptcy-related events of default), or (b) the maturity date
is  extended  upon  our  request,  subject  to  the  agreement  of  the  lenders.  The  credit  agreement  includes  customary  representations,  warranties,
affirmative  and  negative  covenants,  including  financial  covenants,  events  of  default  and  indemnification  provisions  in  favor  of  the  banks.  The
negative covenants include restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and subsidiary indebtedness, in each case, subject to certain exceptions.
The financial covenants require us to meet a quarterly financial test with respect to a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio and a maximum
consolidated leverage ratio. The events of default include the occurrence of a change of control (as defined in the credit agreement) with respect to
us.
We were in compliance with all covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2019.
Credit Ratings
As of December 31, 2019, we were rated investment grade by Standard and Poor’s Financial Services, LLC (long-term rated BBB+, short-
term  rated  A-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  Moody’s  Investor  Service  (long-term  rated  Baa1,  short-term  rated  P-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  and  Fitch
Ratings, Inc. (long-term rated BBB, short-term rated F-2, with a stable outlook). We disclose these ratings to enhance the understanding of our
sources of liquidity and the effects of our ratings on our costs of funds. Our borrowing costs depend, in part, on our credit ratings and any actions
taken by these credit rating agencies to lower our credit ratings will likely increase our borrowing costs. 
Commitments and Contingencies
We  have  certain  fixed  contractual  obligations  and  commitments  that  include  future  estimated  payments  for  general  operating  purposes.
Changes  in  our  business  needs,  contractual  cancellation  provisions,  fluctuating  interest  rates,  and  other  factors  may  result  in  actual  payments
differing from the estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of these payments. The following table summarizes our
fixed contractual obligations and commitments (in millions):
Payments Due During the Year Ending December 31,
Debt
 Leases
Purchase Obligations   
Total
2020
$
1,257
$
200
$
140
$
1,597
2021
980
174
82
1,236
2022
1,933
151
69
2,153
2023
1,284
98
1
1,383
2024
871
45
1
917
Thereafter
4,349
78
3
4,430
$
10,674
$
746
$
296
$
11,716
The significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the above table are as follows:
•
Debt amounts include the principal and interest amounts of the respective debt instruments. For additional details related to our debt,
please see “Note 10 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements  included in this report. This table does not reflect any amounts
payable under our $2 billion revolving credit facility or $1.5 billion commercial paper program, for which no borrowings were outstanding
as of December 31, 2019.
•
Lease amounts include payments for our operating and finance leases for office space, data centers, as well as fulfillment centers and
other corporate assets that we utilize under lease arrangements. The amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are
not expected to differ significantly from actual results under our existing leases, unless a substantial change in our headcount needs
requires us to expand our occupied space or exit an office facility early.
•
Purchase  obligation  amounts  include  minimum  purchase  commitments  for  advertising,  capital  expenditures  (computer  equipment,
software  applications,  engineering  development  services,  construction  contracts)  and  other  goods  and  services  entered  into  in  the
ordinary course of business.
As we are unable to reasonably  predict the timing  of settlement  of liabilities related  to unrecognized tax benefits,  net, the table does not
include $285 million of such non-current liabilities included in other liabilities on our consolidated
52

balance sheet as of December 31, 2019. The gross amount of unrecognized tax benefits expected to be reduced within the next twelve months is
approximately $19 million. See “Note 15 – Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on
unrecognized tax benefits.
Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
As of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, we had assets classified as cash and cash equivalents, as well as short-term and long-
term non-equity investments, in an aggregate amount of $3.8 billion and $8.6 billion, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, this amount included
assets held in certain of our foreign operations totaling approximately $3.4 billion. As we repatriate these funds to the U.S., we will be required to
pay income taxes in certain U.S. states and applicable foreign withholding taxes on those amounts during the period when such repatriation occurs.
We have accrued deferred taxes for the tax effect of repatriating the funds to the U.S.
We actively monitor all counterparties that hold our cash and cash equivalents and non-equity investments, focusing primarily on the safety of
principal  and  secondarily  on  improving  yield  on  these  assets.  We  diversify  our  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  investments  among  various
counterparties  in  order  to  reduce  our  exposure  should  any  one  of  these  counterparties  fail  or  encounter  difficulties.  To  date,  we  have  not
experienced any material loss or lack of access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments; however, we can provide no
assurances that access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial
markets. At any point in time we have funds in our operating accounts and customer accounts that are deposited and invested with third party
financial institutions.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments, together with cash expected to be generated
from  operations,  borrowings  available  under  our  credit  agreement  and  commercial  paper  program,  and  our  access  to  capital  markets,  will  be
sufficient to fund our operating activities, anticipated capital expenditures, repayment of debt, stock repurchases and dividends for the foreseeable
future.
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or income under the arrangement. As of December 31, 2019, we had a total of $4.8 billion in aggregate cash deposits, partially offset by $4.7 billion
in cash withdrawals, held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us and PayPal,
which may be significant. In addition, the indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us and our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application-programming-interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the
53

extent that such marks are applicable to our performance under the subject agreement. In certain cases, we have agreed to provide indemnification
for intellectual property infringement. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential loss under these indemnification provisions due to our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, losses recorded
in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant, either individually or collectively.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
General
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based
our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of
which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our
senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are
highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting
estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. We believe the following
critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The following  descriptions  of critical  accounting  policies,  judgments  and estimates  should be read  in conjunction  with our consolidated  financial
statements and related notes and other disclosures included in this report.
Revenue Recognition
We  may  enter  into  certain  revenue  contracts  that  include  promises  to  transfer  multiple  goods  or  services  including  discounts  on  future
services. We also may enter into arrangements to purchase services from certain customers. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is
sometimes  required  to  determine  the  appropriate  accounting  for  these  transactions  including:  (1)  whether  services  are  considered  distinct
performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price of each
distinct performance obligation; (3) whether revenue should be reported gross (as eBay is acting as a principal), or net (as eBay is acting as an
agent); (4) evaluating whether a promotion or incentive is a payment to a customer; and (5) whether the arrangement would be characterized as
revenue or reimbursement of costs incurred. Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or
amount of revenue recognition.
Income Taxes
Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in
which  we  operate.  Tax  laws  are  complex  and  subject  to  different  interpretations  by  the  taxpayer  and  respective  government  taxing  authorities.
Significant  judgment  is  required  in  determining  our  tax  expense  and  in  evaluating  our  tax  positions,  including  evaluating  uncertainties  and  the
complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Tax
positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. Our
income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of our intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. As a result of U.S. tax reform and the current U.S. taxation of
deemed repatriated earnings, management has no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries at the
balance sheet date.
Deferred  tax  assets  represent  amounts  available  to  reduce  income  taxes  payable  on  taxable  income  in  future  years.  Such  assets  arise
because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax
credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable
income from all sources,
54

including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income
rely  heavily  on  estimates  that  are  based  on  a  number  of  factors,  including  our  historical  experience  and  short-range  and  long-range  business
forecasts.  As  of December  31,  2019,  we  had  a  valuation  allowance  on  certain  net  operating  loss  and  tax  credit  carryforwards  based  on  our
assessment that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
We  recognize  and  measure  uncertain  tax  positions  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  the  U.S.,  or  GAAP,
pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from
such  positions  are  then  measured  based  on  the  largest  benefit  that  has  a  greater  than  50  percent  likelihood  of  being  realized  upon  ultimate
settlement. We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
GAAP further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in
the quarter in which such change occurs. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. A number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax
position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution
of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these reserves, as
well as the related interest, where appropriate in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position could require the
use of cash.
The following table illustrates our effective tax rates for 2019, 2018 and 2017:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
 
2018
 
2017
(In millions, except percentages)
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
415
 $
190
 $
3,288
Effective tax rate
18.8%  
7.0%  
144.5%
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory
rates  and  higher  than  anticipated  in  countries  where  we  have  higher  statutory  rates,  by  changes  in  the  valuation  of  our  deferred  tax  assets  or
liabilities, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination
of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service, as well as various state and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of
adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
Based  on  our  results  for  the  year  ended December  31,  2019,  a  one-percentage  point  change  in  our  provision  for  income  taxes  as  a
percentage of income before taxes would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the provision of approximately $22 million, resulting in an
approximate $0.03 change in diluted earnings per share.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The purchase price of an acquired company is allocated between intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with
the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments
and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the
appropriate weighted average cost of capital.
As  of December  31,  2019,  our  goodwill  totaled $5.2  billion and  our  identifiable  intangible  assets,  net  totaled $67  million.  We  assess  the
impairment of goodwill of our reporting units annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not
be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is
more  likely  than  not  that  the  fair  value  of  the  reporting  unit  is  less  than  its  carrying  value.  If  the  reporting  unit  does  not  pass  the  qualitative
assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market
and  discounted  cash  flow  approaches.  Goodwill  is  considered  impaired  if  the  carrying  value  of  the  reporting  unit  exceeds  its  fair  value.  The
discounted cash flow approach uses expected future operating results. The market
55

approach uses comparable company information to determine revenue and earnings multiples to value our reporting units. Failure to achieve these
expected results or market multiples may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of
goodwill as of August 31, 2019 and 2018. As of December 31, 2019, we determined that no impairment of the carrying value of goodwill for any
reporting units was required. See “Note 4 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Legal Contingencies
In connection with certain pending litigation and other claims, we have estimated the range of probable loss, net of expected recoveries, and
provided for such losses through charges to our consolidated statement of income. These estimates have been based on our assessment of the
facts and circumstances at each balance sheet date and are subject to change based upon new information and future events.
From time to time, we are involved in disputes and regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business. We are currently involved
in  legal  proceedings,  some  of  which  are  discussed  in  “Item  1A:  Risk  Factors,”  “Item  3:  Legal  Proceedings”  and  “Note  12  –  Commitments  and
Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report. We believe that we have meritorious defenses to the claims against
us, and we intend to defend ourselves vigorously. However, even if successful, our defense against certain actions will be costly and could require
significant amounts of management’s time and result in the diversion of significant operational resources. If the plaintiffs were to prevail on certain
claims, we might be forced to pay significant damages and licensing fees, modify our business practices or even be prohibited from conducting a
significant part of our business. Any such results could materially harm our business and could result in a material adverse impact on the financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements included in this report,
regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
56

ITEM 7A: QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Interest Rate Risk
We are exposed to interest rate risk relating to our investments and outstanding debt. In addition, adverse economic conditions and events
(including  volatility  or  distress  in the  equity  and/or  debt  or  credit  markets)  may  impact  regional  and  global  financial  markets.  These  events  and
conditions, including uncertainties and instability in economic and market conditions caused by the United Kingdom’s vote to exit the European
Union and any outcomes resulting from that vote, could cause us to write down our assets or investments. We seek to reduce earnings volatility that
may result from adverse economic conditions and events or changes in interest rates.
The primary objective of our investments is to preserve principal while at the same time improving yields without significantly increasing risk.
To  achieve  this  objective,  we  maintain  our  cash  equivalents  and  short-term  investments  in  a  variety  of  asset  types,  including  bank  deposits,
government bonds and corporate debt securities. As of December 31, 2019, approximately 24% of our total cash and investments was held in cash
and cash equivalents. As such, changes in interest rates will impact interest income. As discussed below, the fair market values of our fixed rate
securities may be adversely affected due to a rise in interest rates, and we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell securities that have
declined in market value due to changes in interest rates.
 
As  of December  31,  2019,  the  balance  of  our  corporate  debt  and  government  bond  securities  was $2.8  billion,  which  represented
approximately 67% of our total cash and investments. Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying
degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of our fixed-rate investment securities may be adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates.
In general, fixed-rate securities with longer maturities are subject to greater interest rate risk than those with shorter maturities. While floating rate
securities generally are subject to less interest rate risk than fixed-rate securities, floating-rate securities may produce less income than expected if
interest rates decrease and may also suffer a decline in market value if interest rates increase. Due in part to these factors, our investment income
may fall short of expectations or we may suffer losses in principal if we sell securities that have declined in market value due to changes in interest
rates. A hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates would have resulted in a decrease in the fair value of our investments of $8 million
and $44 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As of December 31, 2019, we had an aggregate principal amount of $7.8 billion of outstanding senior notes, of which 95% bore interest at
fixed  rates.  In  2014,  we  entered  into  $2.4  billion  of  interest  rate  swap  agreements  that  had  an  economic  effect  of  modifying  the  fixed  interest
obligations associated with $1.15 billion of our 2.200% senior notes due July 2019, $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021, and $500
million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024 so that the interest payable on those notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR plus a
spread. In July 2019, $1.15 billion of the $2.4 billion aggregate notional amount matured. In addition, during the third quarter of 2019, we terminated
the interest rate swaps related to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024,
which were designated as fair value hedges. As a result of the early termination hedge, accounting was discontinued prospectively and the gain on
termination was recorded as an increase to the long-term debt balance and is being recognized over the remaining life of the underlying debt as a
reduction to interest expense. The gain recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 was immaterial.
Further changes in interest rates will impact interest expense on any borrowings under our revolving credit facility, which bear interest at
floating  rates,  and  the  interest  rate  on  any  commercial  paper  borrowings  we  make  and  any  debt  securities  we  may  issue  in  the  future  and,
accordingly, will impact interest expense. For additional details related to our debt, see “Note 10 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements
included in this report.
 
Equity Price Risk
Equity Investments
Our equity investments are primarily investments in privately-held companies. Our consolidated results of operations include, as a component
of interest and other, net, our share of the net income or loss of the equity investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting. Equity
investments without readily determinable fair values are accounted for at cost, less impairment and adjusted for subsequent observable price
changes obtained from orderly transactions for identical or similar investments issued by the same investee. Such changes in the basis of the equity
investment are recognized in interest and other, net. As of December 31, 2019, our equity
57

investments totaled $355 million, which represented approximately 9% of our total cash and investments, and were primarily related to equity
investments without readily determinable fair values.
Warrant
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Changes in Adyen’s common stock price and equity
volatility may have a significant impact  on the value of the warrant.  As of December 31, 2019, a one dollar change in Adyen’s common stock,
holding other factors constant, would increase or decrease the fair value of the warrant by approximately $1 million. For additional details related to
the warrant, please see “Note 7 – Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues and costs that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the
euro, British pound, Korean won and Australian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency risk, which may adversely impact our financial results. We
transact business in various foreign currencies and have significant international revenues as well as costs. In addition, we charge our international
subsidiaries for their use of intellectual property and technology and for certain corporate services we provide. Our cash flow, results of operations
and certain of our intercompany balances that are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations may differ materially from expectations and we may
record significant gains or losses due to foreign currency fluctuations and related hedging activities.
We  have  a  foreign  exchange  exposure  management  program  designed  to  identify  material  foreign  currency  exposures,  manage  these
exposures and reduce the potential effects of currency fluctuations on our reported consolidated cash flows and results of operations through the
purchase of foreign currency exchange contracts. The effectiveness of the program and resulting usage of foreign exchange derivative contracts is
at times limited by our ability to achieve cash flow hedge accounting. For additional details related to our derivative instruments, please see “Note 7
– Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
We use foreign exchange derivative contracts to help protect our forecasted U.S. dollar-equivalent earnings from adverse changes in foreign
currency exchange rates. These hedging contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of adverse currency exchange rate movements.
Most of these contracts are designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes. For qualifying cash flow hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss
is initially reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) and subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same
period the forecasted transaction affects earnings. For contracts not designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, the derivative’s gain
or loss is recognized immediately in earnings in our consolidated statement of income. However, only certain revenue and costs are eligible for cash
flow hedge accounting.
The following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges and net investment
hedges, and the before-tax effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change in the foreign exchange rates that existed as of December 31,
2019.  The  sensitivity  for  foreign  currency  contracts  is  based  on  a  20%  adverse  change  in  foreign  exchange  rates,  against  relevant  functional
currencies.
 
Fair Value
Asset/(Liability)
Fair Value
Sensitivity
(In millions)
Foreign exchange contracts - Cash flow hedges
$
49
$
(88)
Foreign exchange contracts - Net investment hedges
$
(2)
$
(40)
Since our risk management programs are highly effective, the potential loss in value described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
We also use foreign exchange contracts to offset the foreign exchange risk on our assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than
the functional currency of our subsidiaries. These contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of currency exchange rate movements
on our assets and liabilities. The foreign currency
58

gains  and  losses  on  the  assets  and  liabilities  are  recorded  in  interest  and  other,  net,  which  are  offset  by  the  gains  and  losses  on  the  foreign
exchange contracts.
We  considered  the  historical  trends  in  currency  exchange  rates  and  determined  that  it  was  reasonably  possible  that  adverse  changes  in
exchange rates of 20% for all currencies could be experienced in the near term. These changes would have resulted in an adverse impact on
income before income taxes of approximately $18 million as of December 31, 2019 taking into consideration the offsetting effect of foreign exchange
forwards in place as of December 31, 2019.
ITEM 8: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
The  consolidated  financial  statements  and  accompanying  notes  listed  in  Part  IV,  Item  15(a)(1)  of  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  are
included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9: CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A: CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation  of  disclosure  controls  and  procedures: Based  on  the  evaluation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  the
Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e)  under  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  or  the  Exchange  Act)  required  by  Exchange  Act
Rules  13a-15(b)  or  15d-15(b),  our  principal  executive  officer  and  our  principal  financial  officer  have  concluded  that  our  disclosure  controls  and
procedures were effective as of December 31, 2019.
Changes in internal controls: There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting as defined in Exchange Act Rule 13a-15(f)
that occurred during our most recently completed fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal
control over financial reporting.
Management’s  annual report  on internal  control  over financial reporting: Our management  is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting. Our management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, conducted
an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control - Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on its evaluation under the framework in Internal
Control - Integrated Framework, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2019.
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP,
an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which appears in Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9B: OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
59

PART III
ITEM 10: DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2019.
Code of Ethics, Governance Guidelines and Committee Charters
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to all eBay employees and directors. The Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics is posted on our website at https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance/governance-documents/. We will post any amendments
to or waivers from the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics at that location.
We have also adopted Governance Guidelines for the Board of Directors and a written committee charter for each of our Audit Committee,
Compensation  Committee  and  Corporate  Governance  and  Nominating  Committee.  Each  of  these  documents  is  available  on  our  website  at
https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance/governance-documents/.
ITEM 11: EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2019.
ITEM 12: SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2019.
ITEM 13: CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2019.
ITEM 14: PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2019.
60

PART IV
ITEM 15: EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
(a) The following documents are filed as part of this report:
1. Consolidated Financial Statements:
Page
Number
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-1
Consolidated Balance Sheet
F-3
Consolidated Statement of Income
F-4
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
F-5
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
F-6
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
F-7
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
F-9
2. Financial Statement Schedule
Schedule II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
F-46
All other schedules have been omitted because the information required to be set forth therein is not applicable or is
shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.
3. Exhibits Required by Item 601 of Regulation S-K
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index to Exhibits that precedes the signature page of this Annual
Report.
F-47
ITEM 16: FORM 10-K SUMMARY
None.
61

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of eBay Inc.
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of eBay Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the
related consolidated statements of income, of comprehensive income, of stockholders’ equity and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2019, including the related notes and schedule of valuation and qualifying accounts for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2019 appearing under Item 15(a)(2) (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the Company's internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of  the  Company  as  of
December  31,  2019  and  2018,  and  the  results  of  its operations  and  its  cash  flows  for  each  of  the  three  years  in the  period  ended  December  31,  2019  in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued
by the COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed the manner in which it accounts for leases in 2019.
Basis for Opinions
The Company’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for
its  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  Management’s  Annual  Report  on  Internal  Control  over  Financial
Reporting appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules
and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements,  whether  due  to  error  or  fraud,  and  performing  procedures  that  respond  to  those  risks.  Such  procedures  included  examining,  on  a  test  basis,
evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used
and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal
control  over  financial  reporting  included  obtaining  an  understanding  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  assessing  the  risk that  a  material  weakness
exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing
such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A  company’s  internal  control  over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any  evaluation  of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
F-1

Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that was communicated or
required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and
(ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on
the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the
critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Income Taxes
As described in Notes 1 and 15 to the consolidated financial statements, significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s tax expense and in
evaluating management’s tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties and the complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. As disclosed by management, the
Company’s income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to their foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of the Company’s intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. Management recognizes and measures uncertain tax positions in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., or GAAP, pursuant to which management only recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax
position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position.
The total provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $415 million, and the effective tax rate was 18.8%.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to income taxes is a critical audit matter are there is significant judgment
applied by management when determining the tax expense and in evaluating management’s tax positions, including analyzing uncertain tax positions and taxes
on foreign earnings, which in turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, effort, and subjectivity in performing audit procedures and evaluating audit evidence
relating to income taxes.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated financial
statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to income taxes, including controls over uncertain tax positions and the
provision for income taxes. These procedures also included, among others, evaluating tax positions taken by management, including evaluating the
reasonableness of management’s determination of the probability of sustaining the position under tax examination, evaluating communications with the relevant
tax authorities, testing applicable tax rates applied by management, and evaluating the impact of taxes on foreign earnings.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
January 31, 2020
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1997.
F-2

PART II: FINANCIAL INFORMATION
ITEM 8:
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
December 31,
 
2019
 
2018
 
(In millions, except par value)
ASSETS
Current assets:
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
975
$
2,202
Short-term investments
1,850
2,713
Accounts receivable, net
700
712
Other current assets
1,181
1,499
Total current assets
4,706
7,126
Long-term investments
1,316
3,778
Property and equipment, net
1,510
1,597
Goodwill
5,153
5,160
Intangible assets, net
67
92
Operating lease right-of-use assets
628
—
Deferred tax assets
4,377
4,792
Other assets
417
274
Total assets
$
18,174
$
22,819
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities:
 
 
Short-term debt
$
1,022
$
1,546
Accounts payable
270
286
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
2,404
2,335
Deferred revenue
158
170
Income taxes payable
212
117
Total current liabilities
4,066
4,454
Operating lease liabilities
492
—
Deferred tax liabilities
2,646
2,925
Long-term debt
6,738
7,685
Other liabilities
1,362
1,474
Total liabilities
15,304
16,538
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
Stockholders’ equity:
Common stock, $0.001 par value; 3,580 shares authorized; 796 and 915 shares outstanding
2
2
Additional paid-in capital
16,126
15,716
Treasury stock at cost, 897 and 763 shares
(31,396)
(26,394)
Retained earnings
17,754
16,459
Accumulated other comprehensive income
384
498
Total stockholders’ equity
2,870
6,281
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$
18,174
$
22,819
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-3

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Net revenues
$
10,800
$
10,746
$
9,927
Cost of net revenues
2,508
2,382
2,221
Gross profit
8,292
8,364
7,706
Operating expenses:
 
Sales and marketing
3,194
3,391
2,878
Product development
1,240
1,285
1,224
General and administrative
1,189
1,131
1,030
Provision for transaction losses
300
286
272
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
48
49
38
Total operating expenses
5,971
6,142
5,442
Income from operations
2,321
2,222
2,264
Interest and other, net
(114)
496
11
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
2,207
2,718
2,275
Income tax provision
(415)
(190)
(3,288)
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
1,792
$
2,528
$
(1,013)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(6)
2
(4)
Net income (loss)
$
1,786
$
2,530
$
(1,017)
Income (loss) per share - basic:
 
 
Continuing operations
$
2.11
$
2.58
$
(0.95)
Discontinued operations
(0.01)
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
2.10
$
2.58
$
(0.95)
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
2.10
$
2.55
$
(0.95)
Discontinued operations
(0.01)
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
2.09
$
2.55
$
(0.95)
Weighted average shares:
 
 
Basic
849
980
1,064
Diluted
856
991
1,064
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
 
(In millions)
Net income (loss)
$
1,786
$
2,530
$
(1,017)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of reclassification adjustments:
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(99)
(286)
978
Unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
61
(41)
(66)
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
(16)
10
23
Unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
(77)
125
(111)
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
17
(27)
17
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
(114)
(219)
841
Comprehensive income (loss)
$
1,672
$
2,311
$
(176)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-5

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
 
2018
 
2017
 
(In millions)
Common stock:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
$
2
 $
2
 $
2
Common stock issued
—
 
—
 
—
Common stock repurchased/forfeited
—
—
—
Balance, end of year
2
 
2
 
2
Additional paid-in-capital:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
15,716
 
15,293
 
14,907
Common stock and stock-based awards issued
104
 
109
 
120
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and
units
(202)
(225)
(219)
Stock-based compensation
505
 
538
 
484
Other
3
1
1
Balance, end of year
16,126
 
15,716
 
15,293
Treasury stock at cost:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
(26,394)  
(21,892)  
(19,205)
Common stock repurchased
(5,002)  
(4,502)  
(2,687)
Balance, end of year
(31,396)  
(26,394)  
(21,892)
Retained earnings:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
16,459
 
13,929
 
14,946
Net income (loss)
1,786
 
2,530
 
(1,017)
Dividends and dividend equivalents declared
(491)
—
—
Balance, end of year
17,754
 
16,459
 
13,929
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss):
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
498
 
717
 
(124)
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on investments
61
 
(41)  
(66)
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on derivative instruments
(77)  
125
 
(111)
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(99)  
(286)  
978
Tax benefit (provision) on above items
1
(17)
40
Balance, end of year
384
 
498
 
717
Total stockholders’ equity
$
2,870
$
6,281
 $
8,049
Number of shares:
 
 
Common stock - shares outstanding:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
915
 
1,029
 
1,087
Common stock issued
15
 
17
 
24
Common stock repurchased/forfeited
(134)  
(131)  
(82)
Balance, end of year
796
 
915
 
1,029
Dividends and dividend equivalents declared per share or restricted stock unit
$
0.56
$
—
$
—
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-6

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
 
(In millions)
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Net income (loss)
$
1,786
$
2,530
$
(1,017)
(Income) loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
6
(2)
4
Adjustments:
 
 
Provision for transaction losses
300
286
272
Depreciation and amortization
681
696
676
Stock-based compensation
505
538
483
(Gain) loss on investments, net
—
(572)
49
(Gain) loss on sale of business
52
—
(167)
Deferred income taxes
117
(153)
1,728
Change in fair value of warrant
(133)
(104)
—
Other
—
19
—
Changes in assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects
Accounts receivable
(124)
(98)
(195)
Other current assets
177
(143)
(148)
Other non-current assets
222
108
19
Accounts payable
4
(47)
19
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
(391)
(437)
206
Deferred revenue
—
33
8
Income taxes payable and other tax liabilities
(88)
7
1,209
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities
3,114
2,661
3,146
Net cash used in discontinued operating activities
—
(3)
—
Net cash provided by operating activities
3,114
2,658
3,146
Cash flows from investing activities:
 
 
 
Purchases of property and equipment
(554)
(651)
(666)
Purchases of investments
(46,977)
(28,115)
(14,599)
Maturities and sales of investments
50,548
30,901
14,520
Equity investment in Flipkart
—
—
(514)
Equity investment in Paytm Mall
(160)
—
—
Proceeds from sale of equity investment in Flipkart
—
1,029
—
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(93)
(302)
(34)
Other
23
32
(2)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
2,787
2,894
(1,295)
Cash flows from financing activities:
 
 
 
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
106
109
120
Repurchases of common stock
(4,973)
(4,502)
(2,746)
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and units
(202)
(225)
(219)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net
—
—
2,484
Payments for dividends
(473)
—
—
Repayment of debt
(1,550)
(750)
(1,452)
Other
1
(30)
29
Net cash used in financing activities
(7,091)
(5,398)
(1,784)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
(33)
(75)
238
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
(1,223)
79
305
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at beginning of period
2,219
2,140
1,835
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at end of period
$
996
$
2,219
$
2,140

F-7

Supplemental cash flow disclosures:
 
 
 
Cash paid for:
Interest
$
304
$
314
$
285
Interest on finance lease obligations
$
1
$
—
$
—
Income taxes
$
333
$
597
$
308
Noncash investing activities:
Relinquishment of equity method investment
$
—
$
266
$
—
Sale of business in exchange for ownership interest in Flipkart
$
—
$
—
$
211
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-8

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The Company
eBay Inc. is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds platforms. Founded in 1995 in San Jose,
California,  eBay  is  one  of  the  world’s  largest  and  most  vibrant  marketplaces  for  discovering  great  value  and  unique  selection.  Collectively,  we
connect millions of buyers and sellers around the world, empowering people and creating opportunity for all. Our technologies and services are
designed to give buyers choice and a breadth of relevant inventory and to enable sellers worldwide to organize and offer their inventory for sale,
virtually anytime and anywhere. 
When we refer to “we,” “our,” “us” or “eBay” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we mean the current Delaware corporation (eBay Inc.) and
its consolidated subsidiaries, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires.
In the first quarter of 2019, we announced several organizational changes, including bringing our Marketplace geographic regions together
under one global leadership team. We changed from one reportable segment to three reportable segments to reflect the way management and our
chief  operating  decision  maker  (“CODM”)  review  and  assess  performance  of  the  business.  Our three reportable  segments  are  Marketplace,
StubHub and Classifieds. Marketplace includes our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay suite of
mobile  apps.  StubHub  includes  our  online  ticket  platform  located  at  www.stubhub.com,  its  localized  counterparts  and  the  StubHub  mobile
apps.  Classifieds  includes  a  collection  of  brands  such  as  Mobile.de,  Kijiji,  Gumtree,  Marktplaats,  eBay  Kleinanzeigen  and  others.  Prior  period
information has been reclassified to conform to the current period segment presentation. For further information on our segments, refer to “Note 5 –
Segments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
On November 24, 2019, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of viagogo to sell StubHub for $4.05 billion, subject to
certain adjustments. The completion, on our expected timeline, of the proposed sale of StubHub is subject to closing conditions and viagogo’s ability
to obtain debt and equity financing on a timely basis, both of which have not been met as of December 31, 2019. If the conditions to the closing of
the sale of StubHub are neither satisfied nor, where permissible, waived on a timely basis or at all, we may be unable to complete the sale of
StubHub or such completion may be delayed beyond our expected timeline. Given the uncertainty, we have determined as of December 31, 2019
the  transaction  is  not  considered  probable  to  close.  As  such,  StubHub  continues  to  be  classified  as  held  for  use  in  our  December  31,  2019
consolidated financial statements. 
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (“GAAP”)  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an
ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to provisions for transaction losses, legal contingencies, income taxes, revenue
recognition,  stock-based  compensation,  investments,  goodwill  and  the  recoverability  of  intangible  assets.  We  base  our  estimates  on  historical
experience and on various other assumptions  that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.  Actual results could differ from those
estimates.
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements are consolidated and include the financial statements of eBay Inc., our wholly and majority-owned
subsidiaries  and  variable  interest  entities  (“VIE”)  where  we  are  the  primary  beneficiary.  All  intercompany  balances  and  transactions  have  been
eliminated in consolidation. Minority interests are recorded as a noncontrolling interest. A qualitative approach is applied to assess the consolidation
requirement for VIEs. Investments in entities where we hold at least a 20% ownership interest and have the ability to exercise significant influence,
but not control, over the investee are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. For such investments, our share of the investees’ results
of operations is included in interest and other, net and our investment balance is included in long-term investments. Investments in entities where we
hold less than a 20% ownership
F-9

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
interest are generally accounted for as equity investments to be measured at fair value or, under an election, at cost if it does not have readily
determinable  fair  value,  in  which  case  the  carrying  value  would  be  adjusted  upon  the  occurrence  of  an  observable  price  change  in  an  orderly
transaction for identical or similar instruments or impairment.
Significant Accounting Policies
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to
which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected, which are subsequently
remitted to governmental authorities.
Net transaction revenues
Our net transaction revenues primarily include final value fees, feature fees, including fees to promote listings, and listing fees from sellers in
our Marketplace and final value fees from sellers and buyers on our StubHub platforms. Our net transaction revenues also include store subscription
and other fees often from large enterprise sellers. Our net transaction revenues are reduced by incentives provided to our customers.
We identified one performance obligation to sellers on our Marketplace platform, which is to connect buyers and sellers on our secure and
trusted  Marketplace  platforms.  Final  value  fees  are  recognized  when  an  item  is  sold  on  a  Marketplace  platform,  satisfying  this  performance
obligation. There may be additional services available to Marketplace sellers, mainly to promote or feature listings, that are not distinct within the
context of the contract. Accordingly, fees for these additional services are recognized when the single performance obligation is satisfied. Promoted
listing fees are recognized when the item is sold and feature and listing fees are recognized when an item is sold, or when the contract expires. On
our StubHub platform, our performance obligation extends to both buyers and sellers. We made the policy election to consider delivery of tickets in
our StubHub platform to be fulfillment activities and, consequently, the performance obligation is satisfied, and final value fees are recognized, upon
payment to sellers.
Store  subscription  and  other  nonstandard  listing  contracts  may  contain  multiple  performance  obligations,  including  discounts  on  future
services.  Determining  whether  performance  obligations  should  be  accounted  for  separately  or  combined  may  require  significant  judgment.  The
transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on its stand-alone selling price (“SSP”). In instances where SSP is not directly
observable, we generally estimate selling prices based on when they are sold to customers of a similar nature and geography. These estimates are
generally based on pricing strategies, market factors, strategic objectives and observable inputs. Store subscription revenues are recognized over
the  subscription  period,  and  discounts  offered  through  store  subscription  or  nonstandard  listing  contracts  are  recognized  when  the  options  are
exercised or when the options expire.
Further, to drive traffic to our platforms, we provide incentives to buyers and sellers in various forms including discounts on fees, discounts on
items  sold,  coupons  and  rewards.  Evaluating  whether  a  promotion  or  incentive  is  a  payment  to  a  customer  may  require  significant  judgment.
Promotions and incentives which are consideration payable to a customer are recognized as a reduction of revenue at the later of when revenue is
recognized or when we pay or promise to pay the incentive. Promotions and incentives to most buyers on our Marketplace platforms, to whom we
have no performance obligation, are recognized as sales and marketing expense. In addition, we may provide credits to customers when we refund
certain fees. Credits are accounted for as variable consideration at contract inception when estimating the amount of revenue to be recognized
when  a  performance  obligation  is  satisfied  to  the  extent  that  it  is  probable  that  a  significant  reversal  of  revenue  will  not  occur  and  updated  as
additional information becomes available.
Marketing services and other revenues
Our marketing services and other revenues are derived principally from the sale of advertisements, classifieds fees, and revenue sharing
arrangements. Advertising revenue is derived principally from the sale of online advertisements which are based on “impressions” (i.e., the number
of times that an advertisement appears in pages viewed by users of our platforms) or “clicks” (which are generated each time users on our platforms
click through our advertisements to an advertiser’s designated website) delivered to advertisers. We use the output method and apply the practical
expedient to recognize advertising revenue in the amount to which we have a right to invoice. For contracts
F-10

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
with target advertising commitments with rebates, estimated payout is accounted for as a variable consideration to the extent it is probable that a
significant reversal of revenue will not occur.
We generate net revenues related to fees for listing items on our Classifieds platforms, which are recognized over the estimated period of the
classifieds listing and fees to feature the listing that are recognized over the feature period or a point in time depending on the nature of the feature
purchased. Discounts offered through purchase of packages of multiple services are allocated based on the SSP of each respective feature.
Revenues related to revenue sharing arrangements are recognized based on whether we are the principal and are responsible for fulfilling the
promise to provide the specified services or whether we are an agent arranging for those services to be provided by our partners. Determining
whether we are a principal or agent in these contracts may require significant judgment. If we are the principal, we recognize revenue in the gross
amount of consideration received from the customer, whereas if we are an agent, we recognize revenue net of the consideration due to our partners
at a point in time when the services are provided. Our most significant revenue share arrangements are with shipping service providers. We are
primarily acting as an agent in these contracts and revenues are recognized at a point in time when we have satisfied our promise of connecting the
shipping service provider to our customer.
Refer to “Note 5 – Segments” for further information, including revenue by types and geographical markets.
Contract balances  
Timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. Accounts receivable represents amounts invoiced and
revenue  recognized  prior  to  invoicing  when  we  have  satisfied  our  performance  obligation  and  have  the  unconditional  right  to  payment.  The
allowance for doubtful accounts and authorized credits is estimated based upon our assessment of various factors including historical experience,
the  age  of  the  accounts  receivable  balances,  current  economic  conditions  and  other  factors  that  may  affect  our  customers’  ability  to  pay.  The
allowance  for  doubtful  accounts  and  authorized  credits  was $128  million and $106  million as  of December  31,  2019 and December  31,  2018,
respectively.
Deferred revenue consists of fees received related to unsatisfied performance obligations at the end of the period. Due to the generally short-
term  duration  of  contracts,  the  majority  of  the  performance  obligations  are  satisfied  in  the  following  reporting  period.  The  amount  of  revenue
recognized for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 that was included in the deferred revenue balance at the beginning of the period was
$93 million. The amount of revenue recognized for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018 that was included in the deferred revenue balance
at the beginning of the period was $96 million.
Internal use software and platform development costs
Direct costs incurred to develop software for internal use and platform development costs are capitalized and amortized over an estimated
useful life of one to five years. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we capitalized costs, primarily related to labor and stock-
based compensation, of $137 million and $147 million, respectively. Amortization of previously capitalized amounts was $150 million, $160 million
and $156  million for 2019, 2018 and 2017,  respectively.  Costs  related  to  the  design  or  maintenance  of  internal  use  software  and  platform
development are expensed as incurred.
Advertising expense
We expense the costs of producing advertisements at the time production occurs and expense the cost of communicating advertisements in
the period during which the advertising space or airtime is used, in each case as sales and marketing expense. Internet advertising expenses are
recognized based on the terms of the individual agreements, which are generally over the greater of the ratio of the number of impressions delivered
over  the  total  number  of  contracted  impressions,  on  a  pay-per-click  basis,  or  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  term  of  the  contract.  Advertising
expense totaled $1.4 billion, $1.4 billion and $1.3 billion for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
F-11

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Stock-based compensation
We have equity incentive plans under which we grant equity awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-
based  restricted  stock  units,  and  performance  share  units,  to  our  directors,  officers  and  employees.  We  primarily  issue  RSUs.  We  determine
compensation  expense  associated  with  RSUs  based  on  the  fair  value  of  our  common  stock  on  the  date  of  grant.  We  determine  compensation
expense associated with stock options based on the estimated grant date fair value method using the Black-Scholes valuation model. We generally
recognize  compensation  expense  using  a  straight-line  amortization  method  over  the  respective  vesting  period  for  awards  that  are  ultimately
expected to vest.  Accordingly,  stock-based  compensation  expense for 2019, 2018 and 2017 has been reduced for estimated  forfeitures.  When
estimating forfeitures, we consider voluntary termination behaviors as well as trends of actual option forfeitures. We recognize a benefit or provision
from stock-based compensation in earnings as a component of income tax expense to the extent that an incremental tax benefit or deficiency is
realized by following the ordering provisions of the tax law.
Provision for transaction losses
Provision  for  transaction  losses  consists  primarily  of  losses  resulting  from  our  buyer  protection  programs,  fraud  and  bad  debt  expense
associated  with  our  accounts  receivable  balance.  Provisions  for  these  items  represent  our  estimate  of  actual  losses  based  on  our  historical
experience and many other factors including changes to our protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes as well as economic conditions.
Income taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties and the
complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Tax
positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. Our
income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of our intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. 
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach, which requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the
current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements
or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of enacted tax laws; the effects of future
changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated. If necessary, the measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by the amount of any tax benefits
that are not expected to be realized based on available evidence.
We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We
recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less when purchased, which
may include bank deposits, US Treasury securities, time deposits, and certificates of deposit.
Investments
Short-term investments are investments with original maturities of less than one year when purchased, are classified as available-for-sale and
are  reported  at  fair  value  using  the  specific  identification  method.  Short-term  investments  are  primarily  comprised  of  corporate  debt  securities,
commercial paper, and agency securities.
Long-term investments are primarily comprised of corporate debt securities, agency securities, and equity investments. Debt securities are
classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value using the specific identification method.
F-12

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Unrealized  gains  and  losses  on  our  available-for-sale  debt  securities  are  excluded  from  earnings  and  reported  as  a  component  of  other
comprehensive income (loss), net of related estimated income tax provisions or benefits.
Our equity investments are primarily investments in privately-held companies. We account for equity investments through which we exercise
significant  influence  but  do  not  have  control  over  the  investee  under  the  equity  method.  Our  consolidated  results  of  operations  include,  as  a
component  of  interest  and  other,  net,  our  share  of  the  net  income  or  loss  of  the  equity  investments  accounted  for  under  the  equity  method  of
accounting. Our share of investees’ results of operations is not significant for any period presented. Our equity investments not accounted for under
the equity method are carried at under the measurement alternative. Under the measurement alternative, the carrying value is measured at cost
minus  impairment,  if  any,  plus  or  minus  changes  resulting  from  observable  price  changes  in  orderly  transactions  for  the  identical  or  a  similar
investment of the same issuer. Such changes in the basis of the equity investment are recognized in interest & other, net.
We periodically perform impairment assessment review of our debt and equity investments. For debt securities, this assessment takes into
account the severity and duration of the decline in value, our intent to sell the security, whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to
sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, and whether we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security (that is,
whether a credit loss exists). If any impairment is considered other-than-temporary, we will write down the security to its fair value and record the
corresponding charge as interest & other, net. For equity investments we perform a qualitative assessment on a quarterly basis and recognize an
impairment if there are sufficient indicators that the fair value of the investment is less than carrying value. Changes in value are recorded in interest
& other, net.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease or contains a lease at inception. Operating and finance lease liabilities are recognized based on
the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted using the discount rate for the lease at the commencement date. As the rate implicit
in the lease is not readily determinable for our operating leases, we generally use an incremental borrowing rate based on information available at
the commencement date to determine the present value of future lease payments. Operating right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and finance lease assets
are generally recognized based on the amount of the initial measurement of the lease liability. Our leases have remaining lease terms of up to ten
years, some of which include options to extend the leases for up to five years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases within one
year. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease
component for our data center leases. Lease and non-lease components for all other leases are accounted for separately.
Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use assets, other current liabilities and operating lease liabilities on our consolidated
balance  sheets.  Finance  leases  are  included  in  property  and  equipment,  net,  short-term  debt,  and  long-term  debt  on  our  consolidated  balance
sheet.
Property and equipment
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  historical  cost  less  accumulated  depreciation.  Depreciation  for  equipment,  buildings  and  leasehold
improvements commences once they are ready for our intended use. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated
useful  lives  of  the  assets,  generally, one to three years  for  computer  equipment  and  software,  up  to thirty years  for  buildings  and  building
improvements, the shorter of five years or the term of the lease for leasehold improvements and three years for furniture, fixtures and vehicles. Land
is not depreciated.
F-13

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a minimum on an annual basis at the reporting unit level. A qualitative assessment can be performed to
determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass
the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated
using  income  and  market  approaches.  Goodwill  is  considered  impaired  if  the  carrying  value  of  the  reporting  unit  exceeds  its  fair  value.  The
discounted cash flow method, a form of the income approach, uses expected future operating results and a market participant discount rate. The
market approach uses comparable company prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions (either publicly traded entities
or mergers and acquisitions) to develop pricing metrics to be applied to historical and expected future operating results of our reporting units. Failure
to achieve these expected results, changes in the discount rate or market pricing metrics may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting
unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill as of August 31, 2019 and 2018 and determined that no adjustment to the carrying value
of goodwill for any reporting units was required. 
Intangible assets consist of purchased customer lists and user base, marketing related, developed technologies and other intangible assets,
including patents and contractual agreements. Intangible assets are amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method
and estimated useful lives ranging from one to five years. No significant residual value is estimated for intangible assets.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We evaluate long-lived assets (including intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable. An asset is considered impaired if its carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted
future net cash flow the asset is expected to generate. In 2019, 2018 and 2017, no impairment was noted.
Foreign currency
 
Most  of our foreign  subsidiaries  use the local currency  of  their  respective  countries  as their  functional  currency.  Assets  and liabilities  are
translated  into U.S. dollars  using exchange  rates  prevailing at  the balance sheet  date,  while revenues  and expenses  are translated  at  average
exchange rates during the year. Gains and losses resulting from the translation of our consolidated balance sheet are recorded as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income.
Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are recognized as interest and other, net.
Derivative instruments
We use derivative financial instruments, primarily forwards, options and swaps, to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures.
We may also use other derivative instruments not designated as hedges, such as forwards to hedge foreign currency balance sheet exposures. We
do not use derivative financial instruments for trading purposes. 
We also entered into a warrant agreement in addition to a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
See “Note 7 – Derivative Instruments” for a full description of our derivative instrument activities and related accounting policies.
F-14

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Concentration of credit risk
Our cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable and derivative instruments are potentially subject to concentration of credit risk. Cash and
cash equivalents are placed with financial institutions that management believes are of high credit quality. Our accounts receivable are derived from
revenue earned from customers. In each of the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, no customer accounted for more than 10% of net
revenues.  Our  derivative  instruments  expose  us  to  credit  risk  to  the  extent  that  our  counterparties  may  be  unable  to  meet  the  terms  of  the
agreements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In  2016,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  new  guidance  related  to  accounting  for  leases.  The  new  guidance
requires the recognition of right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous
guidance.  We  adopted  this  guidance  in  the  first  quarter  of  2019  using  the  modified  retrospective  approach,  electing  the  package  of  practical
expedients,  and the practical  expedient  to not  separate  lease and nonlease components  for data  center  operating  leases.  We also elected  the
optional transition method that permits adoption of the new standard prospectively, as of the effective date, without adjusting comparative periods
presented. Adoption of the standard resulted in the recognition of $728 million of ROU assets and $744 million of lease liabilities on our consolidated
balance sheet at adoption related to office space, data and fulfillment centers, and other corporate assets. The difference of $16 million represented
deferred rent for leases that existed as of the date of adoption, which was an offset to the opening balance of right-of-use assets. The adoption of
the standard on January 1, 2019 did not have a material impact on our consolidated statements of income, stockholders’ equity and cash flows.
In 2017, the FASB issued new guidance that will shorten the amortization period for certain callable debt securities held at a premium to the
earliest call date to more closely align with expectations incorporated in market pricing. The new guidance will not impact debt securities held at a
discount. Adoption of this standard was made on a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment directly to retained earnings
as of the beginning of the period of adoption. This standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including
interim reporting periods within those annual reporting periods. The adoption of the standard in the first quarter of 2019 did not have a material
impact on our consolidated financial statements at adoption.
In 2018, the FASB issued new guidance to simplify the accounting for nonemployee share-based payment transactions by expanding the
scope of ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from
nonemployees.  Under  the  new  standard,  most  of  the  guidance  on  stock  compensation  payments  to  nonemployees  would  be  aligned  with  the
requirements for share-based payments granted to employees. This standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15,
2018, including interim reporting periods within those annual reporting periods. The adoption of the standard in the first quarter of 2019 did not have
an impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2018, the FASB issued guidance to permit use of the Overnight Index Swap (“OIS”) rate as a U.S. benchmark interest rate for hedge
accounting  purposes  in  addition  to  the  UST,  the  London  InterBank  Offered  Rate  (“LIBOR”)  swap  rate,  the  OIS  rate  based  on  the  Fed  Funds
Effective Rate, and the Securities Industry and Financial Market Association Municipal Swap Rate. This guidance is effective for annual reporting
periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim reporting periods within those annual reporting periods. The adoption of the standard
in the first quarter of 2019 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements at adoption.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance that requires credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at
the  net  amount  expected  to  be  collected,  not  based  on  incurred  losses.  Further,  credit  losses  on  available-for-sale  debt  securities  should  be
recorded through an allowance for credit losses limited to the amount by which fair value is below amortized cost. The new standard is effective for
fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. This standard impacts the Company’s accounting for
allowances for doubtful accounts, available-for-sale securities and other assets subject to credit risk. In preparation for the adoption of this standard,
we will update our credit loss models as needed. The Company has completed its analysis of the impact of this guidance and the adoption of this
standard will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
F-15

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In  2017,  the  FASB  issued  new  guidance  to  simplify  the  subsequent  measurement  of  goodwill  by  removing  the  requirement  to  perform  a
hypothetical purchase price allocation to compute the implied fair value of goodwill to measure impairment. Instead, any goodwill impairment will
equal  the  amount  by  which  a  reporting  unit’s  carrying  value  exceeds  its  fair  value,  not  to  exceed  the  carrying  amount  of  goodwill.  Further,  the
guidance eliminates the requirements for any reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment and, if it
fails that qualitative test, to perform Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test. This standard is effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment
test in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on our consolidated
financial statements.
In 2018, the FASB issued new guidance on a customer's accounting for implementation, set-up, and other upfront costs incurred in a cloud
computing arrangement that is hosted by the vendor (i.e., a service contract). Under the new guidance, customers will apply the same criteria for
capitalizing  implementation  costs  as  they  would  for  an  arrangement  that  has  a  software  license.  This  standard  is  effective  for  annual  reporting
periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim reporting periods within those fiscal years. The adoption of this standard will not have
a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2018, the FASB issued new guidance to  clarify  the interaction  between Collaborative  Arrangements  and Revenue from  Contracts  with
Customers  standards.  The  guidance  (1)  clarifies  that  certain  transactions  between  collaborative  arrangement  participants  should  be  accounted
under revenue guidance; (2) adds unit of account guidance to the collaborative arrangement guidance to align with the revenue standard; and (3)
clarifies presentation guidance for transactions with a collaborative arrangement participant that is not accounted for under the revenue standard.
The guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim reporting periods within those annual
reporting periods. We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2019, the FASB issued new guidance to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles
and also simplification of areas such as franchise taxes, step-up in tax basis goodwill, separate entity financial statements and interim recognition of
enactment of tax laws or rate changes. The standard will be effective for our annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, including
interim reporting periods within those fiscal years. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting guidance on our consolidated
financial statements.
F-16

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 2 – Net Income (loss) Per Share
Basic net income (loss)  per share is computed  by dividing net income (loss) for the period by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) for the period by the weighted
average number of shares of common stock and potentially dilutive common stock outstanding during the period. The dilutive effect of outstanding
options and equity incentive awards is reflected in diluted net income (loss) per share by application of the treasury stock method. The calculation of
diluted net income (loss) per share excludes all anti-dilutive common shares.
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted net income (loss) per share (in millions, except per share amounts):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Numerator:
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
1,792
$
2,528
$
(1,013)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(6)
2
(4)
Net income (loss)
$
1,786
$
2,530
$
(1,017)
Denominator:
Weighted average shares of common stock - basic
849
980
1,064
Dilutive effect of equity incentive awards
7
11
—
Weighted average shares of common stock - diluted
856
991
1,064
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
2.11
$
2.58
$
(0.95)
Discontinued operations
(0.01)
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
2.10
$
2.58
$
(0.95)
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
2.10
$
2.55
$
(0.95)
Discontinued operations
(0.01)
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
2.09
$
2.55
$
(0.95)
Common stock equivalents excluded from income per diluted share because their effect
would have been anti-dilutive
18
12
46
F-17

Note 3 – Business Combinations
Business Combinations
In  February  2019,  we  completed  our  acquisition  of  the  U.K.-based  classifieds  site,  Motors.co.uk  for $93  million in  cash.  We  believe  the
acquisition will increase our international presence and give buyers access to more listings.
The aggregate purchase consideration was allocated as follows (in millions):
Motors.co.uk
Goodwill
$
65
Purchased intangible assets
30
Net liabilities
(2)
Total
$
93
These  allocations  were  prepared  on  a  preliminary  basis  and  changes  to  these  allocations  may  occur  as  additional  information  becomes
available. We assigned the goodwill to our Classifieds segment. The goodwill recognized is primarily attributable to expected synergies and the
assembled workforce of Motors.co.uk. We generally do not expect goodwill to be deductible for income tax purposes.
In 2018, we completed the acquisition of 100% of Giosis Pte. Ltd.’s (“Giosis”) Japan business, including the Qoo10.jp platform, in exchange
for $306 million in cash and the relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in Giosis. We believe the acquisition allows us to offer
Japanese consumers more inventory and grow our international presence. Refer to “Note 6 – Investments” for further details on the relinquishment
of our equity method investment in Giosis’ non-Japanese business. The aggregate purchase consideration was allocated as follows (in millions):
Giosis
Goodwill
$
532
Purchased intangible assets
91
Net liabilities
(50)
Total
$
573
The  goodwill  recognized  is  primarily  attributable  to  expected  synergies  and  the  assembled  workforce  of  Giosis.  We  have  assigned  the
goodwill to our Marketplace segment. We generally do not expect goodwill to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Acquisition activity in 2017 was immaterial.
Our consolidated financial statements include the operating results of acquired businesses from the date of acquisition. Separate operating
results and pro forma results of operations for the acquisition above have not been presented as the effect of these acquisitions is not material to our
financial results.
Note 4 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
The following table presents goodwill activity by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
 
December 31, 
2017
Goodwill 
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31, 
2018
Goodwill 
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31, 
2019
Marketplace
$
4,186
$
532
$
(124)
$
4,594
$
—
$
(60)
$
4,534
StubHub
233
—
(6)
227
—
(4)
223
Classifieds
354
—
(15)
339
65
(8)
396
Total
$
4,773
$
532
$
(145)
$
5,160
$
65
$
(72)
$
5,153
F-18

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The adjustments to goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were primarily due to foreign currency translation. There
were no impairments to goodwill in 2019 and 2018.
Intangible Assets
The components of identifiable intangible assets are as follows (in millions, except years): 
 
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
 
Gross
Carrying
Amount  
Accumulated
Amortization 
Net Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average
Useful Life
(Years)
Gross
Carrying
Amount 
Accumulated
Amortization 
Net Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average
Useful Life
(Years)
Intangible assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Customer lists and
user base
$
502
$
(448)
$
54
5
$
519
$
(445)
$
74
5
Marketing-related
540
(535)
5
5
584
(578)
6
5
Developed
technologies
272
(267)
5
3
278
(269)
9
3
All other
161
(158)
3
4
160
(157)
3
4
Total
$
1,475
$
(1,408)
$
67
 
$
1,541
$
(1,449)
$
92
 
  
Amortization expense for intangible assets was $55 million, $63 million and $64 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and
2017, respectively.
Expected future intangible asset amortization as of December 31, 2019 is as follows (in millions):
Fiscal year:
2020
$
45
2021
18
2022
2
2023
2
2024
—
Total
$
67
Note 5 – Segments
In the first quarter of 2019, we announced several organizational changes, including bringing our Marketplace geographic regions together
under one global leadership team. We changed from one reportable segment to three reportable segments to reflect the way management and our
chief  operating  decision  maker  (“CODM”)  review  and  assess  performance  of  the  business.  Our three reportable  segments  are  Marketplace,
StubHub and Classifieds. Marketplace includes our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay suite of
mobile apps. StubHub includes our online ticket platform located at www.stubhub.com, its localized counterparts and the StubHub mobile apps.
Classifieds includes a collection of brands such as mobile.de, Kijiji, Gumtree, Marktplaats, eBay Kleinanzeigen and others. The accounting policies
of our segments are the same as those described in “Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”. Prior period segment
information has been reclassified to conform to the current period segment presentation.
Our reportable segments reflect the way management and our CODM review and assess performance of the business. Our CODM reviews
revenue and operating income  (loss)  for  each reportable  segment.  Our  CODM  does not  evaluate reportable  segments  using asset information.
Corporate and other costs includes: (i) corporate management costs, such as human resources, finance and legal, that are not allocated to our
segments; (ii) amortization of intangible assets; (iii) restructuring charges; (iv) stock-based compensation; and (v) results of operations of various
initiatives that support all of our reportable segments.
F-19

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Segment net revenue and operating income for the years ended 2019, 2018 and 2017 were as follows (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Net Revenues
Marketplace
Net transaction revenues
$
7,578
$
7,416
$
6,809
Marketing services and other revenues
1,060
1,225
1,192
Total Marketplace
8,638
8,641
8,001
StubHub
Net transaction revenues
1,057
1,068
1,011
Marketing services and other revenues
64
15
18
Total StubHub
1,121
1,083
1,029
Classifieds (1)
1,061
1,022
897
Elimination of inter-segment net revenue (2)
(20)
—
—
Total consolidated net revenue
$
10,800
$
10,746
$
9,927
Operating income (loss)
Marketplace
$
2,814
$
2,673
$
2,626
StubHub
139
149
161
Classifieds
420
401
314
Corporate and other costs
(1,052)
(1,001)
(837)
Total operating income
2,321
2,222
2,264
Interest and other, net
(114)
496
11
Income before income taxes
$
2,207
$
2,718
$
2,275
(1)
Classifieds net revenues consists entirely of marketing services and other revenue.
(2)
Represents revenue generated between our reportable segments.
F-20

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following tables summarize the allocation of net revenues and long-lived tangible assets based on geography (in millions):  
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
  
2018
  
2017
Net revenues by geography:
U.S.
$
4,337
  $
4,373
  $
4,187
Germany
1,506
  
1,591
  
1,464
United Kingdom
1,441
  
1,481
  
1,368
South Korea
1,221
1,195
1,061
Rest of world
2,295
  
2,106
  
1,847
Total net revenues
$
10,800
$
10,746
$
9,927
 
December 31,
 
2019
  
2018
Long-lived tangible assets by geography:
U.S.
$
1,786
  $
1,661
International
352
  
151
Total long-lived tangible assets
$
2,138
  $
1,812
Net revenues, inclusive of the effects of foreign exchange during each period, are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily
based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays advertising, other service provider, or customer, as the case may be, is located.
Long-lived  assets  attributed  to  the  U.S.  and  international  geographies  are  based  upon  the  country  in  which  the  asset  is  located  or  owned.
Depreciation and amortization expense was primarily recorded in the Marketplace segment.
Note 6 – Investments
The following tables summarize the unrealized gains and losses and estimated fair value of our investments classified as available-for-sale as
of December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2019
 
Gross
Amortized
Cost
  
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
  
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
 
Estimated
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
21
  $
—
  $
—
 $
21
Corporate debt securities
1,653
  
1
  
—
 
1,654
Government and agency securities
175
  
—
  
—
 
175
$
1,849
  $
1
  $
—
 $
1,850
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
957
  
4
  
—
 
961
$
957
  $
4
  $
—
 $
961
 
F-21

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
 
December 31, 2018
 
Gross
Amortized
Cost
  
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
  
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
 
Estimated
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
17
  $
—
  $
—
 $
17
Corporate debt securities
2,615
  
—
  
(9)  
2,606
Government and agency securities
90
  
—
  
—
 
90
$
2,722
$
—
$
(9)
$
2,713
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
3,682
  
1
  
(48)  
3,635
$
3,682
  $
1
  $
(48)  $
3,635
Restricted cash is held primarily in interest bearing accounts for letters of credit primarily related to our global sabbatical program and various
lease  arrangements.  Our  fixed-income  investments  consist  of  predominantly  investment  grade  corporate  debt  securities  and  government  and
agency securities. The corporate debt and government and agency securities that we invest in are generally deemed to be low risk based on their
credit ratings from the major rating agencies.
The longer the duration of these securities, the more susceptible they are to changes in market interest rates and bond yields. As interest
rates  increase,  those  securities  purchased  at  a  lower  yield  show  a  mark-to-market  unrealized  loss.  The  unrealized  losses  are  due  primarily  to
changes in credit spreads and interest rates. We regularly review investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment using both qualitative
and quantitative criteria. We presently do not intend to sell any of the securities in an unrealized loss position and expect to realize the full value of
all these investments upon maturity or sale.
Investment securities in a continuous loss position for less than 12 months had an estimated fair value of $774 million and an immaterial
amount of unrealized losses as of December 31, 2019, and an estimated fair value of $2.9 billion and an immaterial amount of unrealized losses as
of December 31, 2018. Investment securities in a continuous loss position for greater than 12 months had an estimated fair value of $92 million and
an immaterial amount of unrealized losses as of December 31, 2019 and an estimated fair value of $2.7 billion and unrealized losses of $41 million
December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2019, these securities had a weighted average remaining maturity of approximately 2 months. Refer to
“Note 17 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income” for amounts reclassified to earnings from unrealized gains and losses.
 
The estimated fair values of our short-term and long-term investments classified as available-for-sale by date of contractual maturity as of
December 31, 2019 are as follows (in millions):  
 
December 31, 2019
One year or less (including restricted cash of $21)
$
1,850
One year through two years
676
Two years through three years
198
Three years through four years
87
Total
$
2,811
Equity Investments
Our equity investments are reported in long-term investments on our consolidated balance sheet. The following table provides a summary of
our equity investments as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
Equity investments without readily determinable fair values
$
337
$
137
Equity investments under the equity method of accounting
18
6
Total equity investments
$
355
$
143
F-22

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In 2019, we invested $160 million in cash in exchange for an equity interest in Paytm Mall and $40 million in other investments. These
investments are accounted for as equity investments without readily determinable fair value.
In 2018, we sold our investment in Flipkart and relinquished our existing equity method investment in Giosis as part of the exchange for the
acquisition of Giosis’ Japan business. The $313 million gain upon sale of our investment in Flipkart and the $266 million gain upon relinquishment of
our  equity  method  investment  in  Giosis  were  recorded  in  interest  and  other,  net  on  our  consolidated  statement  of  income.  Refer  to  “Note  3 –
Business Combinations” for further details on the Giosis acquisition.
In 2017, we made a cost method investment of $50 million. In addition, we received a 5.44% ownership interest in Flipkart in exchange for our
eBay India business and a $500 million cash investment, resulting in an investment of $725 million accounted for as an equity investment without
readily determinable fair value. The gain on disposal of our eBay India business of $167 million was recorded in interest and other, net on our
consolidated statement of income. In addition, we recorded a $61 million impairment charge to write-down our cost method investment in Jasper
Infotech Private Limited (“Snapdeal”). The investment was measured at fair value due to events and circumstances that we identified as having
significant impact on its fair value. The fair value measurement of the impaired investment was measured using significant unobservable inputs. The
impairment charge, representing the difference between the net book value and the fair value, was recorded to interest and other, net.
The  following  table  summarizes  the  total  carrying  value  of  equity  investments  without  readily  determinable  fair  values  during  the twelve
months ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (in millions):
Year Ended 
December 31, 2019
Year Ended December 31,
2018
Carrying value, beginning of period
$
137
$
872
Additions
200
23
Sales
—
(718)
Downward adjustments for observable price changes and impairment
—
(20)
Foreign currency translation and other
—
(20)
Carrying value, end of period
$
337
$
137
For such equity investments without readily determinable fair values still held at December 31, 2019, cumulative downward adjustments for
price changes and impairment was $81 million. As of December 31, 2019, there have been no upward adjustments for price changes to our equity
investments without readily determinable fair values.
Note 7 – Derivative Instruments
Our primary objective in holding derivatives is to reduce the volatility of earnings and cash flows associated with changes in foreign currency
exchange rates and interest rates. These hedging contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of adverse foreign exchange rate and
interest rate movements. We do not use any of our derivative instruments for trading purposes.
We  use  foreign  currency  exchange  contracts  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  cash  flows  related  to  forecasted  revenues,  expenses,  assets  and
liabilities, including intercompany balances denominated in foreign currencies. These contracts are generally one month to one year in duration, but
with maturities up to 24 months. The objective of the foreign exchange contracts is to better ensure that ultimately the U.S. dollar-equivalent cash
flows  are not adversely  affected  by changes  in the  applicable U.S.  dollar/foreign  currency  exchange  rate.  We  evaluate  the effectiveness  of  our
foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow or net investment hedges on a quarterly basis.
We used interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on our fixed rate notes issued in July 2014 and maturing in 2019, 2021 and 2024.
These interest rate swaps had the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with $2.4 billion of these notes so that the
interest payable on these senior notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR plus a spread. There were no interest rate swaps outstanding
as of December 31, 2019.
F-23

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Cash Flow Hedges
For  derivative  instruments  that  are  designated  as  cash  flow  hedges,  the  derivative’s  gain  or  loss  is  initially  reported  as  a  component  of
accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (“AOCI”)  and  subsequently  reclassified  into  earnings  in  the  same  period  the  forecasted  hedged
transaction  affects  earnings.  Derivative  instruments  designated  as cash  flow  hedges must  be de-designated  as hedges when it is probable  the
forecasted hedged transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a subsequent two-month time period. Unrealized gains and
losses in AOCI associated with such derivative instruments are immediately reclassified into earnings. As of December 31, 2019, we have estimated
that approximately $2 million of net derivative loss related to our cash flow hedges included in accumulated other comprehensive income will be
reclassified  into  earnings  within  the  next  12  months.  We  classify  cash  flows  related  to  our  cash  flow  hedges  as  operating  activities  in  our
consolidated statement of cash flows.
Net Investment Hedges
For derivative instruments that are designated as net investment hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported in the translation
adjustments  component  of  AOCI  and  is  reclassified  to  net  earnings  in  the  period  in  which  the  hedged  subsidiary  is  either  sold  or  substantially
liquidated.
Fair Value Hedges
We designated the interest rate swaps used to manage interest rate risk on our fixed rate notes issued in July 2014 and maturing in 2019,
2021 and 2024 as qualifying hedging instruments and accounted for them as fair value hedges. These transactions were designated as fair value
hedges for financial accounting purposes because they protected us against changes in the fair value of certain of our fixed rate borrowings due to
benchmark  interest  rate  movements.  In  2019, $1.15  billion related  to  our 2.200% senior  notes  due  2019  of  the $2.4  billion aggregate  notional
amount matured. In addition, during the three months ended September 30, 2019, we terminated the interest rate swaps related to $750 million of
our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024. As a result of the early termination, hedge
accounting was discontinued prospectively and the gain on termination was recorded as an increase to the long-term debt balance and is being
recognized over the remaining life of the underlying debt as a reduction to interest expense. The gain recognized during the year ended December
31, 2019 was immaterial.
Non-Designated Hedges
Our derivatives not designated as hedging instruments consist of foreign currency forward contracts that we primarily use to hedge monetary
assets  or  liabilities,  including  intercompany  balances  denominated  in  non-functional  currencies.  The  gains  and  losses  on  our  derivatives  not
designated as hedging instruments are recorded in interest and other, net, which are offset by the foreign currency gains and losses on the related
assets and liabilities that are also recorded in interest and other, net. We classify cash flows related to our non-designated hedging instruments as
operating activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
Warrant
We  entered  into  a warrant  agreement  in conjunction  with  a  commercial  agreement  with  Adyen  that,  subject  to  meeting  certain  conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
has a term of seven years and will vest in a series of four tranches, at a specified price per share upon meeting significant processing volume
milestone targets on a calendar year basis. If and when the relevant milestone is reached, the warrant becomes exercisable with respect to the
corresponding tranche of warrant shares up until the warrant expiration date of January 31, 2025. The maximum number of tranches that can vest in
one calendar year is two.
 
The warrant is accounted for as a derivative under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. We report the warrant at fair value within other
assets in our consolidated balance sheets and changes in the fair value of the warrant are recognized in interest and other, net in our consolidated
statement of income. The day-one value attributable to the other side of the warrant, which was recorded as a deferred credit, is reported within
other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets and will be amortized over the life of the commercial arrangement.
F-24

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Fair Value of Derivative Contracts
The fair values of our outstanding derivative instruments as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (in millions):
 
Balance Sheet Location
December 31, 
2019
December 31, 
2018
Derivative Assets:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Assets
$
36
$
72
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other Current Assets
17
38
Warrant
Other Assets
281
148
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Assets
15
4
Total derivative assets
$
349
$
262
Derivative Liabilities:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Liabilities
$
2
$
—
Foreign exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges
Other Current Liabilities
2
1
Interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges
Other Current Liabilities
—
7
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other Current Liabilities
21
30
Interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges
Other Liabilities
—
10
Total derivative liabilities
$
25
$
48
Total fair value of derivative instruments
$
324
$
214
Under the master netting agreements with the respective counterparties to our derivative contracts, subject to applicable requirements, we are
allowed to net settle transactions of the same type with a single net amount payable by one party to the other. However, we have elected to present
the derivative assets and derivative liabilities on a gross basis on our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2019, the potential effect of
rights  of  set-off  associated  with  the  foreign  exchange  contracts  would  be  an  offset  to  both  assets  and  liabilities  by $25  million,  resulting  in  net
derivative assets of $43 million and net derivative liabilities of less than $1 million.
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables present the activity of derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, and
the impact of these derivative contracts on AOCI for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2018
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive 
Income
Less: Amount of Gain
(Loss) Reclassified From
AOCI to Earnings
December 31, 2019
Foreign exchange contracts
designated as cash flow hedges
$
68
4
81
$
(9)
 
December 31, 2017
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive 
Income
Less: Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From AOCI to
Earnings
December 31, 2018
Foreign exchange contracts
designated as cash flow hedges
$
(57)
117
(8)
$
68
F-25

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Consolidated Statement of Income
The following table provides a summary of the total gain (loss) recognized in the consolidated statement of income from our foreign exchange
derivative contracts by location (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in net revenues
$
81
$
(8)
$
(28)
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in cost of net
revenues
—
—
11
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in interest and other,
net
—
—
24
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments recognized in interest and
other, net
(11)
9
(16)
Total gain (loss) recognized from foreign exchange derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
70
$
1
$
(9)
The following table provides a summary of the total gain (loss) recognized in the consolidated statement of income from our interest rate
derivative contracts by location (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Gain (loss) from interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges recognized in interest
and other, net
$
34
$
(19)
$
(21)
Gain (loss) from hedged items attributable to hedged risk recognized in interest and other, net
(34)
19
21
Total gain (loss) recognized from interest rate derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
—
$
—
$
—
The following table provides a summary of the total gain recognized in the consolidated statement of income due to changes in the fair value
of the warrant (in millions): 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Gain attributable to changes in the fair value of warrant recognized in interest and other, net
$
133
$
104
$
—
Notional Amounts of Derivative Contracts
Derivative transactions are measured in terms of the notional amount, but this amount is not recorded on the balance sheet and is not, when
viewed in isolation, a meaningful measure of the risk profile of the instruments. The notional amount is generally not exchanged, but is used only as
the  basis  on  which  the  value  of  foreign  exchange  payments  under  these  contracts  are  determined.  The  following  table  provides  the  notional
amounts of our outstanding derivatives as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
December 31,
2019
2018
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
$
1,983
$
1,510
Foreign exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges
200
804
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
2,710
3,517
Interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges
—
2,400
Total
$
4,893
$
8,231
F-26

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Credit Risk
Our derivatives expose us to credit risk to the extent that the counterparties may be unable to meet the terms of the arrangement. We seek to
mitigate such risk by limiting our counterparties to, and by spreading the risk across, major financial institutions. In addition, the potential risk of loss
with any one counterparty resulting from this type of credit risk is monitored on an ongoing basis. To further limit credit risk, we also enter into
collateral security arrangements related to certain interest rate derivative instruments whereby collateral is posted between counterparties if the fair
value of the derivative instrument exceeds certain thresholds. Additional collateral would be required in the event of a significant credit downgrade
by either party. We are not required to pledge, nor are we entitled to receive, collateral related to our foreign exchange derivative transactions.
Note 8 – Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities
The following tables present our financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2019 and 2018
(in millions):
December 31, 2019
Quoted Prices in 
Active Markets for 
Identical Assets 
(Level 1)
Significant Other 
Observable Inputs 
(Level 2)
Significant  
Unobservable Inputs 
(Level 3)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
975
$
975
$
—
$
—
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
21
21
—
—
Corporate debt securities
1,654
—
1,654
—
Government and agency securities
175
—
175
—
Total short-term investments
1,850
21
1,829
—
Derivatives
349
—
68
281
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
961
—
961
—
Total long-term investments
961
—
961
—
Total financial assets
$
4,135
$
996
$
2,858
$
281
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
25
$
—
$
25
$
—
F-27

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
December 31, 2018
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1) 
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant  
Unobservable Inputs 
(Level 3)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
2,202
$
2,052
$
150
$
—
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
17
17
—
—
Corporate debt securities
2,606
—
2,606
—
Government and agency securities
90
—
90
—
Total short-term investments
2,713
17
2,696
—
Derivatives
262
—
114
148
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
3,635
—
3,635
—
Total long-term investments
3,635
—
3,635
—
Total financial assets
$
8,812
$
2,069
$
6,595
$
148
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
48
$
—
$
48
$
—
 
Our financial assets and liabilities are valued using market prices on both active markets (Level 1), less active markets (Level 2) and little or
no market activity (Level 3). Level 1 instrument valuations are obtained from real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets involving
identical assets. Level 2 instrument valuations are obtained from readily available pricing sources for comparable instruments, identical instruments
in  less  active  markets,  or  models  using  market  observable  inputs.  Level  3  instrument  valuations  typically  reflect  management’s  estimate  of
assumptions  that  market  participants  would use in pricing  the  asset  or liability.  We  did not  have any transfers  of  financial  instruments  between
valuation levels during 2019 or 2018.
The majority of our derivative instruments are valued using pricing models that take into account the contract terms as well as multiple inputs
where applicable, such as equity prices, interest rate yield curves, option volatility and currency rates. Our warrant, which is accounted for as a
derivative  instrument,  is  valued  using  a  Black-Scholes  model.  Key  assumptions  used  in  the  valuation  include  risk-free  interest  rates;  Adyen’s
common stock price, equity volatility and common stock outstanding; exercise price; and details specific to the warrant. The value is also probability
adjusted for management assumptions with respect to meeting the processing volume milestone targets. These assumptions and the probability of
meeting processing volume milestone targets may have a significant impact on the value of the warrant. Refer to “Note 7 – Derivative Instruments”
for further details on our derivative instruments.
Other  financial  instruments,  including  accounts  receivable  and  accounts  payable,  are  carried  at  cost,  which  approximates  their  fair  value
because of the short-term nature of these instruments.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the opening to closing balance of assets measured using significant unobservable inputs
(Level 3) as of December 31, 2019 (in millions):
December 31, 
2019
December 31, 
2018
Opening balance as of January 1, 2019
$
148
$
—
Recognition of warrant
—
44
Change in fair value
133
104
Closing balance as of December 31, 2019
$
281
$
148
F-28

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 9 – Balance Sheet Components
Other Current Assets
 
December 31,
2019
 
2018
(In millions)
Customer accounts and funds receivable
$
632
 $
670
Other
549
829
Other current assets
$
1,181
$
1,499
Property and Equipment, Net
 
December 31,
2019
 
2018
(In millions)
Computer equipment and software
$
5,029
 $
4,933
Land and buildings, including building improvements
740
 
713
Leasehold improvements
421
 
399
Furniture and fixtures
175
 
169
Construction in progress and other
104
 
130
Property and equipment, gross
6,469
 
6,344
Accumulated depreciation
(4,959)  
(4,747)
Property and equipment, net
$
1,510
 $
1,597
Total depreciation expense on our property and equipment for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 totaled $628 million, $626
million and $612 million, respectively.
Accrued Expenses and Other Current Liabilities
 
December 31,
2019
 
2018
(In millions)
Customer accounts and funds payable
$
736
$
681
Compensation and related benefits
500
410
Advertising accruals
195
264
Other current tax liabilities
38
229
Other
935
751
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
$
2,404
$
2,335
F-29

Note 10 – Debt
The following table summarizes the carrying value of our outstanding debt (in millions, except percentages):
Coupon
As of
Effective
As of
Effective
 Rate
December 31, 2019
 Interest Rate
December 31, 2018
 Interest Rate
Long-Term Debt
Floating Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2019
LIBOR plus 0.48%
$
—
—%
$
400
3.123%
Senior notes due 2023
LIBOR plus 0.87%
400
2.913%
400
3.499%
Fixed Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2019
2.200%
—
—%
1,150
2.346%
Senior notes due 2020
3.250%
500
3.389%
500
3.389%
Senior notes due 2020
2.150%
500
2.344%
500
2.344%
Senior notes due 2021
2.875%
750
2.993%
750
2.993%
Senior notes due 2022
3.800%
750
3.989%
750
3.989%
Senior notes due 2022
2.600%
1,000
2.678%
1,000
2.678%
Senior notes due 2023
2.750%
750
2.866%
750
2.866%
Senior notes due 2024
3.450%
750
3.531%
750
3.531%
Senior notes due 2027
3.600%
850
3.689%
850
3.689%
Senior notes due 2042
4.000%
750
4.114%
750
4.114%
Senior notes due 2056
6.000%
750
6.547%
750
6.547%
Total senior notes
7,750
9,300
Hedge accounting fair value adjustments (1)
15
(10)
Unamortized discount and debt issuance
costs
(44)
(55)
Other long-term borrowings
17
—
Less: Current portion of long-term debt
(1,000)
(1,550)
Total long-term debt
6,738
7,685
Short-Term Debt
Current portion of long-term debt
1,000
1,550
Hedge accounting fair value adjustments (1)
—
(7)
Unamortized discount and debt issuance
costs
(1)
(1)
Other short-term borrowings
23
4
Total short-term debt
1,022
1,546
Total Debt
$
7,760
$
9,231
(1) Includes the fair value adjustments to debt associated with terminated interest rate swaps which are being recorded as a reduction to interest expense over the remaining
term of the related notes.
F-30

Senior Notes
In 2019, $400 million of floating rate notes and $1.15 billion of 2.200% fixed rate notes matured and were repaid. In 2018, $750 million of
2.500% fixed rate notes due 2018 matured and were repaid.
None of the floating rate notes are redeemable prior to maturity. On and after March 1, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the 6.000% fixed
rate notes due 2056 at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes
to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. We may redeem some or all of the other fixed rate notes of each series at any time and from time
to time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
If a change of control triggering event occurs with respect to the 2.150% fixed rate notes due 2020, the 3.800% fixed rate notes due 2022, the
floating rate notes due 2023, the 2.750% fixed rate notes due 2023, the 3.600% fixed rate notes due 2027 or the 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056,
we must, subject to certain exceptions, offer to repurchase all of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount,
plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default.
To help achieve our interest rate risk management objectives, in connection with the previous issuance of certain senior notes, we entered
into interest rate swap agreements that effectively converted $2.4 billion of our fixed rate notes to floating rate debt based on LIBOR plus a spread.
These swaps were designated as fair value hedges against changes in the fair value of certain fixed rate senior notes resulting from changes in
interest rates. The gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps substantially offset changes in the fair value of the
hedged portion of the underlying debt that are attributable to changes in market interest rates. In 2019, $1.15 billion related to our 2.200% senior
notes of the $2.4 billion aggregate notional amount matured. In addition, during the three months ended September 30, 2019, we terminated the
interest rate swaps related to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024. As
a result of the early termination, hedge accounting was discontinued prospectively and the gain on termination was recorded as an increase to the
long-term  debt  balance  and  is  being  recognized  over  the  remaining  life  of  the  underlying  debt  as  a  reduction  to  interest  expense.  The  gain
recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 was immaterial.
The effective interest rates for our senior notes include the interest payable, the amortization of debt issuance costs and the amortization of
any  original  issue  discount  on  these  senior  notes.  Interest  on  these  senior  notes  is  payable  either  quarterly  or  semiannually.  Interest  expense
associated with these senior notes, including amortization of debt issuance costs, during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 was
approximately $301 million, $318 million and $307 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the estimated fair value of these senior
notes, using Level 2 inputs, was approximately $7.9 billion and $9.0 billion, respectively.
Commercial Paper
We have a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes in an aggregate principal amount at maturity
of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time with maturities of up to 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, there were
no commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In November 2015, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year revolving credit facility. We may
also, subject to the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase the commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to an aggregate amount
of $1 billion. Funds borrowed under the credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, acquisitions and other
general corporate purposes.
As of December 31, 2019, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and therefore maintain $1.5 billion of available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order
to repay commercial paper borrowings in the event
F-31

we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due. As a result, $500 million of borrowing capacity was available
as of December 31, 2019 for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement.  
Loans under the credit agreement bear interest at either (i) LIBOR plus a margin (based on our public debt credit ratings) ranging from 0.875
percent to 1.5 percent or (ii) a formula based on the agent bank’s prime rate, the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5 percent or LIBOR plus 1.0
percent, plus a margin (based on our public debt credit ratings) ranging from zero percent to 0.5 percent. The credit agreement will terminate and all
amounts owing thereunder will be due and payable on November 9, 2020, unless (a) the commitments are terminated earlier, either at our request
or, if an event of default occurs, by the lenders (or automatically in the case of certain bankruptcy-related events of default), or (b) the maturity date
is  extended  upon  our  request,  subject  to  the  agreement  of  the  lenders.  The  credit  agreement  includes  customary  representations,  warranties,
affirmative  and  negative  covenants,  including  financial  covenants,  events  of  default  and  indemnification  provisions  in  favor  of  the  banks.  The
negative covenants include restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and subsidiary indebtedness, in each case, subject to certain exceptions.
The financial covenants require us to meet a quarterly financial test with respect to a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio and a maximum
consolidated leverage ratio. The events of default include the occurrence of a change of control (as defined in the credit agreement) with respect to
us.
We were in compliance with all covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2019.
Future Maturities
Expected future principal maturities as of December 31, 2019 are as follows (in millions):
Fiscal Years:
2020
$
1,000
2021
750
2022
1,750
2023
1,150
2024
750
Thereafter
2,350
Total future maturities
$
7,750
Note 11 – Leases
We have operating and finance leases for office space, data and fulfillment centers, and other corporate assets that we utilize under lease
arrangements.
The following table provides a summary of leases by balance sheet location as of December 31, 2019 (in millions):
 
As of
Balance Sheet Location
December 31, 2019
Assets
Operating
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$
628
Finance
Property and equipment, net (1)
31
Total leased assets
$
659
Liabilities
Operating - current
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
$
170
Finance - current
Short-term debt
11
Operating - noncurrent
Operating lease liabilities
492
Finance - noncurrent
Long-term debt
16
Total lease liabilities
$
689
 
(1)
Recorded net of accumulated amortization of $2 million as of December 31, 2019.
F-32

The components of lease expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 were as follows (in millions):
Lease Costs
Statement of Income Location
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Finance lease cost:
Amortization of right-of-use assets
Cost of net revenues
$
2
Interest on lease liabilities
Interest and other, net
1
Operating lease cost (2)
Cost of net revenues, Sales and marketing, Product development and General and
administrative expenses
214
Total lease cost
$
217
(2)
Includes variable lease payments and sublease income that were immaterial during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Maturity of lease liabilities under our non-cancelable operating and financing leases as of December 31, 2019 are as follows (in millions):  
Operating
Finance
2020
$
188
$
12
2021
162
12
2022
146
5
2023
98
—
2024
45
—
Thereafter
78
—
Total lease payments
717
29
Less interest
(56)
(2)
Present value of lease liabilities
$
661
$
27
Future minimum rental payments under our non-cancelable operating leases as of December 31, 2018 were as follows (in millions):  
Leases (3)
2019
$
136
2020
104
2021
91
2022
76
2023
51
Thereafter
119
Total minimum lease payments
$
577
(3) Amounts are based on ASC 840, Leases that were superseded upon our adoption of ASC 842, Leases on January 1, 2019.
Rent expense for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 totaled $233 million, $118 million and $105 million, respectively. Rent
expense includes operating lease costs as well as expense for non-lease components such as common area maintenance.
F-33

The following table provides a summary of our lease terms and discount rates for the year ended December 31, 2019:
 
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Weighted Average Remaining Lease Term
Operating leases
4.66 years
Weighted Average Discount Rate
Operating leases
3.11%
Supplemental information related to our leases for the year ended December 31, 2019 is as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows from operating leases
$
196
Operating cash flows from finance leases
$
1
Financing cash flows from finance leases
$
6
 
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for new lease obligations:
Operating leases
$
99
Finance leases
$
34
F-34

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies
Commitments
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or income under the arrangement. As of December 31, 2019, we had a total of $4.8 billion in aggregate cash deposits, partially offset by $4.7 billion
in cash withdrawals, held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
Litigation and Other Legal Matters
 
Overview
We are involved in legal and regulatory proceedings on an ongoing basis. Many of these proceedings are in early stages and may seek an
indeterminate amount of damages. If we believe that a loss arising from such matters is probable and can be reasonably estimated, we accrue the
estimated liability in our financial statements. If only a range of estimated losses can be determined, we accrue an amount within the range that, in
our judgment, reflects the most likely outcome; if none of the estimates within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the
low  end  of  the  range.  For  those  proceedings  in  which  an  unfavorable  outcome  is  reasonably  possible  but  not  probable,  we  have  disclosed  an
estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses or we have concluded that an estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses
arising directly from the proceeding (i.e., monetary damages or amounts paid in judgment or settlement) is not material. If we cannot estimate the
probable or reasonably possible loss or range of losses arising from a proceeding, we have disclosed that fact. In assessing the materiality of a
proceeding, we evaluate, among other factors, the amount of monetary damages claimed, as well as the potential impact of non-monetary remedies
sought by plaintiffs (e.g., injunctive relief) that may require us to change our business practices in a manner that could have a material adverse
impact on our business. With respect to the matters disclosed in this Note 12, we are unable to estimate the possible loss or range of losses that
could potentially result from the application of such non-monetary remedies.
Amounts accrued for legal and regulatory proceedings for which we believe a loss is probable were not material for the twelve months ended
December 31, 2019. Except as otherwise noted for the proceedings described in this Note 12, we have concluded, based on currently available
information,  that  reasonably  possible  losses  arising  directly  from  the  proceedings  (i.e.,  monetary  damages  or  amounts  paid  in  judgment  or
settlement) in excess of our recorded accruals are also not material. However, legal and regulatory proceedings are inherently unpredictable and
subject to significant uncertainties. If one or more matters were resolved against us in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s
expectations,  the  impact  on  our  operating  results  or  financial  condition  for  that  reporting  period  could  be  material.  Legal  fees  are  expensed  as
incurred.
General Matters
Third parties have from time to time claimed, and others may claim in the future, that we have infringed their intellectual property rights. We
are subject to patent disputes, and expect that we could be subject to additional patent infringement claims involving various aspects of our business
as our products  and services continue to expand in scope and complexity.  Such claims may be brought  directly or indirectly  against us and/or
against our customers (who may be entitled to contractual indemnification under their contracts with us), and we are subject to increased exposure
to such claims as a result of our acquisitions and divestitures and in cases where we are entering new lines of business. We have in the past been
forced to litigate such claims. We may also become more vulnerable to third-party claims as laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, the
Lanham Act and the Communications Decency Act are
F-35

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
interpreted by the courts, and as we expand the scope of our business (both in terms of the range of products and services that we offer and our
geographical  operations)  and  become  subject  to  laws  in  jurisdictions  where  the  underlying  laws  with  respect  to  the  potential  liability  of  online
intermediaries like ourselves are either unclear or less favorable. We believe that additional lawsuits alleging that we have violated patent, copyright
or trademark laws will be filed against us. Intellectual property claims, whether meritorious or not, are time consuming and costly to defend and
resolve, could require expensive changes in our methods of doing business or could require us to enter into costly royalty or licensing agreements
on unfavorable terms.
From time to time, we are involved in other disputes or regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business, including suits by our
users (individually or as class actions) alleging, among other things, improper disclosure of our prices, rules or policies, that our practices, prices,
rules, policies or customer/user agreements violate applicable law or that we have acted unfairly and/or not acted in conformity with such practices,
prices,  rules,  policies  or  agreements.  Further,  the  number  and  significance  of  these  disputes  and  inquiries  are  increasing  as  the  political  and
regulatory landscape changes and, as we have grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope (both in terms of the range of products and
services  that  we  offer  and  our  geographical  operations)  and  our  products  and  services  have  increased  in  complexity.  Any  claims  or  regulatory
actions against us, whether meritorious or not, could be time consuming, result in costly litigation, damage awards (including statutory damages for
certain  causes  of  action  in  certain  jurisdictions),  injunctive  relief  or  increased  costs  of  doing  business  through  adverse  judgment  or  settlement,
require us to change our business practices in expensive ways, require significant amounts of management time, result in the diversion of significant
operational resources or otherwise harm our business.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us and PayPal,
which may be significant. In addition, the indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us and our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application programming interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision.
To date, losses recorded in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant,
either individually or collectively. 
F-36

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 13 – Stockholders’ Equity
Preferred Stock
We are authorized, subject to limitations prescribed by Delaware law, to issue preferred stock in one or more series; to establish the number
of shares included within each series; to fix the rights, preferences and privileges of the shares of each wholly unissued series and any related
qualifications, limitations or restrictions; and to increase or decrease the number of shares of any series (but not below the number of shares of a
series then outstanding) without any further vote or action by our stockholders. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, there were 10 million shares of
$0.001 par value preferred stock authorized for issuance, and no shares issued or outstanding.
Common Stock
Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation authorizes us to issue 3.6 billion shares of common stock.
Stock Repurchase Programs
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and,
subject to market conditions and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding
share count. Any share repurchases under our stock repurchase programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately
negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems
appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives. Our stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated
at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and
regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash.  
In  January  2018,  our  Board  of  Directors  (“Board”)  authorized  a $6.0  billion stock  repurchase  program,  and  in  January  2019,  our  Board
authorized an additional 4.0 billion stock repurchase program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
The stock repurchase activity under our stock repurchase programs during 2019 was as follows (in millions, except per share amounts):
Shares
Repurchased (1)
Average Price per
Share (2)
Value of Shares
Repurchased (2)
Remaining Amount
Authorized
Balance as of January 1, 2019
$
3,151
Authorization of additional plan in January 2019
4,000
Repurchase of shares of common stock
134
$
37.26
$
5,000
(5,000)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
2,151
(1)
These repurchased shares of common stock were recorded as treasury stock and were accounted for under the cost method. None of the repurchased shares of common
stock have been retired.
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
In January 2020, our Board authorized an additional $5.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
Dividends
The company paid a total of $473 million in cash dividends during the year ended December 31, 2019. In January 2020, we declared a cash
dividend of $0.16 per share of common stock to be paid on March 20, 2020 to stockholders of record as of March 2, 2020.
F-37

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 14 – Employee Benefit Plans
Equity Incentive Plans
 
We have equity incentive plans under which we grant equity awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-
based  restricted  stock  units  (“PBRSUs”),  stock  payment  awards  and  performance  share  units,  to  our  directors,  officers  and  employees.  As  of
December 31, 2019, 755 million shares were authorized under our equity incentive plans and 55 million shares were available for future grant.
Stock options granted under these plans generally vest 12.5% six months from the date of grant (or 25% one year from the date of grant for
grants to new employees) with the remainder vesting at a rate of 2.08% per month thereafter, and generally expire seven to ten years from the date
of grant. RSU awards granted to eligible employees under our equity incentive plans generally vest in annual or quarterly installments over a period
of three to five years, are subject to the employees’ continuing service to us and do not have an expiration date.
In 2019, 2018 and 2017, certain executives were eligible to receive PBRSUs. PBRSU awards are subject to performance and time-based
vesting  requirements.  The  target  number  of  shares  subject  to  the  PBRSU  award  are  adjusted  based  on  our  business  performance  measured
against the performance goals approved by the Compensation Committee at the beginning of the performance period. Generally, if the performance
criteria are satisfied, one-half of the award vests in March following the end of the performance period and the other half of the award vests in March
of the following year.
Deferred Stock Units
Prior  to  December  31, 2016, we  granted  deferred  stock  units  to  each non-employee  director  (other  than  Mr.  Omidyar)  at  the  time  of  our
annual meeting of stockholders and to new non-employee directors upon their election to the Board. Each deferred stock unit award granted to a
new non-employee director upon election to the Board vests 25% one year from the date of grant, and at a rate of 2.08% per month thereafter. In
addition, directors were permitted to elect to receive, in lieu of annual retainer and committee chair fees and at the time these fees would otherwise
be payable, fully vested deferred stock units with an initial value equal to the amount based on the fair market value of common stock at the date of
grant. Following termination of a non-employee director’s service on the Board, deferred stock units granted prior to August 1, 2013 are payable in
stock or cash (at our election), while deferred stock units granted on or after August 1, 2013 are payable solely in stock. As of December 31, 2019,
there  were  approximately 207,179 deferred  stock  units  outstanding,  which  are  included  in  our  restricted  stock  unit  activity  below.  As  of
December 31, 2016, we no longer grant deferred stock units.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
We  have  an  Employee  Stock  Purchase  Plan  (“ESPP”)  for  all  eligible  employees.  Under  the  plan,  shares  of  our  common  stock  may  be
purchased  over  an  offering  period  with  a  maximum  duration  of two years  at 85% of  the  lower  of  the  fair  market  value  on  the  first  day  of  the
applicable offering period or on the last day of the six-month purchase period. Employees may purchase shares having a value not exceeding 10%
of their eligible compensation during an offering period. During 2019, 2018, and 2017, employees purchased approximately 3 million, 4 million and 4
million shares under this plan at average prices of $25.24, $23.82 and $22.32 per share, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, approximately 9
million shares of common stock were reserved for future issuance.
Stock Option Activity
No stock options were granted in 2019, 2018 and 2017.
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, the aggregate intrinsic value of options exercised under our equity incentive plans was $20 million, $18 million
and $26  million,  respectively,  determined  as  of  the  date  of  option  exercise.  As  of December  31,  2019,  options  to  purchase  approximately 800
thousand shares of our common stock were outstanding and in-the-money.
F-38

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Restricted Stock Unit Activity
The following table presents RSU activity (including PBRSUs that have been earned) under our equity incentive plans as of and for the year
ended December 31, 2019 (in millions except per share amounts):
 
 
Units 
Weighted Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value
(per share)
Outstanding as of January 1, 2019
34
$
33.59
Awarded and assumed
19
$
37.61
Vested
(17)
$
31.67
Forfeited
(8)
$
35.50
Outstanding as of December 31, 2019
28
$
36.82
Expected to vest as of December 31, 2019
23
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, the aggregate intrinsic value of RSUs vested under our equity incentive plans was $609 million, $684 million and
$635 million, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The following table presents stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 (in millions):  
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Cost of net revenues
$
55
$
59
$
53
Sales and marketing
97
111
94
Product development
198
197
178
General and administrative
155
171
158
Total stock-based compensation expense
$
505
$
538
$
483
Capitalized in product development
$
14
$
14
$
14
As of December 31, 2019, there was approximately $768 million of unearned stock-based compensation that will be expensed from 2020
through 2023. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or
cancel all or a portion of the remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense. Future unearned stock-based compensation will increase to
the extent we grant additional equity awards, change the mix of grants between stock options and restricted stock units or assume unvested equity
awards in connection with acquisitions.
Employee Savings Plans
We have a defined contribution plan, which is qualified under Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Participating employees may
contribute up to 50% of their eligible compensation, but not more than statutory limits. In 2019, 2018 and 2017, we contributed one dollar for each
dollar a participant contributed, with a maximum contribution of 4% of each employee’s eligible compensation, subject to a maximum employer
contribution of $11,200, $11,000 and $10,800 per employee for each period, respectively. Our non-U.S. employees are covered by various other
savings plans. Total expense for these plans was $64 million, $60 million and $57 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
F-39

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 15 – Income Taxes
The components of pretax income for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 are as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
  
2018
  
2017
United States
$
358
  $
299
  $
417
International
1,849
  
2,419
  
1,858
$
2,207
$
2,718
$
2,275
The provision (benefit) for income taxes is comprised of the following (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
 
2018
 
2017
Current:
 
 
Federal
$
51
 $
73
 $
1,426
State and local
26
 
25
 
(17)
Foreign
221
 
245
 
151
$
298
 $
343
 $
1,560
Deferred:
 
 
Federal
$
(269)  $
(488)  $
1,788
State and local
(45)  
(10)  
4
Foreign
431
 
345
 
(64)
117
 
(153)  
1,728
$
415
 $
190
 $
3,288
The following is a reconciliation of the difference between the actual provision for income taxes and the provision computed by applying the
federal statutory rate of 21% for 2019 and 2018 and 35% for 2017 to income before income taxes (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
 
2018
 
2017
Provision at statutory rate
$
463
 $
571
 $
797
Foreign income taxed at different rates
31
 
(16)  
(217)
Other taxes on foreign operations
(155)
26
330
Stock-based compensation
3
 
(3)  
(33)
State taxes, net of federal benefit
(20)  
13
 
(13)
Research and other tax credits
(33)  
(30)  
(35)
Tax basis step-up resulting from realignment
199
(9)
(695)
Impact of tax rate change
(19)
108
—
U.S. tax reform
—
(463)
3,142
Effective settlement of audits
(71)
—
—
Other
17
 
(7)  
12
$
415
$
190
$
3,288
F-40

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of differences between the carrying amounts of assets and
liabilities  and  their  respective  tax  bases  using  enacted  tax  rates  in  effect  for  the  year  in  which  the  differences  are  expected  to  be  reversed.
Significant deferred tax assets and liabilities consist of the following (in millions):
 
As of December 31,
 
2019
 
2018
Deferred tax assets:
 
Net operating loss, capital loss and credits
$
158
 $
136
Accruals and allowances
214
 
168
Stock-based compensation
15
 
22
Amortizable tax basis in intangibles
4,287
4,757
Net deferred tax assets
4,674
 
5,083
Valuation allowance
(102)  
(65)
$
4,572
 $
5,018
Deferred tax liabilities:
 
Unremitted foreign earnings
$
(2,610)
$
(2,930)
Acquisition-related intangibles
(37)  
(46)
Depreciation and amortization
(131)  
(132)
Net unrealized gain
(2)
(27)
Available-for-sale securities
(61)  
(15)
(2,841)  
(3,150)
$
1,731
 $
1,868
As of December 31, 2019, our federal, state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards for income tax purposes were approximately $11
million, $55 million and $361 million, respectively. The federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are subject to various limitations under
Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and applicable state tax laws. If not utilized, the federal and state net operating loss carryforwards will
begin to expire in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The carryforward periods on our foreign net operating loss carryforwards are as follows: $12 million
do not expire, $246 million are subject to valuation allowance and begin to expire in 2020, and $104 million are not subject to valuation allowance
but will begin to expire in 2024. As of December 31, 2019, state tax credit carryforwards for income tax purposes were approximately $140 million.
Most of the state tax credits carry forward indefinitely.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, we maintained a valuation allowance with respect to certain of our deferred tax assets relating primarily
to operating losses in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions and certain state tax credits that we believe are not likely to be realized.
During the first half of 2017, we recognized a noncash income tax charge of $376 million caused by the foreign exchange remeasurement of a
deferred tax asset related to intangible assets in our foreign eBay platforms. In the first quarter of 2017, we achieved a step-up in the tax basis of the
intangible assets in our foreign Classifieds platforms as a result of voluntary domiciling our Classifieds intangible assets into a new jurisdiction and
recognized a tax benefit of $695 million.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was enacted. U.S. tax reform, among other things, reduced the U.S. federal income tax
rate from 35% to 21% beginning in 2018, instituted a dividends received deduction for foreign earnings with a related tax for the deemed repatriation
of  unremitted  foreign  earnings  in  2017  and  created  a  new  U.S.  minimum  tax  on  earnings  of  foreign  subsidiaries.  We  recognized  a  provisional
income tax charge of $3.1 billion in the fourth quarter of 2017, which was included as a component of the income tax provision on our consolidated
statement of income. We completed our analysis of the impacts of U.S. tax reform in the fourth quarter of 2018 and recognized a $463 million
reduction to the provisional tax amounts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017, which is included as a component of income tax expense from
continuing operations in 2018.
Included in the 2017 provisional amount was $1.4 billion for the income tax on the deemed repatriation of unremitted foreign earnings. We
completed the computation of this amount as part of the 2017 income tax return filing and reduced the provisional amount by $18 million and we
utilized $213 million of foreign tax credits to reduce the net
F-41

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
liability,  both  in  2018.  We  elected  to  pay  the  liability  for  the  deemed  repatriation  of  foreign  earnings  in  installments,  as  specified  by  the
Act. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, $884 million and $968 million of our liability for deemed repatriation of foreign earnings was
included in other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
The remaining provisional amount of $1.7 billion was for the deferred income tax effects  of the Act, primarily the impact of the new U.S.
minimum tax on foreign earnings, partially offset by the reversal of our existing deferred tax liability associated with repatriation of unremitted foreign
earnings. We completed our analysis of the components of the deferred tax computation in the fourth quarter of 2018 and recognized a tax benefit of
$445 million as a reduction to the provisional amounts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 for the deferred income tax effects of the Act. This
amount  includes  a $389  million tax  benefit  as  a  result  of  clarification  by  Swiss  tax  authorities  regarding  the  applicability  of  withholding  tax  to
repatriated earnings in October 2018.
We have recognized the tax consequences of all foreign unremitted earnings and management has no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest
the  unremitted  earnings  of  our  foreign  subsidiaries  as  of  the  balance  sheet  date.  We  have  not  provided  for  deferred  taxes  on  outside  basis
differences  in  our  investments  in  our  foreign  subsidiaries  that  are  unrelated  to  unremitted  earnings.  These  basis  differences  will  be  indefinitely
reinvested. A determination of the unrecognized deferred taxes related to these other components of our outside basis difference is not practicable.
The following table reflects changes in unrecognized tax benefits for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 (in millions):
2019
2018
2017
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the beginning of the period
$
551
$
487
$
458
Increases related to prior period tax positions
44
64
37
Decreases related to prior period tax positions
(114)
(10)
(28)
Increases related to current period tax positions
28
28
58
Settlements
(122)
(18)
(38)
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the end of the period
$
387
$
551
$
487
Included within our gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits of $387 million as of December 31, 2019 is $55 million of unrecognized tax
benefits indemnified by PayPal. If total unrecognized tax benefits were realized in a future period, it would result in a tax benefit of $285 million. Of
this amount, approximately $51 million of unrecognized tax benefit is indemnified by PayPal and a corresponding receivable would be reduced upon
a future realization. As of December 31, 2019,  our liabilities  for  unrecognized  tax  benefits  were  included in  other  liabilities  on our  consolidated
balance sheet.
We  recognize  interest  and/or  penalties  related  to  uncertain  tax  positions  in  income  tax  expense.  In 2019, $8  million was  included  in  tax
expense for interest and penalties. The amount of interest and penalties accrued as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 was approximately $46 million
and $61 million, respectively.
 
We are subject to both direct  and indirect  taxation  in the U.S.  and various  states  and foreign  jurisdictions.  We are under examination  by
certain  tax  authorities  for  the  2008  to  2018  tax  years.  We  believe  that  adequate  amounts  have  been  reserved  for  any  adjustments  that  may
ultimately result from these or other examinations. The material jurisdictions where we are subject to potential examination by tax authorities for tax
years after 2007 include, among others, the U.S. (Federal and California), Germany, Korea, Israel, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
 
Although  the  timing  of  the  resolution  and/or  closure  of  audits  is  highly  uncertain,  it  is  reasonably  possible  that  the  balance  of  gross
unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change in the next 12 months. Given the number of years remaining subject to examination and the
number of matters  being examined, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized tax
benefits. We expect the gross amount of unrecognized tax benefits to be reduced within the next twelve months by at least $19 million.
 
On July 27, 2015, in Altera Corp. v. Commissioner, the U.S. Tax Court issued an opinion invalidating the regulations relating to the treatment
of stock-based compensation expense in an intercompany cost-sharing arrangement. A final decision was issued by the Tax Court in December
2015. The IRS appealed the decision in June 2016. On July 24, 2018, the Ninth Circuit Federal Court issued a decision that was subsequently
withdrawn and a
F-42

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
reconstituted  panel  has  conferred  on  the  appeal.  On  June  7,  2019,  the  Ninth  Circuit  Federal  Court  upheld  the  cost-sharing  regulations  and  on
November 11, 2019 the U.S. Tax Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit released a court order denying an en banc rehearing of the case Altera Corp.
v Commissioner following Altera’s petition filed on July 22, 2019. It has not been determined if this ruling will be further appealed as of the date of
our filing. Due to the uncertainty surrounding the status of the current regulations, questions related to the scope of potential benefits or obligations,
and the risk of the Tax Court’s decision being overturned upon appeal, we have not recorded any benefit or expense as of December 31, 2019. We
will continue to monitor ongoing developments and potential impacts to our consolidated financial statements.
Note 16 – Interest and Other, Net
The components of interest and other, net for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 are as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2019
  
2018
  
2017
Interest income
$
120
  $
176
  $
177
Interest expense
(311)
(326)
(292)
Gains on investments and sale of business (1)
80
663
115
Other
(3)   
(17)   
11
Total interest and other, net
$
(114)   $
496
  $
11
(1)
Gains on investments and sale of business includes: (i) 2019 included a $52 million loss recorded on the divestiture of brands4friends and a $133 million gain recognized
due to the change in fair value of the Adyen warrant; (ii) 2018 included a $313 million gain on the sale of our equity investment in Flipkart, a $266 million gain recognized
upon the relinquishment of our equity investment in Giosis and a $104 million gain recognized due to the change in fair value of the Adyen warrant; and (iii) 2017 included
a $167 million gain on disposal of our eBay India business.
Note 17 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables summarize the changes in AOCI for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized
Gains (Losses)
on Investments
Foreign
Currency
Translation
Estimated Tax
(Expense) Benefit
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
68
$
(56)
$
462
$
24
$
498
Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications
4
61
(99)
(16)
(50)
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from
AOCI
81
—
—
(17)
64
Net current period other comprehensive income
(loss)
(77)
61
(99)
1
(114)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
(9)
$
5
$
363
$
25
$
384
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized 
Gains (Losses) 
on Investments
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation
Estimated Tax
(Expense) Benefit
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2017
$
(57)
$
(15)
$
748
$
41
$
717
Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications
117
(42)
(286)
(15)
(226)
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from
AOCI
(8)
(1)
—
2
(7)
Net current period other comprehensive income
(loss)
125
(41)
(286)
(17)
(219)
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
68
$
(56)
$
462
$
24
$
498
F-43

The following table provides a summary of reclassifications out of AOCI for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
Details about AOCI Components
 
Affected Line Item in the Statement of
Income
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified from AOCI
2019
2018
Gains (losses) on cash flow hedges - foreign exchange contracts
Net Revenues
$
81
$
(8)
Total, from continuing operations before
income taxes
81
(8)
Income tax provision
(17)
2
Total, from continuing operations net of
income taxes
64
(6)
Total, from discontinued operations net
of income taxes
—
—
Total, net of income taxes
64
(6)
Unrealized gains (losses) on investments
Interest and other, net
—
(1)
Total, before income taxes
—
(1)
Income tax provision
—
—
Total, net of income taxes
—
(1)
Total reclassifications for the period
Total, net of income taxes
$
64
$
(7)
Note 18 — Restructuring
The following table summarizes restructuring reserve activity during 2019 (in millions):
 
Employee Severance
and Benefits
Accrued liability as of January 1, 2019
$
8
Charges
77
Payments
(49)
Accrued liability as of December 31, 2019
$
36
During the first quarter of 2019, management approved a plan to drive operational improvement that included the reduction of workforce,
primarily in our Marketplace segment. The reduction was substantially completed in the first quarter of 2019 and resulted in pre-tax restructuring
charges  of  approximately $41  million.  During  the  fourth  quarter  of  2019,  management  approved  a  plan  to  drive  operational  improvement  that
included the reduction of workforce, primarily in our Marketplace segment. We incurred a pre-tax charge of $36 million, which was primarily related
to employee severance and benefits.
In June 2018, management approved a plan to implement a strategic reduction of our existing global workforce, primarily in our Marketplace
segment. The reduction was substantially completed in the second quarter of 2018 and resulted in pre-tax restructuring charges of approximately
$86 million.
No restructuring charges were recognized in 2017.
The restructuring charges incurred in 2019 and 2018 were aggregated in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement
of income.
F-44

Supplementary Data — Quarterly Financial Data — Unaudited
The following tables present certain unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information for each of the eight quarters in the two year period
ended December 31, 2019. This quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as the Consolidated Financial Statements and includes
all adjustments necessary to state fairly the information for the periods presented.
Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited, in millions, except per share amounts)
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2019
Net revenues
$
2,643
$
2,687
$
2,649
$
2,821
Gross profit
$
2,042
$
2,057
$
2,022
$
2,171
Income from continuing operations
$
521
$
403
$
310
$
558
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(3)
(1)
—
(2)
Net income (loss)
$
518
$
402
$
310
$
556
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.58
$
0.47
$
0.37
$
0.69
Discontinued operations
—
—
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
0.58
$
0.47
$
0.37
$
0.69
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.57
$
0.46
$
0.37
$
0.69
Discontinued operations
—
—
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
0.57
$
0.46
$
0.37
$
0.69
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
900
860
830
807
Diluted
908
867
837
812
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2018
Net revenues
$
2,580
$
2,640
$
2,649
$
2,877
Gross profit
$
2,021
$
2,043
$
2,041
$
2,259
Income from continuing operations
$
407
$
638
$
720
$
763
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
—
4
1
(3)
Net income (loss)
$
407
$
642
$
721
$
760
Income per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.40
$
0.64
$
0.74
$
0.81
Discontinued operations
—
—
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
0.40
$
0.64
$
0.74
$
0.81
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.40
$
0.64
$
0.73
$
0.80
Discontinued operations
—
—
—
—
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
0.40
$
0.64
$
0.73
$
0.80
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
1,010
992
974
945
Diluted
1,029
1,004
983
950
F-45

eBay Inc.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
The Financial Statement Schedule II — VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS as of and for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and
2017.
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Charged/Credited to
Net Income
Charged to Other
Account
Charges
Utilized/Write-offs
Balance at End of
Period
(In millions)
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts and
Authorized Credits
Year Ended December 31, 2017
$
81
$
91
$
—
$
(70)
$
102
Year Ended December 31, 2018
102
92
—
(88)
106
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
106
$
122
$
—
$
(100)
$
128
Allowance for Transaction Losses
Year Ended December 31, 2017
$
23
$
181
$
—
$
(179)
$
25
Year Ended December 31, 2018
25
194
—
(191)
28
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
28
$
178
$
—
$
(179)
$
27
Tax Valuation Allowance
Year Ended December 31, 2017
$
37
$
(20)
$
2
$
—
$
19
Year Ended December 31, 2018
19
33
13
—
65
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
65
$
45
$
(1)
$
(7)
$
102
F-46

INDEX TO EXHIBITS
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished
with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
2.01
Separation and Distribution Agreement by and between Registrant and
PayPal Holdings, Inc. dated as of June 26, 2015.
8-K
000-24821
6/30/2015
2.02*
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 24, 2019 by and
among eBay Inc., eBay International AG, PUG LLC, and solely for the
purposes set forth therein, Pugnacious Endeavors, Inc.
8-K
001-37713
11/25/2019
3.01
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
 
 
10-Q
 
001-37713
7/18/2019
3.02
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Bylaws.
 
 
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
4.01
  Form of Specimen Certificate for Registrant’s Common Stock.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097  
8/19/1998
4.02
Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between Registrant and Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.03
Supplemental Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between
Registrant and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.04
Form of 3.250% Note due 2020 (included in Exhibit 4.03).
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.05
Officer’s Certificate dated July 24, 2012.
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.06
Forms of 2.600% Note due 2022 and 4.000% Note due 2042 (included
in Exhibit 4.05).
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.07
Officer’s Certificate dated July 28, 2014.
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.08
Forms of 2.875% Note due 2021 and 3.450% Note due 2024 (included
in Exhibit 4.07).
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.09
Officer’s Certificate dated February 29, 2016.
8-K
000-24821
2/29/2016
4.10
Form of 6.00% Note due 2056 (included in Exhibit 4.09).
8-K
000-24821
2/29/2016
4.11
Officer’s Certificate dated March 9, 2016.
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
4.12
Form of 3.800% Note due 2022 (included in Exhibit 4.11).
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
4.13
Officer’s Certificate dated June 6, 2017.
8-K
001-37713
6/6/2017
4.14
Form of Floating Rate Note due 2023, 2.150% Note due 2020, 2.750%
Note due 2023 and 3.600% Note due 2027 (included in Exhibit 4.13).
8-K
001-37713
6/6/2017
4.15
Description of Securities.
X
10-K
001-37713
1/31/2020
10.01+
  Form of Indemnity Agreement entered into by Registrant with each of its
directors and executive officers.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097  
7/15/1998
10.02+
  Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan, as amended.
 
 
10-K
 
000-24821  
2/28/2007
10.03+
Amendment to Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan, effective
April 2, 2012.
10-Q
 
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.04+
Form of Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003 Deferred
Stock Unit Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.05+
  
Form of Electing Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.06+
  
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
F-47

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished
with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.07+
  
Form of 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan Restricted Stock Unit Grant
Notice and Agreement.
 
 
10-Q/A
 
000-24821  
4/24/2008
10.08+
  
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan, as amended and
restated.
 
 
8-K
 
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.09+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan and Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.10+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (with Modified Vesting)
under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.11+
Form of Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.12+
Form of Stock Option Agreement (with Modified Vesting) under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.13+
Form of Director Deferred Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.14+
  Amended and Restated eBay Incentive Plan.
 
 
8-K
 
000-24821  
5/5/2015
10.15+
  
eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and restated
effective April 1, 2018.
 
 
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.16+
eBay Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
DEF 14A
000-24821
3/19/2012
10.17
Credit Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2015, by and among
Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, and
the other parties thereto.
8-K
000-24821
11/12/2015
10.18+
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.19+
Form of Director Annual Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.20+
Form of Electing Director Quarterly Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.21+
Form of Performance Share Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.22+
Form of Global Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.23+
Form of Global Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (and Performance-
Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.24+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement
under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.25+
Form of Stock Payment Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.26+
Form of Director Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.27+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant Notice
and Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.28+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant Notice and Restricted Stock
Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award
Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
F-48

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished
with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.29+
Notice Regarding Payment of Dividend Equivalents on Restricted Stock
Units and Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.30+
Letter Agreement dated September 29, 2014 between Registrant and
Devin Wenig.
10-Q
000-24821
10/16/2014
10.31+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. Change in Control Severance Plan for
Key Employees, effective January 1, 2016.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.32
Amendment dated June 30, 2016, to the Operating Agreement by and
among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal,
Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.33+
Operating Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015,  by and among
Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal, Inc.,
PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.34
Transition Services Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.35+
Tax Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and between
Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.36+
Employee Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.37+
Intellectual Property Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by
and among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc.,
PayPal, Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings
S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.38+
Letter dated September 30, 2014 from Registrant to Scott Schenkel.
10-Q
000-24821
7/21/2015
10.39+
Offer Letter dated April 2, 2015 between Registrant and Marie Oh Huber.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.40
Cooperation Agreement, dated February 28, 2019, by and among Elliott
Associates, L.P., Elliott International, L.P., Elliott International Capital
Advisors Inc. and Registrant.
8-K
001-37713
2/28/2019
10.41
Agreement, dated February 28, 2019 by and among Starboard Value LP
and affiliates and Registrant.
8-K
001-37713
2/28/2019
10.42+
Offer Letter dated February 1, 2017, between Registrant and Wendy
Jones.
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
10.43+
Offer Letter dated July 3, 2018, between Registrant and Wendy Jones.
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
10.44+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc, SVP and Above Standard Severance
Plan, effective September 18, 2019.
10-Q
001-37713
10/24/2019
10.45+
Letter Agreement between Devin N. Wenig and eBay Inc., dated
September 24, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
9/25/2019
10.46+
Letter Agreement between Scott Schenkel and eBay Inc., dated October
11, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
10/16/2019
10.47+
Letter Agreement between Andrew Cring and eBay Inc., dated October
11, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
10/16/2019
10.48+
Offer Letter dated June 25, 2019 between Registrant and Jae Hyun Lee.
10-Q
001-37713
10/24/2019
21.01
  List of Subsidiaries.
 
X
 
 
 
23.01
  PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP consent.
 
X
 
 
 
F-49

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished
with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
24.01
  Power of Attorney (see signature page).
 
X
 
 
 
31.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
31.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
101.INS
  
XBRL Instance Document- the instance document does not appear in
the Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags are embedded within the
Inline XBRL document.
 
X
 
 
 
101.SCH
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.CAL
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.DEF
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.LAB
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.PRE
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted as Inline XBRL and
contained in Exhibit 101).
X
*
Schedules and exhibits have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The registrant agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule
or exhibit to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission upon request.
+
Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
F-50

SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized on January 31, 2020.
eBay Inc.
By:
/s/ Scott F. Schenkel
Scott F. Schenkel
Interim Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Scott F. Schenkel, Andy
Cring,  Brian  J.  Doerger  and  Marie  Oh  Huber  and  each  or  any  one  of  them,  each  with  the  power  of  substitution,  his  or  her  attorney-in-fact,  to  sign  any
amendments to this report, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying
and confirming all that each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf
of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on January 31, 2020.
Principal Executive Officer and Director:
Principal Financial Officer:
By:
/s/ Scott F. Schenkel
By:
/s/ Andy Cring
Scott F. Schenkel
Andy Cring
Interim Chief Executive Officer
Interim Chief Financial Officer
Principal Accounting Officer:
By:
/s/ Brian J. Doerger
Brian J. Doerger
Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
F-51

Additional Directors
By:
/s/ Pierre M. Omidyar
By:
/s/ Thomas J. Tierney
Pierre M. Omidyar
Thomas J. Tierney
Founder and Director
Chairman of the Board and Director
By:
/s/ Fred D. Anderson
By:
/s/ Anthony J. Bates
Fred D. Anderson
Anthony J. Bates
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Adriane Brown
By:
/s/ Jesse A. Cohn
Adriane Brown
Jesse A. Cohn
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Diana Farrell
By:
/s/ Logan D. Green
Diana Farrell
Logan D. Green
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Bonnie S. Hammer
By:
/s/ Kathleen C. Mitic
Bonnie S. Hammer
Kathleen C. Mitic
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Matthew J. Murphy
By:
/s/ Paul S. Pressler
Matthew J. Murphy
Paul S. Pressler
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Robert H. Swan
By:
/s/ Perry M. Traquina
Robert H. Swan
Perry M. Traquina
Director
Director
F-52

Exhibit 4.15
DESCRIPTION OF THE REGISTRANT’S SECURITIES
REGISTERED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12 OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
As of December 31, 2019, eBay Inc. had the following two classes of securities registered under Section 12 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”): (i) its common stock, $0.001 par value per share (“common stock”), and (ii) its
6.00% Notes due 2056.
References in the following discussion to “eBay,” “eBay Inc.,” “we,” “our” and “us” and similar references mean eBay Inc.
excluding, unless the context otherwise requires or otherwise expressly stated, its subsidiaries.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
The following is a description of some of the terms of our common stock, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation (the
“charter”), our amended and restated bylaws (the “bylaws”) and certain provisions of the Delaware General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”).
The following description is not complete and is subject to, and qualified in its entirety by reference to, our charter and bylaws, each of which
is filed or incorporated by reference as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 10-K of which this Exhibit is a part, and the DGCL. You
should read our charter and bylaws and the applicable provisions of the DGCL for a complete statement of the provisions described under this
caption “Description of Common Stock” and for other provisions that may be important to you.
Common Stock
Under our charter, the total number of shares of all classes of capital stock which we are authorized to issue is 3,590,000,000 shares,
consisting  of  two  classes:  3,580,000,000  shares  of  common  stock  and  10,000,000  shares  of  preferred  stock,  $0.001  par  value  per  share
(“preferred stock”).
Each share of our common stock is entitled to one vote per share on all matters submitted to a vote of our common stockholders. Our
charter does not entitle the holders of our common stock to cumulative voting rights with respect to the election of our directors. This means
that the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of our common stock can elect all of the directors then standing for election by our
common stockholders (assuming there are no outstanding shares of our preferred stock entitled to vote as a single class with our common
stock in such election).
Nominees for election as directors at an annual meeting of stockholders shall stand for election to a one-year term expiring at the next
annual  meeting  of  stockholders  and  until  their  respective  successors  are  duly  elected  and  qualified,  subject  to  earlier  death,  resignation,
retirement or removal. Pursuant to our bylaws and subject to the rights of any series of our preferred stock that may be outstanding, each
member  of  our  board  of  directors  shall  be  elected  by  the  affirmative  vote  of  a  majority  of  the  votes  cast  with  respect  to  such  director
(excluding abstentions) by the shares represented and entitled to vote at a meeting of stockholders at which a quorum is present; provided,
however, that if our board of directors determines that the number of nominees for director exceeds the number of directors to be elected at
such meeting (a “Contested Election”) and has not rescinded that determination as provided in our bylaws, each of the directors to be elected
at such meeting shall be elected by the affirmative vote of a plurality of the votes cast by the shares represented and entitled to vote at such
meeting with respect to the election of such director. If an incumbent director fails to receive the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes
cast at a meeting for the election of directors
 

(other than a Contested Election), either our Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee or a committee of independent directors shall
determine whether to accept or reject any resignation that may have been previously tendered by such incumbent director or whether other
action  should  be  taken  (including  whether  to  request  the  incumbent  director  to  resign  from  the  board  of  directors  if  no  resignation  has
previously been tendered).
Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, the rules or regulations of any applicable stock exchange, or our charter or bylaws,
every matter to be voted on by our stockholders, other than the election of directors, shall be decided by the affirmative vote of the holders of
a  majority  in  voting  power  of  the  shares  of  our  stock  entitled  to  vote  thereon  that  are  present  in  person  or  represented  by  proxy  at  the
applicable meeting.
Our bylaws require us to include in our proxy materials for an annual meeting of stockholders the name of any person nominated for
election to our board of directors by a stockholder or group of up to 20 stockholders who own and have owned, or are acting on behalf of up
to 20 beneficial owners who own and have owned, in each case continuously for at least three years, at least 3% (determined as provided in
our bylaws) of the aggregate voting power of our outstanding common stock and any other capital stock entitled to vote generally in the
election of directors; provided that such stockholders give us written notice of such request within the time period set forth in our bylaws and
such stockholders and their nominees satisfy the other requirements specified in our bylaws; and provided, further, that the number of such
nominees whose names appear in our proxy materials shall not exceed the greater of (x) two nominees and (y) the largest whole number of
nominees that does not exceed 20% of the number of our directors then in office, subject to possible reduction as provided in our bylaws.
Subject to any preferential rights of any outstanding shares of our preferred stock to receive dividends before any dividends may be
paid on our common stock, the holders of our common stock will be entitled to share ratably in any dividends payable on our common stock
that may be declared by our board of directors out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends.
Upon our voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding-up, the holders of our common stock will be entitled to share
ratably in any of our assets remaining for distribution to our common stockholders after payment of or provision for our debts and other
liabilities and subject to any preferential rights of any outstanding shares of our preferred stock to receive distributions in the event of our
liquidation, dissolution or winding-up before distributions are made to holders of our common stock.
Our common stock is not entitled to preemptive rights.
Under our charter, our board of directors is authorized, without vote or other action by our stockholders, to cause the issuance of up to
10,000,000 shares of our preferred stock in one or more series from time to time, to establish the number of shares to be included in each such
series and to fix the designation, powers, preferences and rights of the shares of each such series (which may include, without limitation,
voting rights, dividend rights and preferences, liquidation rights and preferences, redemption provisions and rights to convert the preferred
stock of such series into other securities or property) and any qualifications, limitations or restrictions thereof, and to increase or decrease the
number  of  shares  of  any  such  series  (but  not  below  the  number  of  shares  of  such  series  then  outstanding).  Our  board  of  directors  may
authorize the issuance of preferred stock with voting, dividend, liquidation, conversion or other rights (which may include, without limitation,
rights of one or more series of preferred stock, voting as a separate class, to elect one or more directors, rights of one or more series of
preferred stock to vote with our common stock in the election of directors, and rights to receive dividends and to receive distributions in the
event of our liquidation,
2

dissolution or winding-up before any dividends or distributions may be paid to holders of our common stock) that could dilute or otherwise
adversely affect the voting power or the dividend, liquidation or other rights of the holders of the common stock. The issuance of preferred
stock,  while  providing  flexibility  in  connection  with  possible  acquisitions,  financings  and  other  corporate  purposes,  could,  among  other
things,  have  the  effect  of  delaying,  deterring  or  preventing  a  merger,  change  of  control  or  other  takeover  of  our  company  that  our
stockholders might consider to be in their best interests, including transactions that might result in a premium being paid over the market
price of our common stock, and may also adversely affect the market price of our common stock and any other securities that we may issue
and the voting, dividend, liquidation and other rights of the holders of our common stock.
Anti-Takeover Provisions of Delaware Law
We are subject to Section 203 of the DGCL (“Section 203”). In general, Section 203 prohibits a publicly held Delaware corporation
from engaging in “business combination” transactions with any “interested stockholder” for a period of three years following the time that the
stockholder became an interested stockholder, unless:
•
prior to the time the stockholder became an interested stockholder, the corporation’s board of directors approved either the applicable
business combination or the transaction which resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested stockholder;
•
upon  consummation  of  the  transaction  which  resulted  in  the  stockholder  becoming  an  interested  stockholder,  the  interested
stockholder owned at least 85% of the voting stock of the corporation outstanding at the time the transaction commenced, excluding
for purposes of determining the voting stock outstanding (but not the voting stock owned by the interested stockholder) shares owned
by directors who are also officers of the corporation and shares owned by employee stock plans in which the employee participants
do not have the right to determine confidentially whether shares held subject to the plan will be tendered in a tender or exchange
offer; or
•
at or subsequent to the time that the stockholder became an interested stockholder, the business combination is approved by the
corporation’s board of directors and authorized at an annual or special meeting of stockholders by the affirmative vote of at least 66-
2/3% of the outstanding voting stock which is not owned by the interested stockholder.
A  “business  combination”  is  defined  to  include,  among  other  things  and  in  general  and  subject  to  exceptions,  a  merger  of  the
corporation  with  the  interested  stockholder;  a  sale  of  10%  or  more  of  the  market  value  of  the  corporation’s  consolidated  assets  to  the
interested stockholder; certain transactions that result in the issuance of the corporation’s stock to the interested stockholder; a transaction that
has the effect of increasing the proportionate share of the corporation’s stock owned by the interested stockholder; and any receipt by the
interested stockholder of loans, guarantees or other financial benefits provided by the corporation. An “interested stockholder” is defined to
include, in general and subject to exceptions, a person that (1) owns 15% or more of the outstanding voting stock of the corporation or (2) is
an “affiliate” or “associate” (as defined in Section 203) of the corporation and was the owner of 15% or more of the corporation’s outstanding
voting stock at any time within the prior three year period.
A Delaware corporation may opt out of Section 203 with an express provision in its original certificate of incorporation or by an
amendment to its certificate of incorporation or bylaws expressly electing not to be governed by Section 203 and approved by a majority of
its outstanding voting shares. We have not opted out of Section 203. As a result, Section 203 could delay, deter or prevent a merger, change
of control or other takeover of our company that our stockholders might consider to be in their best interests, including
3

transactions that might result in a premium being paid over the market price of our common stock, and may also adversely affect the market
price of our common stock and any other securities that we may issue.
Anti-Takeover Provisions of Our Charter and Bylaws
Certain provisions of our charter and bylaws could have the effect of delaying, deterring or preventing another party from acquiring
or seeking to acquire control of us. For example, our charter and bylaws include anti-takeover provisions that:
•
authorize our board of directors, without vote or other action by our stockholders, to cause the issuance of preferred stock in one or
more series from time to time and, with respect to each series, to establish the number of shares constituting that series and to fix the
rights and other terms of that series, which may include, without limitation, voting rights, dividend rights and preferences, liquidation
rights and preferences and rights to convert the preferred stock of such series into other securities or property;
•
provide that, subject to the rights of any series of our preferred stock that may be outstanding, vacancies on our board of directors or
newly created directorships resulting from an increase in the number of our directors may be filled only by a majority of directors
then in office, even though less than a quorum, or by the sole remaining director;
•
provide that the number of directors constituting our board of directors shall be fixed from time to time by resolution adopted by our
board of directors;
•
require that actions to be taken by our stockholders must be taken at an annual or special meeting of our stockholders and not by
written consent;
•
establish advance notice procedures and other requirements for stockholders to submit nominations of candidates for election to our
board of directors and other proposals to be brought before a stockholders meeting;
•
provide that, subject to the rights of any series of preferred stock that may be outstanding and except as may be required by law,
special meetings of stockholders may be called only by (1) our board of directors; (2) our Chairman of the Board; (3) our Chief
Executive Officer; or (4) our Secretary upon the written request of one or more of our stockholders that have continuously held, for
their own account or on behalf of others, at least a 20% aggregate “net long position” (as defined and determined as provided in our
bylaws) of our outstanding common stock for at least 30 days as of the date such request is delivered to us and that have complied
with the other requirements set forth in our bylaws; and
•
do not give the holders of our common stock cumulative voting rights with respect to the election of directors, which means that the
holders  of  a  majority  of  our  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  can  elect  all  directors  standing  for  election  by  our  common
stockholders.
The provisions described above are intended to discourage certain types of coercive takeover practices and inadequate takeover bids
and to encourage anyone seeking to acquire control of us to negotiate first with our board of directors. However, these provisions may also
delay, deter or prevent a merger, change of control or other takeover of our company that our stockholders might consider to be in their best
interests, including transactions that might result in a premium being paid over the market price of our common stock,
4

and may also adversely affect the market price of our common stock and any other securities that we may issue. These provisions may also
have the effect of preventing changes in our management.
Limitation on Liability of Directors; Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Our charter provides that, to the fullest extent permitted by law, none of our directors shall be personally liable for monetary damages
for breach of fiduciary duty as a director. Our bylaws provide that we will indemnify our officers and directors to the fullest extent permitted
by the DGCL. We believe that these limitations of liability and indemnification provisions are useful to attract and retain qualified directors
and officers.
Nasdaq Global Select Market Listing
Our common stock is listed on The Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol “EBAY”.
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES
Our 6.00% Notes due 2056 (the “notes”) were issued under an indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 (the “base indenture”), as
amended and supplemented by a supplemental indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 (the “supplemental indenture;” the base indenture, as
amended and supplemented by the supplemental indenture, is hereinafter called the “indenture”), each between us and Wells Fargo Bank,
National  Association,  as  trustee.  The  description  of  the  notes  is  contained  in  two  parts.  The  first  part,  contained  under  this  caption
“Description of Notes,” describes some of the specific terms of the notes and some of the specific terms of the indenture that are applicable to
the notes. The second part, contained under the caption “Description of Indenture” below, provides a more general description of some of the
terms of the indenture and the debt securities (the “debt securities”) issuable by us under the indenture. The discussion of some of the terms
of the notes and the indenture contained under this caption “Description of Notes” supplements, and to the extent inconsistent replaces, the
description  of  some  of  the  general  terms  of  the  indenture  and  the  debt  securities  contained  below  under  the  caption  “Description  of
Indenture.” To the extent the discussion of some of the terms of the notes and the indenture appearing under this caption “Description of
Notes” differs from the discussion of some of the terms of the indenture and the debt securities appearing under the caption “Description of
Indenture,” you should rely on the discussion under this caption “Description of Notes.” Certain terms used but not defined under this caption
“Description of Notes” have the meanings specified below under the caption “Description of Indenture—Covenants.”
We may issue our debt securities under the indenture from time to time in one or more series. The notes are a separate series of our
debt securities issued and outstanding under the indenture, which means that, for purposes of giving any consent, notice or waiver or taking
any other action under the indenture, the registered holders of the notes will act separately from the registered holders of each other series of
our debt securities that may be outstanding under the indenture from time to time. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise
requires, references to “debt securities” under this caption “Description of Notes” and the caption “Description of Indenture” below shall
include the notes.
The description of some of the terms of the notes and the indenture contained under this caption “Description of Notes” and under the
caption “Description of Indenture” are not complete and are subject to, and qualified in their entirety by reference to, the indenture and the
form of the notes, which are incorporated by reference as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10-K of which this Exhibit is a part. You
should read the indenture and the form of the notes for a complete statement of the provisions described under this caption “Description of
Notes” and under the caption “Description of Indenture” and other provisions that may be important to you.
5

General
The notes were originally issued on February 29, 2016. The notes constitute a separate series of debt securities under the indenture,
were issued in the initial aggregate principal amount of $750,000,000 and will mature on February 1, 2056.
We may from time to time, without giving notice to or obtaining the consent of the holders or beneficial owners of the notes, issue
additional notes having the same terms (except for the issue date, public offering price, sale price, the first interest payment date and the date
from which interest shall begin to accrue) as, and ranking equally in right of payment with, the notes then outstanding. Any such additional
notes, together with the notes then outstanding, will constitute a single series of debt securities under the indenture.
The notes are listed on The Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol “EBAYL.”
The notes are issuable in fully registered form without coupons in denominations of $25 in principal amount and in integral multiples
of $25 in principal amount in excess thereof. The notes are in book-entry form and are evidenced by one or more notes in global form
(“global notes”), registered in the name of The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”), as depositary (the “Depositary”) for the global notes, or
its nominee. Beneficial owners of interests in the global notes are not entitled to receive physical certificates registered in their names except
in  the  limited  circumstances  described  below  under  “Description  of  Indenture  —  Book-Entry  Form  and  Transfer”  and,  unless  physical
certificates registered in their names are issued, beneficial owners will not be considered “holders” of notes under the indenture.
The notes are not entitled to the benefit of any sinking fund. Except as described below under “—Change of Control Triggering
Event,” the indenture does not contain any provisions which are intended to protect holders of notes in the event of a change of control of
eBay or a highly leveraged transaction (whether or not relating to a change of control) involving eBay. The indenture does not limit the
incurrence of unsecured debt by us or any of our subsidiaries.
We may at our option, at any time or from time to time, repurchase notes at any price in the open market or otherwise, and may hold
or resell such notes or surrender such notes to the trustee for cancellation.
Ranking
The notes are our senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other existing and future senior
unsecured indebtedness. The notes are effectively subordinated in right of payment to all of our existing and future secured indebtedness to
the extent of the collateral securing that indebtedness. In addition, the notes are effectively subordinated in right of payment to all existing
and future indebtedness and other liabilities of our subsidiaries, which are separate legal entities from us and have no obligation to pay any
amounts due pursuant to the notes or to make funds available for such purpose.
Interest
The notes bear interest at a rate of 6.00% per year, accruing from the most recent date to which we have paid or provided for interest
on the notes. Interest on the notes is payable quarterly in arrears on February 1, May 1, August 1 and November 1 of each year (each, an
“interest payment date”). Interest paid on the notes on any interest payment date is payable to the persons who were the registered holders of
the notes at the close of business on the January 15, April 15, July 15 or October 15, as the case may be, whether or not a business day,
immediately preceding the applicable interest payment date.
6

Interest on the notes is computed on the basis of a 360-day year comprised of twelve 30-day months. The amount of interest payable
on the notes on any interest payment date, redemption date, Change of Control Payment Date (as defined below), maturity date or other date
on which interest on the notes is due will be the amount of interest accrued to, but excluding, such interest payment date, redemption date,
Change of Control Payment Date, maturity date or other date, as the case may be. If an interest payment date, redemption date, Change of
Control Payment Date, maturity date or other date on which any payment on the notes is due falls on a day that is not a business day, then
payment of principal, premium, if any, and interest, as the case may be, due on such interest payment date, redemption date, Change of
Control Payment Date, maturity date or other date, as the case may be, need not be made on such interest payment date, redemption date,
Change of Control Payment Date, maturity date or other date as the case may be, but may be made on the next succeeding business day, and
no  interest  on  such  payment  shall  accrue  for  the  period  from  and  after  such  interest  payment  date,  redemption  date,  Change  of  Control
Payment Date, maturity date or other date, as the case may be. As used in this paragraph and the immediately preceding paragraph, the term
“business day” means any day except a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which banking institutions in The City of New York are authorized
or obligated by law, regulation or executive order to close (a “New York business day”); provided that such term shall mean, with respect to
any place of payment of principal of or premium, if any, or interest on the notes, any day (a) which is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on
which banking institutions in such place of payment are authorized or obligated by law, regulation or executive order to close and (b) which
is also a New York business day.
Optional Redemption
On  and  after  March  1,  2021,  we  may  at  our  option  redeem  the  notes,  at  any  time  in  whole  or  from  time  to  time  in  part,  at  a
redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the principal
amount of the notes being redeemed to the applicable redemption date.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, payments of interest on the notes that are due and payable on any interest payment dates falling on or
prior to a date fixed for redemption of the notes will be payable to the holders of the notes registered as such at the close of business on the
relevant record dates according to their terms and the terms and provisions of the indenture.
If less than all of the notes are to be redeemed, then, if the notes are evidenced by one or more global notes, the notes to be redeemed
will be selected in accordance with the procedures of the Depositary, or, if the notes are evidenced by notes in definitive, physical form issued
under the limited circumstances described below under “Description of Indenture — Book-Entry Form and Transfer,” the trustee shall select
the  notes  (or  portions  thereof)  to  be  redeemed  in  any  manner  that  the  trustee  deems  fair  and  appropriate.  Notes  may  be  selected  for
redemption in whole or in part in a minimum of $25 in principal amount and integral multiples of $25 in principal amount in excess thereof,
provided that the remaining principal amount of any note redeemed in part is $25 or an integral multiple of $25 in excess thereof.
Notice of any redemption shall be mailed at least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the redemption date to each holder of the
notes to be redeemed.
Unless we default in payment of the redemption price, on and after the redemption date interest shall cease to accrue on the notes or
portions thereof called for redemption.
7

Change of Control Triggering Event
If a Change of Control Triggering Event (as defined below) occurs with respect to the notes, then, unless we give notice of our
election to redeem all of the notes as described above under “—Optional Redemption” and such notice is given by the date specified below,
we will be required to make an offer (a “Change of Control Offer”) to each holder of notes to repurchase (at such holder’s option and on the
terms described below) all or any part (in a principal amount of $25 or an integral multiple of $25 in excess thereof, provided that any
remaining principal amount of any note repurchased in part is $25 or an integral multiple of $25 in excess thereof) of such holder’s notes at a
purchase price in cash equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notes
repurchased to the Change of Control Payment Date (as defined below) (the “Change of Control Payment”); provided that, notwithstanding
the foregoing, payments of interest on notes that are due and payable on any interest payment dates falling on or prior to such Change of
Control Payment Date will be payable to the holders of the notes registered as such at the close of business on the relevant record dates
according to their terms and the terms and provisions of the indenture.
No later than 30 days following the date on which a Change of Control Triggering Event shall have occurred with respect to the notes
or, at our option, prior to any Change of Control (as defined below) but after the public announcement of the transaction that constitutes or
may constitute the Change of Control, we will, unless we give notice of our election to redeem all of the notes as described above under “—
Optional Redemption” and such notice is given by the date specified below, mail or cause to be mailed (or, in the case of notes evidenced by
one  or  more  global  notes,  give  or  cause  to  be  given  in  accordance  with  the  Depositary’s  procedures)  a  notice  (the  “Change  of  Control
Purchase Notice”) to all holders of notes (with a copy to the trustee), which notice shall govern the terms of such Change of Control Offer. In
such Change of Control Purchase Notice, we will generally describe the transaction or transactions that constitute or may constitute the
Change of Control and offer to repurchase the notes on the date specified in such notice, which date will be no earlier than 30 days and no
later  than  60  days  after  the  date  such  notice  is  mailed  (or  given,  as  the  case  may  be),  except  as  may  be  required  by  applicable  law  or
regulation (the “Change of Control Payment Date”). The Change of Control Purchase Notice shall, if mailed (or given, as the case may be)
prior to occurrence of the applicable Change of Control, state that the Change of Control Offer for the notes and our obligation to purchase
the notes pursuant to such Change of Control Offer are conditioned on such Change of Control and the related Change of Control Triggering
Event with respect to the notes occurring on or prior to the applicable Change of Control Payment Date specified in such notice.
Holders electing to have a note or portion thereof repurchased pursuant to a Change of Control Offer with respect to the notes will be
required to surrender the note (which, in the case of notes evidenced by one or more global notes, must be made in accordance with the
procedures of the Depositary), together with a duly completed and executed notice of holder to elect repurchase in the form attached to the
notes (which may, in the case of notes evidenced by one or more global notes, be given in accordance with the Depositary’s procedures), to
the trustee under the indenture (or to such other person as may be designated by us for such purpose) as provided in the applicable Change of
Control Purchase Notice prior to the close of business on the third business day immediately preceding the applicable Change of Control
Payment Date and to comply with other procedures and requirements set forth in such Change of Control Purchase Notice. As used in the
preceding sentence, the term “business day” means any day except a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which banking institutions in The City
of New York are authorized or obligated by law, regulation or executive order to close.
On any Change of Control Payment Date with respect to the notes, we shall be required, to the extent lawful, to:
8

•
accept for payment all notes or portions of notes properly tendered pursuant to the applicable Change of Control Offer;
•
deposit with a paying agent for the notes an amount equal to the aggregate Change of Control Payment in respect of all notes or
portions of notes properly tendered pursuant to the applicable Change of Control Offer; and
•
deliver or cause to be delivered (including by book-entry transfer, if applicable) the repurchased notes or portions of notes to the
trustee, accompanied by an officers’ certificate stating the aggregate principal amount of notes accepted by us for repurchase.
Interest on notes and portions of notes properly tendered for repurchase pursuant to a Change of Control Offer will cease to accrue on
and after the applicable Change of Control Payment Date, unless we shall have failed to accept such notes and such portions of notes for
payment or failed to deposit the Change of Control Payment in respect thereof in accordance with the immediately preceding paragraph. We
will promptly pay, or cause the trustee or a paying agent for the notes to promptly pay (by application of funds deposited by us as aforesaid),
to each holder of notes (or portions thereof) properly tendered and accepted for payment by us pursuant to such Change of Control Offer, the
Change of Control Payment for such notes. In the case of any note repurchased in part, the trustee will promptly authenticate and mail (or
cause to be delivered by book-entry transfer) to the holder of such note a new note equal in principal amount to any unrepurchased portion of
the note repurchased in part.
We will comply with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other securities laws and regulations to the
extent those laws and regulations are applicable in connection with the repurchase of notes pursuant to a Change of Control Offer. To the
extent that the provisions of any such securities laws or regulations conflict with the Change of Control Triggering Event provisions of the
notes or the indenture, we shall comply with those securities laws and regulations and shall not be deemed to have breached our obligations
under the Change of Control Triggering Event provisions of the notes or the indenture by virtue thereof.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the indenture or the Change of Control Triggering Event provisions of the notes, we will
not be required to make a Change of Control Offer for the notes or repurchase any notes pursuant to any Change of Control Offer for such
notes if (a) a third party agrees to make such Change of Control Offer in the manner, at the times and otherwise in compliance with the
requirements for an offer made by us and such third party repurchases all notes properly tendered by the holders pursuant to such Change of
Control Offer or (b) we give notice of redemption of all of the notes no later than 30 days after the applicable Change of Control Triggering
Event with respect to the notes. In addition, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the indenture or the Change of Control Triggering
Event provisions of the notes, we will not be required to, and we will not, repurchase notes pursuant to a Change of Control Offer with
respect to the notes if there has occurred and is continuing on the applicable Change of Control Payment Date an event of default (as defined
under “Description of Indenture—Events of Default” below) with respect to the notes or the debt securities of any other series outstanding
under the indenture.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any of the following:
(a)    the consummation of any transaction (including, without limitation, any merger or consolidation) the result of which is
that any “person” (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) (other than us or any of our Subsidiaries (as defined
under “Description of Indenture — Covenants — Certain Definitions” below)) becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rules
13d-3 and 13d-5 under the Exchange Act), directly or indirectly, of more than 50% of our
9

outstanding Voting Stock (measured by voting power rather than number of shares), provided, however, that a person shall not be
deemed the beneficial owner of, or to own beneficially, (1) any securities tendered pursuant to a tender or exchange offer made by or
on behalf of such person or any of such person’s affiliates (as defined in the indenture) until such tendered securities are accepted for
purchase or exchange thereunder or (2) any securities if such beneficial ownership arises solely as a result of a revocable proxy
delivered in response to a proxy or consent solicitation made pursuant to the applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act;
(b)    the direct or indirect sale, transfer, conveyance or other disposition (other than by way of merger or consolidation), in
one transaction or a series of related transactions, of all or substantially all of the properties and assets of us and our Subsidiaries,
taken as a whole, to any person (other than us or any of our Subsidiaries);
(c)    the first day on which a majority of the members of our board of directors (which term, as used in this definition, means
our full board of directors and not any committees thereof) are not Continuing Directors;
(d)    the adoption of a plan by our board of directors relating to our liquidation or dissolution; or
(e)    we consolidate with, or merge with or into, any person, or any person consolidates with, or merges with or into, us, in
any such event pursuant to a transaction in which any of our outstanding Voting Stock or the outstanding Voting Stock of such other
person is converted into or exchanged for cash, securities or other property, other than any such transaction where the shares of our
Voting Stock outstanding immediately prior to such transaction constitute, or are converted into or exchanged for, a majority of the
outstanding Voting Stock (measured by voting power rather than number of shares) of the surviving person, or any direct or indirect
parent of the surviving person, immediately after giving effect to such transaction.
Except as otherwise expressly provided in clause (a) of the first sentence of this definition, the term “person,” as used in this definition, has
the meaning set forth in the indenture.
“Change of Control Triggering Event” means the occurrence of both a Change of Control and a Rating Event with respect to the
notes. For purposes of clarity, it is understood and agreed that no Change of Control Triggering Event shall be deemed to have occurred with
respect to the notes in connection with any particular Change of Control unless and until such Change of Control has actually occurred.
“Continuing Directors” means, as of any date of determination, any member of our board of directors (which term, as used in this
definition, means our full board of directors and not any committees thereof) who (a) was a member of our board of directors on the date the
notes were first issued or (b) was nominated for election, elected or appointed to our board of directors with the approval of or by a majority
of the Continuing Directors who were members of our board of directors at the time of such nomination, election or appointment (either by
vote or written consent or by approval of our proxy statement in which such member was named as a nominee for election as a director
without written objection to such nomination).
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor thereto, in each case as amended or
supplemented from time to time.
10

“Investment Grade Rating” means a rating equal to or higher than Baa3 (or the equivalent) by Moody’s and BBB- (or the equivalent)
by S&P, and a rating equal to or higher than the equivalent investment grade credit rating from any replacement Rating Agency or Rating
Agencies selected by us.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc.
“Rating  Agencies”  means  (a)  each  of  Moody’s  and  S&P;  and  (b)  if  Moody’s  or  S&P  or,  if  applicable,  any  replacement  Rating
Agency ceases to rate the notes or fails to make a rating of the notes publicly available for reasons outside of our control, a “nationally
recognized statistical rating organization” (as defined in Section 3(a)(62) of the Exchange Act) selected by us as a replacement for Moody’s,
S&P or any such replacement Rating Agency, as the case may be.
“Rating Event” means the rating on the notes is lowered by both of the Rating Agencies and as a result the notes are rated below an
Investment Grade Rating by both of the Rating Agencies, in each case on any day during the period (the “Measurement Period”) commencing
on the date of the first public announcement of an arrangement that results in a Change of Control and ending on the 60th day following the
first public announcement of the occurrence of such Change of Control (which Measurement Period shall be extended (subject to the proviso
below) if on such 60th day (x) the rating of the notes is under publicly announced consideration for a possible downgrade by either Rating
Agency and (y) the rating on the notes by such Rating Agency is an Investment Grade Rating, such extension to continue until the day on
which each such Rating Agency considering such possible downgrade either rates the notes below an Investment Grade Rating or publicly
announces that it is no longer considering the notes for a possible downgrade; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing, no such extension
will occur if on such 60th day, and any such extension will terminate if at any time after such 60th day, the notes have an Investment Grade
Rating  from  at  least  one  Rating  Agency  and  are  not  under  publicly  announced  consideration  for  a  possible  downgrade  by  such  Rating
Agency).
“S&P” means Standard & Poor’s Rating Group, Inc.
“Voting Stock” means, with respect to any person, any Capital Stock (as defined under “Description of Indenture – Covenants –
Certain Definitions” below) of such person that is normally entitled (without regard to the occurrence of any contingency) to vote generally in
the election of directors, managers, trustees or similar persons, as applicable, of such person.
As used under this caption “—Change of Control Triggering Event,” all references to rules and regulations under the Exchange Act
shall include any successor provisions thereto; and all references to “the Change of Control Triggering Event covenant,” “the Change of
Control Triggering Event provisions” and other similar references mean all of the terms and provisions set forth above under this caption “—
Change of Control Triggering Event.”
If we are required to make a Change of Control Offer with respect to the notes, we cannot assure you that we will have sufficient
financial  resources  available,  or  that  we  will  be  able  to  arrange  sufficient  financing,  to  satisfy  our  obligation  to  repurchase  the  notes.
Moreover, any such failure to repurchase the notes following the occurrence of a Change of Control Triggering Event could constitute an
event of default under other debt instruments of ours and our subsidiaries resulting in the acceleration and required repayment of that other
indebtedness. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and financial condition and on the market value of the
notes.
The Change of Control Triggering Event provisions of the notes may not provide holders of notes protection in the event of highly
leveraged transactions, reorganizations, restructurings, mergers or similar
11

transactions involving us that might adversely affect holders of notes. In particular, any such transaction may not give rise to a Change of
Control Triggering Event with respect to the notes, in which case we would not be required to make a Change of Control Offer with respect
to the notes. Except as described above with respect to a Change of Control Triggering Event, neither the notes nor the indenture contain
provisions that permit holders of notes to require us to repurchase or repay the notes in the event of a reorganization, restructuring, merger or
similar transaction involving us or any of our subsidiaries.
In addition, clause (b) of the definition of “Change of Control” appearing above includes a phrase relating to the direct or indirect
sale, transfer, conveyance or other disposition (other than by way of merger or consolidation) of “all or substantially all” of the properties and
assets of us and our Subsidiaries, taken as a whole. Although there is a limited body of case law interpreting the phrase “substantially all,”
there is no precise established definition of the phrase under applicable law. Accordingly, our obligation to make an offer to repurchase the
notes as a result of a sale, transfer, conveyance or other disposition of less than all of the properties and assets of us and our Subsidiaries,
taken as a whole, may be uncertain.
Moreover, under clause (c) of the definition of Change of Control appearing above, a Change of Control will occur when a majority
of the members of our board of directors are not “Continuing Directors” (as defined above). In a decision in connection with a proxy contest,
a Delaware court held that the existing directors could approve a dissident slate of director nominees (who would constitute a majority of the
new board of directors) as “continuing directors” under a similar indenture provision and avoid triggering a change of control under such
indenture, provided the incumbent directors give their approval in the good faith exercise of their fiduciary duties. Therefore, in certain
circumstances involving a significant change in the composition of our board of directors, including in connection with a proxy contest where
our board of directors does not endorse a dissident slate of directors but approves them as “Continuing Directors” for purposes of the Change
of Control Triggering Event provisions, holders of the notes may not be entitled to require us to make a Change of Control Offer with respect
to the notes.
Covenant Defeasance, Legal Defeasance and Satisfaction and Discharge
The  provisions  described  below  under  “Description  of  Indenture—  Defeasance  of  Debt  Securities  and  Certain  Covenants”  and
“Description of Indenture —Satisfaction and Discharge” are applicable with respect to the notes. In that regard, the covenants described
below under “Description of Indenture—Covenants,” insofar as they apply to the notes, are subject to covenant defeasance as described
below under “Description of Indenture— Defeasance of Debt Securities and Certain Covenants.” However, the provisions described above
under “– Change of Control Triggering Event” will not be subject to covenant defeasance.
DESCRIPTION OF INDENTURE
The information under this caption describes certain general terms and provisions of the indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 (the
“base indenture”), as amended and supplemented by a supplemental indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 (the “supplemental indenture;”
the base indenture, as amended and supplemented by the supplemental indenture, is hereinafter called the “indenture”), each between us and
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (the “trustee”), and our debt securities (the “debt securities”) that are issuable under the
indenture. Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires, references to “debt securities” under this caption “Description
of Indenture” include our 6.00% Notes due 2056 (the “notes”), which are a series of our debt securities under the indenture. The following
description is not complete and is subject to, and qualified in its entirety by reference to, the indenture, which is incorporated by reference as
an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 10-K of which this Exhibit is a part. You should read the indenture for a complete statement of the
provisions described under this caption and
12

for other provisions that may be important to you. The indenture is subject to and governed by the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
In  the  following  description,  we  have  included  references  to  some  of  the  section  numbers  of  the  base  indenture  and  the  supplemental
indenture so that you can easily locate those provisions.
General
The terms of each series of debt securities will be established by or pursuant to a resolution of our board of directors or a committee
thereof, and set forth or determined in the manner provided in a resolution of our board of directors or a committee thereof, an officers’
certificate or a supplemental indenture. (Section 2.2 of the base indenture)
An unlimited aggregate principal amount of debt securities may be issued under the indenture. We may issue debt securities under the
indenture from time to time in one or more series with the same or various maturities, interest rates, public offering prices and other terms and
provisions. We need not issue all debt securities of one series at the same time. In addition, unless otherwise provided with respect to any
series of debt securities, we may, without the consent of the holders or beneficial owners of the debt securities of any series, reopen a series of
debt securities and issue additional debt securities of that series from time to time. Any such additional debt securities of any series, together
with the debt securities of that series previously issued, will constitute a single series of debt securities under the indenture.
Without limitation to the foregoing, the terms of the debt securities of any series may modify, supplement or supersede any of the
terms of the indenture described under this caption.
Transfer and Exchange
Debt securities may be surrendered for registration of transfer or exchange at any office we maintain for this purpose in accordance
with the terms of the indenture. No service charge will be made for any transfer or exchange of debt securities (except as otherwise expressly
provided  by  the  indenture),  but  we  may  (subject  to  limited  exceptions)  require  payment  of  a  sum  sufficient  to  cover  any  tax  or  other
governmental charge payable in connection with a transfer or exchange. (Section 2.7 of the base indenture)
The indenture provides that neither we nor any registrar for the debt securities will be required (a) to issue, register the transfer of or
exchange debt securities of any series during the period beginning at the opening of business 15 days preceding the mailing of a notice of
redemption of debt securities of that series and ending at the close of business on the day of that mailing or (b) to register the transfer of or
exchange debt securities (or portions thereof) selected, called or being called for redemption or, if applicable, surrendered for repurchase by
us at the option of the holder, except any portion thereof not so selected, called or being called or so surrendered. (Section 2.7 of the base
indenture)
The indenture provides that, prior to due presentment of a debt security for registration of transfer, we, the trustee and any agent of
ours or the trustee may treat the person in whose name such debt security is registered in the register maintained for that purpose as the owner
of such debt security for the purpose of receiving payment of the principal of and premium and interest, if any, on such debt security and for
all other purposes whatsoever, whether or not any payment with respect to such debt security shall be overdue, and neither we, the trustee nor
any agent of ours or the trustee shall be affected by notice to the contrary. (Section 2.16 of the base indenture)
13

Covenants
The following covenants apply to the notes. The following covenants also apply to the debt securities of each other series that may be
outstanding  from  time  to  time  under  the  indenture,  unless  otherwise  specified  in  a  resolution  of  our  board  of  directors  (or  a  committee
thereof), supplemental indenture or officers’ certificate establishing the terms of the debt securities of such series as provided in the indenture.
Limitation on Liens
In the indenture, we covenant and agree, for the benefit of the holders of the debt securities of each series, that we will not, nor will
we permit any Significant Subsidiary to, issue, incur, create, assume or guarantee any debt for borrowed money (including debt for borrowed
money evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or similar instruments) (collectively, “Debt”) secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, security
interest, pledge, lien, charge or similar encumbrance (each, a “Lien”) upon any Principal Property, shares of Capital Stock of any Significant
Subsidiary or intercompany Debt owed by any Significant Subsidiary to us or any of our other Subsidiaries (“Intercompany Debt”) (whether
such Principal Property, shares of Capital Stock or Intercompany Debt is existing or owed on the date the debt securities of such series are
first issued or thereafter created or acquired), without in any such case effectively providing, substantially concurrently with or prior to the
issuance, incurrence, creation, assumption or guarantee of any such secured Debt or the grant of such Lien securing any such secured Debt,
that the debt securities of such series (together with, if we shall so determine, any other indebtedness or other obligations (including, without
limitation, debt securities of other series issued under the indenture) of or guarantees by us or any Significant Subsidiary ranking equally in
right of payment with the debt securities of such series or any such guarantee) shall be secured equally and ratably with (or, at our option,
prior to) such secured Debt (but only so long as such secured Debt is so secured). The foregoing restriction, however, will not apply to any of
the following:
(1)        Liens  on  property,  Capital  Stock,  Debt  or  other  assets  of  any  person  existing  at  the  time  such  person  becomes  a
Subsidiary of ours, provided that such Liens are not incurred in anticipation of such person becoming a Subsidiary of ours and do not
extend to any assets other than those of such person;
(2)    Liens on property, Capital Stock, Debt or other assets existing at the time of acquisition thereof (including, without
limitation, by merger, consolidation or acquisition of Capital Stock) by us or a Subsidiary of ours, or Liens thereon to secure the
payment of all or any part of the purchase price thereof, or Liens on property, Capital Stock, Debt or other assets to secure any Debt
incurred prior to, at the time of, or within 18 months after, the latest of the acquisition (including, without limitation, by merger,
consolidation or acquisition of Capital Stock) thereof or, in the case of property, the completion of construction, the completion of
improvements or the commencement of substantial commercial operation of such property for the purpose of financing all or any part
of the purchase price thereof, such construction or the making of such improvements, as the case may be;
(3)    Liens in favor of, or which secure Debt owing to, us or any of our Subsidiaries;
(4)    Liens existing on the date the debt securities of such series were first issued;
(5)    Liens on property of a person existing at the time such person is merged with or into, or consolidated with, us or a
Subsidiary of ours or otherwise acquired by us or a Subsidiary of ours or at the time of a sale, lease or other disposition of the
properties of any person as an entirety or substantially as an entirety to us or a Subsidiary of ours, provided that such Liens were not
incurred
14

in anticipation of such merger, consolidation, sale, lease or other disposition and do not extend to any assets other than those of the
person merged with or into, or consolidated with, us or a Subsidiary of ours or such property sold, leased or disposed of;
(6)    Liens in favor of the United States of America or any state, territory or possession thereof (or the District of Columbia),
or  any  department,  agency,  instrumentality  or  political  subdivision  of  the  United  States  of  America  or  any  state,  territory  or
possession thereof (or the District of Columbia), to secure partial, progress, advance or other payments pursuant to any contract or
statute or to secure any Debt incurred for the purpose of financing all or any part of the purchase price of or the cost of constructing
or improving the property subject to such Liens;
(7)    Liens securing the debt securities of such series;
(8)    Liens created in connection with a project financed with, or created to secure, Non-recourse Obligations;
(9)    Liens to secure bonds, notes, debentures or similar instruments on which the interest is exempt from federal income tax;
and
(10)    extensions, renewals, refinancings or replacements (in whole or in part) of any Liens or Debt which is secured by Liens
that were permitted to be incurred by the indenture; provided, however, that (a) the principal or accreted amount of any Debt of ours
or any of our Significant Subsidiaries secured by such Lien immediately after such extension, renewal, refinancing or replacement
shall not exceed the sum of the principal or accreted amount, as the case may be, of any Debt of ours or any of our Significant
Subsidiaries  so  secured  immediately  prior  to  such  extension,  renewal,  refinancing  or  replacement  plus  any  costs  and  expenses
(including, without limitation, any fees, premiums and penalties) related to such extension, renewal, refinancing or replacement and
(b)  such  extension,  renewal,  refinancing  or  replacement  Liens  are  limited  to  all  or  part  of  the  same  Principal  Property  (and  any
improvements thereon), shares of Capital Stock of any Significant Subsidiary or Intercompany Debt which secured any Debt of ours
or any of our Significant Subsidiaries immediately prior to such extension, renewal, refinancing or replacement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we and our Significant Subsidiaries may, without securing the debt securities of such series or any
other debt securities issued under the indenture, issue, incur, create, assume or guarantee Debt secured by any Liens which would otherwise
be subject to the restrictions set forth in the immediately preceding paragraph if, immediately after giving effect thereto and, if applicable, to
the application of any proceeds therefrom to repay Debt on a pro forma basis, our Aggregate Debt does not exceed the greater of (1) 20% of
our  Consolidated  Net  Tangible  Assets,  determined  as  of  the  date  of  such  issuance,  incurrence,  creation,  assumption  or  guarantee,  and
(2) $500 million. (Section 4.1 of the supplemental indenture)
Limitation on Sale and Lease-Back Transactions
In the indenture, we covenant and agree, for the benefit of the holders of the debt securities of each series, that we will not, nor will
we permit any Significant Subsidiary to, enter into any Sale and Lease-Back Transaction with respect to any Principal Property, unless:
(1)    such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction involves a lease for a term of not more than three years;
15

(2)    such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction is between us and one of our Subsidiaries or between any Subsidiaries of ours;
(3)    we or such Significant Subsidiary would be entitled, at the time of such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction, to incur Debt
secured  by  a  Lien  on  the  Principal  Property  involved  in  such  Sale  and  Lease-Back  Transaction  at  least  equal  in  amount  to  the
Attributable Debt with respect to such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction, without equally and ratably securing the debt securities of
such series, pursuant to the first paragraph under “—Limitation on Liens” above;
(4)    we or any of our Subsidiaries applies an amount equal to the net proceeds of such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction
within 365 days after such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction to any of (or a combination of) (i) the prepayment or retirement of the
debt securities of such series, (ii) the prepayment or retirement of other bonds, notes, debentures or similar instruments (including,
without limitation, debt securities of any other series issued under the indenture) or Debt of ours or a Subsidiary of ours (other than
bonds,  notes,  debentures,  similar  instruments  or  Debt  of  ours  that  is  by  its  terms  subordinated  in  right  of  payment  to  the  debt
securities  of  such  series)  that  by  its  terms  matures  more  than  12  months  after  its  creation  or  (iii)  the  purchase,  construction,
development, expansion or improvement of properties or facilities that are used in or useful to our business or the business of any of
our Subsidiaries; or
(5)    such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction was entered into on or prior to the date the debt securities of such series were
first issued.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we and our Significant Subsidiaries may, without securing the debt securities of such series or any
other  debt  securities  issued  under  the  indenture,  enter  into  a  Sale  and  Lease-Back  Transaction  which  would  otherwise  be  subject  to  the
restrictions set forth in the immediately preceding paragraph if, immediately after giving effect thereto and, if applicable, to the application of
any proceeds therefrom to repay Debt on a pro forma basis, our Aggregate Debt does not exceed the greater of (1) 20% of our Consolidated
Net  Tangible  Assets,  determined  as  of  the  date  of  such  Sale  and  Lease-Back  Transaction,  and  (2)  $500  million.  (Section  4.1  of  the
supplemental indenture)
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets
In the indenture, we covenant and agree, for the benefit of the holders of the debt securities of each series, that we will not consolidate
with or merge into, or convey, transfer or lease all or substantially all of our properties and assets to, any person (a “successor person”)
unless:
•
we are the surviving person or the successor person (if other than us) is organized and existing under the laws of the United States of
America, any State thereof or the District of Columbia and expressly assumes our obligations under the debt securities of each series
and the indenture;
•
immediately after giving effect to the transaction, no event of default (as defined below), and no event which, after notice or lapse of
time or both, would be an event of default, shall have occurred and be continuing under the indenture; and
•
certain other conditions are met.
Notwithstanding the above, any Subsidiary of eBay Inc. may consolidate with, merge into or convey, transfer or lease all or part of its
properties or assets to eBay Inc. or any other Subsidiary of eBay Inc.
16

Upon compliance with the provisions above, the successor person (if other than eBay) will succeed to and be substituted for and may
exercise every right and power of us under the debt securities and the indenture with the same effect as if such successor person had been the
original  obligor  under  the  debt  securities  and  the  indenture,  and  thereafter  (except  in  the  case  of  a  lease)  we  will  be  released  from  all
obligations and covenants under the debt securities and the indenture. (Section 5.1 of the base indenture)
Certain Definitions
As used in this “Description of Indenture” section, the following terms have the meanings set forth below.
“Aggregate Debt” means, with respect to the debt securities of any series, the sum of the following, calculated as of the date of
determination on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP:
(1)
the  aggregate  amount  of  then  outstanding  Debt  of  us  and  our  Significant  Subsidiaries  incurred  after  the  date  the  debt
securities of such series were first issued and secured by Liens not permitted under the first paragraph under “—Limitation on
Liens” above, and
(2)
the aggregate amount of Attributable Debt of us and our Significant Subsidiaries then outstanding in respect of Sale and
Lease-Back Transactions entered into by us and our Significant Subsidiaries after the date the debt securities of such series
were first issued pursuant to the second paragraph under “—Limitation on Sale and Lease-Back Transactions” above.
“Attributable Debt” with regard to a Sale and Lease-Back Transaction with respect to any Principal Property means, at the time of
determination, the lesser of:
(1)
the fair market value (as determined in good faith by our board of directors, which term, as defined in the indenture, includes
committees thereof) of the Principal Property subject to such Sale and Lease-Back Transaction; and
(2)
the  present  value  of  the  total  net  amount  of  rent  required  to  be  paid  under  the  applicable  lease  during  the  remaining
contractual term thereof (including any period for which such lease has been extended but subject to the last sentence of this
subparagraph),  discounted  at  the  rate  of  interest  per  annum  set  forth  or  implicit  in  the  terms  of  such  lease  (or,  if  not
practicable to determine such rate, the weighted average interest rate per annum borne (at the time of determination) by the
debt  securities  then  outstanding  under  the  indenture)  compounded  semi-annually  (assuming  a  360-day  year  consisting  of
twelve 30 day months). For purposes of clarity, it is understood and agreed that (a) the total net amount of rent required to be
paid under, and the term of, the applicable lease shall be determined upon the basis of the contractual terms of such lease and
shall not be affected by the fact that all or any portion of such rent may, under GAAP, be characterized as interest or some
other amount or that the amount of such rent or the term of such lease, as determined under GAAP, may be different from the
amount of rent or the term specified by the contractual terms of such lease and (b) the total net amount of rent shall exclude
any  amounts  required  to  be  paid  by  the  lessee,  whether  or  not  designated  as  rent  or  additional  rent,  on  account  of
maintenance, repairs, insurance, taxes, assessments, water rates or similar charges or any amounts required to be paid by such
lessee contingent upon the amount of sales or similar contingent amounts. In the case of any lease that is terminable by the
lessee upon the payment of a penalty, such total net amount of rent shall be the lesser of (1) the net amount determined
assuming
17

termination upon the first date such lease may be terminated (in which case the net amount shall also include the present
value, calculated as provided above, of the amount of the penalty, but no rent shall be considered as required to be paid under
such lease subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated) or (2) the net amount determined assuming no
such termination, in each case determined in accordance with the contractual terms of such lease.
“Capital Stock” of any person means any and all shares, interests, participations or other equivalents (however designated) in the
equity of such person.
“Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means, as of any date on which we effect a transaction requiring such Consolidated Net Tangible
Assets to be measured under the indenture, the aggregate amount of assets (less applicable reserves) after deducting therefrom (a) all current
liabilities,  except  for  current  maturities  of  long-term  debt  and  obligations  under  capital  leases,  and  (b)  all  intangible  assets  (including
goodwill), to the extent included in said aggregate amount of assets, all as set forth in the most recent consolidated balance sheet of us and
our  consolidated  Subsidiaries  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP  contained  in  an  annual  report  on  Form  10‑K  or  a  quarterly  report  on
Form 10-Q (in each case as amended, if applicable) filed by us with the Securities and Exchange Commission (or any successor thereto) or if,
at such date, we shall have ceased filing such reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (or any successor thereto), our then most
recent consolidated annual or quarterly balance sheet prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“GAAP”  means  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America,  which  are  in  effect  as  of  the  date  of
application thereof.
“holder” means any person in whose name a debt security is registered.
“Non-recourse Obligation” means indebtedness or other obligations substantially related to (1) the acquisition of assets not previously
owned by us or any of our Subsidiaries or (2) the financing of a project involving the development or expansion of properties of ours or any
of our Subsidiaries, as to which the obligee with respect to such indebtedness or obligation has no recourse to us or any Subsidiary of ours or
to our or any such Subsidiary’s assets other than the assets which were acquired with the proceeds of such transaction or the project financed
with the proceeds of such transaction (and the proceeds thereof).
“person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, limited liability company, joint-stock company,
trust, unincorporated organization or any other entity, including any government or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
“Principal Property” means (1) our principal corporate office (whether owned on the date of the indenture or thereafter acquired, and
including any leasehold interest therein) and (2) each data center, service and support facility or research and development facility (in each
case, whether owned on the date of the indenture or thereafter acquired) which is owned by or leased to us or any of our Subsidiaries and is
located within the United States of America, unless, with respect to clause (2), our board of directors (which term, as defined in the indenture,
includes committees thereof) has determined in good faith that such center or facility is not of material importance to the total business
conducted by us and our Subsidiaries, taken as a whole; provided, however, that any such center or facility (a) owned by us or any of our
Subsidiaries for which the book value (less accumulated depreciation) on the date as of which the determination is being made is equal to or
less than 1.0% of our Consolidated Net Tangible Assets as of such date, all determined in accordance with GAAP, or (b) leased by us or any
of our Subsidiaries for which the annual lease obligation on the date as of which the determination is being made is equal to or less than
$2.0 million shall in no event be deemed a Principal Property.
18

“Sale  and  Lease-Back  Transaction”  means  any  arrangement  with  any  person  providing  for  the  leasing  by  us  or  any  Significant
Subsidiary of ours of any Principal Property, whether owned on the date of the indenture or thereafter acquired, which Principal Property has
been or is to be sold or transferred by us or such Significant Subsidiary of ours to such person with the intention of taking back a lease of
such Principal Property.
“Significant Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of ours that is a “significant subsidiary” as defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S‑X
as promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (or any successor thereto) or any successor to such Rule.
“Subsidiary” of any specified person means any corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity of which more than
50% of the total voting power of outstanding shares of Capital Stock entitled (without regard to the occurrence of any contingency) to vote in
the election of directors, managers or trustees thereof (or persons performing similar functions) is at the time owned (and, in the case of a
partnership, more than 50% of whose total general partnership interests then outstanding is at the time owned), directly or indirectly, by such
person or other Subsidiaries of such person or a combination thereof and, in the case of an entity other than a corporation or a partnership,
such person has the power to direct, directly or indirectly, the policies, management and affairs of such entity.
Events of Default
The term “event of default” means, with respect to the notes, any of the events described in the first four bullet points below. The
term “event of default” means, with respect to the debt securities of any other series, unless otherwise specified in a resolution of our board of
directors (or a committee thereof), supplemental indenture or officers’ certificate establishing the terms of the debt securities of such series as
provided in the indenture, any of the following:
•
default in the payment of any interest on any debt security of that series when it becomes due and payable, and continuance of
that default for a period of 30 days (unless the entire amount of such payment is deposited by us with the trustee or with a
paying agent prior to the expiration of such 30-day period); or
•
default in the payment of principal of or premium (if any) on any debt security of that series when due and payable; or
•
default in the performance or breach of any covenant or warranty of ours in the indenture (other than a covenant or warranty
for  which  the  consequences  of  nonperformance  or  breach  are  addressed  by  another  event  of  default  applicable  to  debt
securities of that series and other than a covenant or warranty that has been included in the indenture solely for the benefit of
a series of debt securities other than that series), which default or breach continues uncured for a period of 90 days after there
has been given, by registered or certified mail, to us by the trustee or to us and the trustee by the holders of at least 25% in
principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series, a written notice containing the statements required by the
indenture; or
•
certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of eBay; or
•
any other event of default with respect to the debt securities of that series that is specified in a resolution of our board of
directors (or a committee thereof), supplemental indenture
19

or officer’s certificate establishing the terms of the debt securities of that series as provided in the indenture. (Section 6.1 of
the base indenture)
No event of default with respect to a particular series of debt securities necessarily constitutes an event of default with respect to any
other series of debt securities. The occurrence of certain events of default or an acceleration of the debt securities of one or more series under
the indenture may constitute an event of default under certain of our other indebtedness outstanding from time to time.
If an event of default with respect to the debt securities of any series at the time outstanding occurs and is continuing (other than an
event of default relating to certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of eBay), then the trustee or the holders of not less than
25% in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series may declare the principal of and accrued and unpaid interest, if any,
on all of the debt securities of that series to be due and payable immediately, by a notice in writing to us (and to the trustee if given by the
holders). If an event of default resulting from certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of eBay occurs and is continuing
with respect to the debt securities of any series, the principal of and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all outstanding debt securities of
such series will become and be immediately due and payable without any declaration or other act on the part of the trustee or any holder of
debt securities of such series. At any time after acceleration with respect to debt securities of any series has occurred and before a judgment
or decree for payment of the money due has been obtained by the trustee, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding
debt securities of that series may rescind and annul such acceleration and its consequences if all events of default with respect to the debt
securities of such series, other than non-payment of the principal and interest, if any, of the debt securities of such series which have become
due solely by such acceleration, have been cured or waived as provided in the indenture. (Section 6.2 of the base indenture).
The indenture provides that the trustee will be under no obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers under the indenture at the
request or direction of any of the holders of debt securities of any series unless such holders shall have offered to the trustee security or
indemnity reasonably satisfactory to it against the costs, expenses and liabilities which might be incurred by it in compliance with such
request or direction. (Section 7.2(f) of the base indenture) Subject to certain rights of the trustee and to certain conditions specified in the
indenture, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series will have the right to direct the time,
method and place of conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the trustee or exercising any trust or power conferred on the
trustee with respect to the debt securities of that series. (Section 6.12 of the base indenture)
No holder of any debt security of any series will have any right to institute any proceeding, judicial or otherwise, with respect to the
indenture or the debt securities of such series, or for the appointment of a receiver, trustee or similar official, or for any other remedy under
the indenture, unless:
•
that holder has previously given written notice to the trustee of a continuing event of default with respect to debt securities of
that series;
•
the  holders  of at  least  a  majority  in  principal amount  of the  outstanding  debt  securities  of that series  have made written
request  to  the  trustee  to  institute  proceedings  in  respect  of  such  event  of  default  in  its  own  name  as  trustee  under  the
indenture;
•
such holder or holders have  offered to the trustee indemnity reasonably satisfactory to it against the costs, expenses and
liabilities to be incurred in compliance with such request;
20

•
the  trustee  for  90  days  after  its  receipt  of  such  notice,  request  and  offer  of  indemnity  has  failed  to  institute  any  such
proceeding; and
•
no direction inconsistent with such written request has been given to the trustee during such 90-day period by holders of a
majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series. (Section 6.7 of the base indenture)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the holder of any debt security will have an absolute and unconditional right to receive payment of the
principal of and premium and interest, if any, on that debt security on the due dates expressed in that debt security and to institute suit for the
enforcement of any such payment. (Section 6.8 of the base indenture)
The indenture requires that we deliver to the trustee, within 120 days after the end of each of our fiscal years, an officers’ certificate
stating whether or not, to the knowledge of the signers thereof, we are in default in the performance or observance of any of the terms,
provisions and conditions of the indenture and, if we are in default, specifying all such defaults and the nature and status thereof of which the
signers  may  have  knowledge.  The  indenture  also  requires  that,  so  long  as  any  debt  securities  are  outstanding,  we  deliver  to  the  trustee
promptly upon becoming aware of any default or event of default under the indenture, an officers’ certificate specifying such default or event
of default and what action we are taking or propose to take with respect thereto. (Section 4.3 of the base indenture) The indenture provides
that the trustee may withhold notice to the holders of debt securities of any series of any default or event of default with respect to debt
securities of that series (except a default in payment of principal of or premium or interest, if any, on any debt securities of that series) if it in
good faith determines that withholding notice is in the interest of the holders of the debt securities of that series. (Section 7.5 of the base
indenture)
Modification and Waiver
We and the trustee may enter into a supplemental indenture in order to amend or supplement the indenture with respect to the debt
securities of one or more series or amend or supplement the debt securities of one or more series, without notice to or the consent of any
holders of any debt securities, to:
•
cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
•
make any change that does not adversely affect the rights of any holder of debt securities in any material respect;
•
comply with the provisions described above under “—Covenants—Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets;”
•
provide for the issuance of uncertificated debt securities in addition to or in place of certificated debt securities or reflect any
changes in the rules or procedures of any depositary for global securities (as defined below);
•
add to the covenants or the events of default for the benefit of holders of all or any series of debt securities or surrender any
right or power conferred on us by the indenture with respect to the debt securities of one or more series or to secure the debt
securities of one or more series or to provide guarantees for the benefit of one or more series of debt securities;
•
amend or supplement any of the provisions of the indenture in respect of one or more series of debt securities, provided,
however, that any such amendment or supplement either
21

(A) shall not apply to any outstanding debt security of any series issued prior to the date of such amendment or supplement
and entitled to the benefit of such provision or (B) shall become effective only if or when, as the case may be, there is no
outstanding debt security of any series issued prior to the date of such amendment or supplement and entitled to the benefit of
such provision;
•
establish the form and terms of any series of debt securities as permitted by the indenture;
•
evidence and provide for the acceptance of appointment under the indenture by a successor trustee with respect to the debt
securities of one or more series and add to or change any of the provisions of the indenture as shall be necessary to provide
for or facilitate the administration of the trusts thereunder by more than one trustee;
•
supplement any provisions of the indenture as is necessary to permit or facilitate the legal defeasance, covenant defeasance or
satisfaction and discharge of any debt securities as described below under “—Defeasance of Debt Securities and Certain
Covenants” or “—Satisfaction and Discharge;” and
•
comply with the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission or any applicable law or regulation in order to
effect  or  maintain  the  qualification  of  the  indenture under  the Trust  Indenture Act of  1939,  as  amended, or  conform the
indenture with any other mandatory provision of law or regulation, or conform the indenture or the debt securities of any
series  to  the  description  thereof  contained  in  any  applicable  prospectus,  prospectus  supplement,  free  writing  prospectus,
offering memorandum, term sheet or other offering document. (Section 9.1 of the base indenture)
We  and  the  trustee  may  enter  into  supplemental  indentures  for  the  purpose  of  supplementing  or  amending  in  any  manner  the
indenture with respect to the debt securities of any series or supplementing or amending the debt securities of any series with the consent of
the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of such series; provided that no such consent of holders
of debt securities shall be required for any amendment or supplement described in the immediately preceding paragraph. In addition, the
holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series may, on behalf of the holders of all debt
securities of that series, waive compliance by us with any covenants or other provisions of the indenture and the debt securities of such series.
However,  the  indenture  provides  that,  subject  to  the  provisions  described  in  the  next  succeeding  paragraph,  an  amendment,
supplement or waiver described in the immediately preceding paragraph affecting the debt securities of any series may not, without the
consent of the holder of each debt security of such series then outstanding:
•
reduce the rate of or extend the time for payment of interest (including default interest, if any) on any debt security of that
series;
•
reduce the principal of or premium on or change the stated maturity of any debt security of that series or reduce the amount
of, or postpone the date fixed for, the payment of any sinking fund or analogous obligation with respect to any debt securities
of that series;
•
reduce the principal amount of any discount securities of that series payable upon acceleration of its maturity;
22

•
waive a default or event of default in the payment of the principal of or premium or interest, if any, on any debt security of
that series (except a rescission of acceleration of the debt securities of such series by the holders of at least a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of such series and a waiver of the payment default that resulted
from such acceleration);
•
make the principal of or premium or interest, if any, on any debt security of such series payable in a currency other than that
stated in such debt security;
•
make any change, insofar as relates to the debt securities of that series, to the provisions of the indenture relating to, among
other things, the right of holders of debt securities of that series to receive payment of the principal of, and premium and
interest, if any, on, the debt securities of that series when due and to institute suit for the enforcement of any such payment or
relating to waivers of past defaults and events of default with respect to the debt securities of that series;
•
reduce the amount payable upon the redemption of any debt security of that series at our option or the repayment of any debt
security of that series at the option of the holder; or
•
reduce the percentage in principal amount of debt securities of that series, the consent of the holders of which is required for
any of the foregoing modifications or otherwise necessary to supplement or amend the indenture with respect to the debt
securities of that series, or to waive any past default or event of default with respect to the debt securities of that series.
(Section 9.3 of the base indenture)
The indenture provides that any amendment, supplement or waiver shall bind every holder of debt securities of each series affected
by such amendment, supplement or waiver unless it is of the type, or relates to any of the matters, described in any of the bullet points in the
immediately preceding paragraph. In that case then, anything in the indenture to the contrary notwithstanding, the amendment, supplement or
waiver shall bind every holder of a debt security who has consented to it and every subsequent holder of a debt security or portion of a debt
security that evidences the same debt as the consenting holder’s debt security. (Section 9.5 of the base indenture)
The holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series may, on behalf of the holders of all debt
securities of such series, waive any past default or event of default under the indenture with respect to that series and its consequences, except
a default or event of default in the payment of the principal of, or premium or interest, if any, on, any debt security of that series; provided,
however, that the holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series may rescind an acceleration of the
debt securities of that series and its consequences, including any related payment default that resulted from the acceleration. (Section 6.13 of
the base indenture)
Defeasance of Debt Securities and Certain Covenants
The indenture provides that, upon satisfaction of the conditions specified in the indenture, we shall be deemed to have paid and
discharged the entire indebtedness on all outstanding debt securities of any series on the 91st day after the date of the deposit referred to in
clause (a) under “—Conditions to Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance” below with respect to the debt securities of such series and
the provisions of the indenture, as it relates to the outstanding debt securities of such series, shall no longer be in effect except for:
23

•
the rights of holders of debt securities of such series to receive, solely from the funds described in clause (a) under “—
Conditions to Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance” below, payment of the principal of and premium and interest, if
any, on the outstanding debt securities of such series when due; and
•
a limited number of other provisions of the indenture, including provisions relating to transfers and exchanges of, and the
maintenance  of  a  registrar  and  paying  agent  for,  the  debt  securities  of  such  series  and  the  replacement  of  stolen,  lost  or
mutilated debt securities of such series.
We  sometimes  refer  to  this  as  “legal  defeasance.”  Upon  the  legal  defeasance  of  the  debt  securities  of  any  series,  we  will  be
discharged from our obligations to make payments on the debt securities of such series and (subject to the exceptions as described above) all
of our other obligations under the indenture with respect to the debt securities of such series.
The  indenture  further  provides  that,  upon  satisfaction  of  the  conditions  specified  in  the  indenture,  we  will  be  released  from  our
obligations  under,  and  may  omit  to  comply  with,  the  covenants  described  under  the  heading  “—Covenants”  above  and  certain  other
covenants in the indenture with respect to the debt securities of any series, as well as any additional covenants applicable to the debt securities
of such series which may be identified in a resolution of our board of directors (or committee thereof), supplemental indenture or officers’
certificate establishing the terms of the debt securities of such series as provided in the indenture as being subject to covenant defeasance, and
the failure to comply with any such covenants shall not constitute a default or event of default with respect to any debt securities of such
series. We sometimes refer to this as “covenant defeasance.”
Conditions to Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance. In order to effect legal defeasance or covenant defeasance of the debt
securities of any series, we must, among other things:
(a)
deposit with the trustee money and/or U.S. government obligations or, in the case of debt securities of any series denominated
in a currency other than U.S. dollars, money and/or foreign government obligations, that, through the payment of interest and
principal in accordance with their terms, will provide an amount in cash sufficient, in the opinion of a nationally recognized
firm of independent public accountants, to pay and discharge each installment of principal of, premium and interest, if any, on
and any mandatory sinking fund payments in respect of the debt securities of that series on the dates those payments are due
or, if applicable, any redemption date;
(b)
in the case of legal defeasance, deliver to the trustee an opinion of counsel to the effect that we have received from, or there
has been published by, the United States Internal Revenue Service a ruling or, since the date of the indenture, there has been a
change in the applicable United States federal income tax law, in either case to the effect that, and based thereon such opinion
shall confirm that, the holders of the debt securities of that series will not recognize income, gain or loss for United States
federal income tax purposes as a result of such deposit, legal defeasance and discharge and will be subject to United States
federal income tax on the same amounts and in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such
deposit, legal defeasance and discharge had not occurred; and
(c)
in the case of covenant defeasance, deliver to the trustee an opinion of counsel to the effect that the holders of the debt
securities of that series will not recognize income, gain or loss for United States federal income tax purposes as a result of
such deposit and covenant
24

defeasance and will be subject to United States federal income tax on the same amounts and in the same manner and at the
same times as would have been the case if such deposit and covenant defeasance had not occurred. (Sections 8.3 and 8.4 of
the base indenture)
In the event we exercise our option to effect covenant defeasance with respect to any series of debt securities and the debt securities
of that series are declared due and payable because of the occurrence of an event of default (including an event of default due to our failure to
comply  with  any  covenant  that  remains  in  effect  following  such  covenant  defeasance),  the  amount  of  money  and/or  U.S.  government
obligations or foreign government obligations, as the case may be, on deposit with the trustee will be sufficient to pay amounts due on the
debt securities of that series on the dates those payments are due or, if applicable, a redemption date, but may not be sufficient to pay amounts
due on the debt securities of that series at the time of the acceleration resulting from the event of default. However, we shall remain liable for
those payments.
When we use the term “U.S. government obligations,” we mean:
•
securities which are (a) direct obligations of the United States of America for the payment of which its full faith and credit is
pledged or (b) obligations of a person controlled or supervised by and acting as an agency or instrumentality of the United
States of America, the payment of which is unconditionally guaranteed as a full faith and credit obligation by the United
States of America, and which in the case of (a) and (b) are not callable or redeemable at the option of the issuer thereof; and
•
depository receipts issued by a bank or trust company as custodian with respect to any such U.S. government obligations or a
specific payment of interest on, or principal of or other amount payable with respect to, such U.S. government obligations
held by such custodian for the account of the holder of a depository receipt, provided that (except as required by law) such
custodian is not authorized to make any deduction from the amount payable to the holder of such depository receipt from any
amount received by the custodian in respect of the U.S. government obligation or the specific payment of interest on or
principal of or other amount payable with respect to the U.S. government obligation evidenced by such depository receipt.
Satisfaction and Discharge
The indenture will cease to be of any further effect with respect to any series of debt securities if:
•
all outstanding debt securities of such series have (subject to certain exceptions) been delivered to the trustee for cancellation;
or
•
all outstanding debt securities of such series not previously delivered to the trustee for cancellation have become due and
payable, will become due and payable at their stated maturity within one year, have been called for redemption or are to be
called  for  redemption  within  one  year,  or  have  been  legally  defeased  as  described  above  under  “—Defeasance  of  Debt
Securities  and  Certain  Covenants,”  and  (except  in  the  case  of  debt  securities  that  have  been  legally  defeased)  we  have
deposited  with  the  trustee  an  amount  sufficient  to  pay  the  principal  of,  and  premium  and  interest,  if  any,  on,  such  debt
securities to the date of such deposit (in the case of debt securities which have become due and payable on or prior to the date
of such deposit) or to the stated maturity or redemption date, as the case may be;
25

and, in either case, we also pay or cause to be paid all other sums payable under the indenture by us with respect to the debt securities of that
series and satisfy certain other conditions specified in the indenture. We sometime refer to this as “satisfaction and discharge.” (Section 8.1 of
the base indenture)
Notwithstanding the satisfaction and discharge of the indenture with respect to the debt securities of any series, a limited number of
provisions  of  the  indenture  shall  remain in  effect,  including provisions relating to  transfers  and exchanges  of,  and the  maintenance of a
registrar and paying agent for, debt securities, and the replacement of stolen, lost or mutilated debt securities.
Repayment of Unclaimed Funds
The indenture provides that the trustee and any paying agent shall pay to us upon request any money, U.S. government obligations or
foreign government obligations held by them for payment of principal, interest or premium, if any, or any sinking fund payment on any debt
securities that remain unclaimed for two years after the respective dates such principal, interest or premium, if any, or sinking fund payment
shall have become due and payable. Thereafter, holders of debt securities entitled to those payments must look to us for payment as general
creditors unless an applicable abandoned property law designates another person. (Section 8.5 of the base indenture)
Governing Law
The indenture and the debt securities will be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
No Recourse Against Others
The indenture provides that a director, officer, employee or stockholder, as such, of ours shall not have any liability for any of our
obligations under the debt securities or the indenture or for any claim based on, in respect of or by reason of such obligations or their creation.
The indenture further provides that each holder of debt securities, by accepting a debt security, waives and releases all such liability and that
such waiver and release are part of the consideration for the issuance of the debt securities.
Book-Entry Form and Transfer
The debt securities of any series may be issued in the form of one or more debt securities in global, fully registered form (“global
securities”), without interest coupons. Each such global security will be deposited with or on behalf of a depositary for the global securities of
such series (the “Depositary”) and registered in the name of the Depositary or a nominee of the Depositary. The following discussion assumes
that The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”) will be the Depositary.
Investors may hold their interests in a global security directly through the Depositary if they are direct participants (as defined below)
or indirectly through organizations that are participants (as defined below) in the Depositary. Except in the limited circumstances described
below, holders of beneficial interests in the global securities of any series will not be entitled to receive debt securities of such series in
definitive, certificated form (“certificated securities”) or to have debt securities of such series registered in their names.
The Depositary holds securities of institutions that have accounts with the Depositary (“direct participants”) to facilitate the clearance
and settlement of securities transactions among its participants through electronic book-entry changes in accounts of such participants,
thereby eliminating the need for
26

physical movement of securities certificates. The Depositary’s direct participants include brokers, dealers, banks, trust companies, clearing
corporations and certain other organizations. Indirect access to the Depositary’s book-entry system is also available to other organizations
(“indirect participants” and, together with direct participants, “participants”), such as brokers, dealers, banks, trust companies and clearing
corporations, that clear through or maintain a custodial relationship with a direct participant, whether directly or indirectly. The rules
applicable to the Depositary and its direct participants are on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
So long as the Depositary or its nominee is the registered holder of a global security of any series, the Depositary or such nominee, as
the case may be, will be considered the sole holder and owner of the debt securities represented by such global security for all purposes under
the indenture and such debt securities. Owners of beneficial interests in a global security of any series will not be considered the owners or
holders of the debt securities of such series under the indenture, will not be able to transfer those beneficial interests except in accordance
with the procedures of the Depositary and its participants and, except under the limited circumstances set forth below, will not be entitled to
receive certificated securities or to have debt securities registered in their names. Accordingly, each owner of a beneficial interest in a global
security of any series must rely on the procedures of the Depositary and, if such person is not a direct participant, on the procedures of the
participants through which it owns its beneficial interest to exercise any rights of a holder of debt securities of such series under the indenture.
We understand that, under existing industry practice, in the event owners of beneficial interests in global securities of any series wish to take
any  action  that  DTC  or  its  nominee,  as  the  holder  of  such  global  securities,  is  entitled  to  take,  DTC  would  authorize  the  applicable
participants to take such action, and that such participants would authorize beneficial owners owning through such participants to take such
action or would otherwise act upon the instructions of such beneficial owners. Because DTC can only act on behalf of direct participants, who
in turn act on behalf of others, the ability of a person having a beneficial interest in a global security to pledge that interest to persons that do
not participate in the DTC system, or otherwise to take actions in respect of that interest, may be impaired by the lack of a physical certificate
representing that interest.
All payments on the debt securities of any series represented by a global security registered in the name of the Depositary or its
nominee will be made to the Depositary or its nominee, as the case may be, as the registered holder of the global security. We expect that the
Depositary or its nominee, upon receipt of any payment of principal of, or premium or interest, if any, on, a global security of any series, will
credit  the  applicable  direct  participants’  accounts  with  payments  in  amounts  proportionate  to  their  respective  beneficial  interests  in  the
principal amount of the global security as shown on the records of the Depositary. We also expect that payments by participants to owners of
beneficial interests in the global security held through such participants will be governed by standing instructions and customary practices as
is now the case with securities held for accounts for customers registered in “street name”; those payments will be the responsibility of such
participants. Neither we, the trustee nor any agent of ours or of the trustee will have any responsibility or liability for any aspect of the
records relating to, or payments made on account of, beneficial interests in any global security or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing
any records relating to such beneficial interests or for any other aspect of the relationship between the Depositary and its participants or the
relationship between such participants and the owners of beneficial interests in the global securities.
Unless and until it is exchanged in whole or in part for certificated securities under the limited circumstances described below, a
global security may not be transferred except as a whole by the Depositary to a nominee of the Depositary or by a nominee of the Depositary
to the Depositary or another nominee of the Depositary or by the Depositary or any such nominee to a successor Depositary or a nominee of
such successor Depositary.
27

The indenture provides that the global securities of any series will be exchanged for debt securities of the same series in certificated
form only in the following limited circumstances:
(1)    we receive notice from the Depositary that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depository for the global securities of
such series or if the Depositary ceases to be a clearing agency registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the
“Exchange Act”), and, in either case, we fail to appoint a successor Depositary for the global securities of such series registered as
clearing agency under the Exchange Act within 90 days after the date we receive such notice or learn that the Depositary has ceased
to be so registered;
(2)    we in our sole discretion determine that the global securities of such series shall be exchanged (in whole but not in part)
for debt securities of such series in certificated form and we deliver to the trustee an officers’ certificate to such effect; or
(3)    an event of default with respect to the debt securities of such series shall have occurred and shall be continuing.
Any  global  security  of  any  series  that  is  exchanged  for  certificated securities as provided  above will be exchanged  for an  equal
aggregate principal amount of certificated securities of the same series, in authorized denominations and registered in such names as the
Depositary  instructs  the  trustee.  It  is  expected  that  such  instructions  will  be  based  upon  directions  received  by  the  Depositary  from
participants with respect to ownership of beneficial interests in global securities.
The information in this section concerning DTC and its book-entry system has been obtained from sources that we believe to be
reliable, but we do not take responsibility for this information. This information has been provided solely as a matter of convenience. The
rules and procedures of DTC are solely within its control and could change at any time. Neither we nor the trustee nor any agent of ours or of
the trustee has any control over DTC and none of us takes any responsibility for their activities. In addition, DTC is under no obligation to
perform or continue to perform such procedures and such procedures may be discontinued at any time. Neither we nor the trustee nor any
agent  of  ours  or  of  the  trustee  has  any  responsibility  for  the  performance  or  nonperformance  by  DTC  or  any  other  Depositary  or  their
respective participants of these or any other rules or procedures governing their respective operations.
28

 Exhibit 21.01
 
LIST OF SUBSIDIARIES
The following is a list of our subsidiaries as of December 31, 2019 that are required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K.
DOMESTIC SUBSIDIARIES
Name
StubHub, Inc., a Delaware corporation
INTERNATIONAL SUBSIDIARIES
 
 
Jurisdiction of
 
Percent Ownership
Name
 
Incorporation
 
If Less Than 100%
mobile.de GmbH
Germany
eBay GmbH
Germany
eBay International Treasury Center Sarl
Luxembourg
eBay Korea Co., Ltd.
Korea
eBay International Holding GmbH
Switzerland
eBay International AG
Switzerland
eBay Korea Holding GmbH
Switzerland
eBay Marketplaces GmbH
Switzerland
Marktplaats B.V.
The Netherlands
eBay Classifieds Holding B.V.
The Netherlands
eBay KTA (UK) Limited
United Kingdom
eBay (UK) Limited
United Kingdom

Exhibit 23.01
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-3 (No. 333-215919), Form S-4 (No. 333-117914),
and Form S-8 (Nos. 333-64179, 333-87593, 333-41944, 333-58046, 333-97729, 333-100426, 333-107832, 333-117913, 333-127971, 333-129072,
333-136118, 333-140942, 333-143880, 333-149131, 333-149132, 333-151851, 333-155314, 333-159778, 333-165438, 333-168295, 333-171154,
333-174242, 333-175416, 333-175417, 333-176477, 333-176663, 333-178369, 333-181535, 333-181539, 333-192514, 333-193299, 333-195987,
333-203546, 333-213340) of eBay Inc. of our report dated January 31, 2020 relating to the consolidated financial statements, financial statement
schedule and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in this Form 10‑K.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
January 31, 2020

Exhibit 31.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Scott F. Schenkel, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.
 
/s/ Scott F. Schenkel
Scott F. Schenkel
Interim Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: January 31, 2020

Exhibit 31.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Andy Cring, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.
/s/ Andy Cring
Andy Cring
Interim Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: January 31, 2020

Exhibit 32.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Scott F. Schenkel, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
 
/s/ Scott F. Schenkel
Scott F. Schenkel
Interim Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: January 31, 2020
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.

Exhibit 32.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Andy Cring, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
 
/s/ Andy Cring
Andy Cring
Interim Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: January 31, 2020
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.
