UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 10-K
 
[x]
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016 .
OR
[ ]
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Transition Period from             to             .
Commission file number 000-24821
 
eBay Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Delaware
77-0430924
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
2025 Hamilton Avenue
San Jose, California
95125
(Address of principal
executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(408) 376-7400
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934:
Title of each class
Name of exchange on which registered
Common stock
The Nasdaq Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934:
None
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.     Yes [x]  No [ ]
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act.    Yes [ ]  No [x]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    Yes [x]  No [ ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).    Yes [x]   No [ ]
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.    Yes  [x]   No  [ ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,”
and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
[x]
Accelerated filer
[ ]
Non-accelerated filer
[ ]
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Smaller reporting company
[ ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).   Yes  [ ]  No  [x]

As of June 30, 2016 , the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $24,544,842,965 based on the closing sale price as reported on The Nasdaq Global
Select Market.
Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant’s classes of common stock, as of the latest practicable date.
Class
Outstanding as of January 30, 2017
Common Stock, $0.001 par value per share
1,087,042,601
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference from the definitive proxy statement for the registrant’s Annual Meeting of Stockholders expected to be held on May 18, 2017.

eBay Inc.
Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
Item 1.
Business
4
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
9
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
27
Item 2.
Properties
28
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
29
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
30
Part II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
31
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
34
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
35
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
54
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
56
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
56
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
56
Item 9B.
Other Information
57
Part III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
58
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
58
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
58
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence
58
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
58
Part IV
Item 15.
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
59
3

PART I
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future business, future results of operations or financial condition, new or planned features or services, or management strategies). You can identify
these  forward-looking  statements  by  words  such  as  “may,”  “will,”  “would,”  “should,”  “could,”  “expect,”  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “estimate,”  “intend,”
“plan” and other similar expressions. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ
materially from those expressed or implied in our forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed
in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other
information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC. We do not intend,
and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-looking statements after the date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or
circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
ITEM 1: BUSINESS
Overview
eBay  Inc.  was  formed  as  a  sole  proprietorship  in  September  1995  and  was  incorporated  in  California  in  May  1996.  In  April  1998,  we
reincorporated in Delaware, and in September 1998, we completed the initial public offering of our common stock. Our principal executive offices are
located at 2025 Hamilton Avenue, San Jose, California 95125, and our telephone number is (408) 376-7400. Unless otherwise expressly stated or
the context otherwise requires, when we refer to “we,” “our,” “us” or “eBay” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we mean the current Delaware
corporation (eBay Inc.) and its California predecessor, as well as all of its consolidated subsidiaries. When we refer to “eBay Inc.” we mean our
Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds platforms.
eBay Inc. is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace, StubHub and Classifieds platforms. Collectively, we connect millions
of  buyers  and  sellers  around  the  world.  The  technologies  and  services  that  power  our  platforms  are  designed  to  enable  sellers  worldwide  to
organize and offer their inventory for sale, and buyers to find and purchase it, virtually anytime and anywhere. Our Marketplace platforms include our
online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay mobile apps. We believe that these are among the world’s
largest and most vibrant marketplaces for discovering great value and unique selection. Our StubHub platforms include our online ticket platform
located at www.stubhub.com, its localized counterparts, the StubHub mobile apps and Ticketbis. These platforms connect fans with their favorite
sporting events, shows and artists and enable them to buy and sell tens of thousands of tickets whenever they want. Our Classifieds platforms
include a collection of brands such as mobile.de, Kijiji, Gumtree, Marktplaats, eBay Kleinanzeigen and others. Offering online classifieds in more
than 1,500 cities around the world, these platforms help people find whatever they are looking for in their local communities.
Our  platforms  are  accessible  through  a  traditional  online  experience  (e.g.,  desktop  and  laptop  computers),  from  mobile  devices  (e.g.,
smartphones and tablets) and by API (platform access for third party software developers). Our multi-screen approach offers downloadable, easy-to-
use  applications  for  iOS  and  Android  mobile  devices  that  allow  access  to  ebay.com  and  some  of  our  other  websites  and  vertical  shopping
experiences.  In  addition,  our  platform  is  increasingly  based  on  open  source  technologies  that  provide  industry-standard  ways  for  software
developers and merchants to access our application programming interfaces, or APIs, to develop software and solutions for commerce.
4

Offerings
Delivering the best choice, the most relevance and the most powerful selling platform
Our objective is to drive the best choice, the most relevance and the most powerful selling platform for our buyers and sellers. We continue to
focus on customizing our buying and selling experiences to make it easier for users to list, find and buy items by offering formats dedicated to
specific products or categories. On our Marketplace platforms, we have built specialized experiences such as eBay Deals, which offers a variety of
products in multiple categories at discounted prices with free shipping. Other experiences include Fashion, Motors and Electronics.
One of the changes we are making to our Marketplace platform is the shift to better understand, organize and leverage the inventory on eBay.
This initiative, which we call structured data, will allow us to expand new experiences to more traffic and drive data quality.
As one of the world’s largest ticket marketplaces, StubHub connects people through inspiring live experiences. Event-goers can find more
than 10 million live sports, music, theater and other events in more than 40 countries on our StubHub platforms, and can browse, buy and sell
anytime, anywhere through desktop and mobile devices.
As a world leader in online classifieds, eBay’s Classifieds platforms are designed to help people list their products and services generally for
free, find whatever they are looking for in their local communities and trade at a local level. eBay Classifieds Group’s 11 global brands offer both
horizontal and vertical experiences, such as motors, real estate and jobs.
Business model and pricing
Our business model and pricing are designed so that our business is successful primarily when our sellers are successful. We partner, but do
not compete with, our sellers to enable their success on eBay’s platforms. Our eBay Top Rated Seller program rewards qualifying sellers with fee
discounts and improved search standing for qualifying listings if they are able to maintain excellent customer service ratings and meet specified
criteria for shipping and returns. We believe that sellers who fulfill these standards help promote our goal of maintaining an online marketplace that
is safe and hassle-free.
eBay Money Back Guarantee covers most items purchased on our websites in a number of countries, including the U.S., the U.K., Germany
and Australia, through a qualifying payment method and protects most buyers with respect to items that are not received or are received but not as
described  in  the  listing.  Some  purchases,  including  some  vehicles,  are  not  covered.  eBay  Money  Back  Guarantee  provides  coverage  for  the
purchase price of the item, plus original shipping costs, for a limited period of time from the original date of transaction, and includes a streamlined
interface to help buyers and sellers navigate the process.
The size and scale of our platforms are designed to enable our buyers and sellers to leverage economies of scale and capital investment, for
example in sales and marketing, mobile, customer acquisition and customer service.
Providing value to buyers and sellers
We believe that our sellers offer some of the best value and deals available for a number of consumer products. In the U.S., the U.K. and
Germany, the majority of transactions included free shipping during 2016. We have developed a number of features on our Marketplace platforms in
the areas of trust and safety (including our Seller Performance Standards, eBay Top Rated Seller program, eBay Money Back Guarantee, Verified
Rights Owner Program and Feedback Forum), customer support and value-added tools and services, as well as loyalty programs (for both buyers
and sellers). These features are designed to build trust and make users more comfortable buying and selling with unknown partners and completing
transactions online or through mobile devices, as well as rewarding our top sellers for their loyalty.
For sellers in particular, in 2016 we implemented a number of changes to our seller policies to primarily help small- and medium-sized sellers
be more successful on our platforms and better reward sellers who provide exceptional service to eBay buyers. These changes included providing
more objective standards; giving sellers the ability to customize how they manage returns based on their specific business needs; and launching the
Seller Hub, which puts a seller’s listing and marketing tools in one central place. 
5

Offering buyers and sellers choice
We offer choice to buyers and sellers across a number of dimensions.
For sellers, this includes:
•
Sellers can choose to list their products and services through fixed price listings or an auction-style format on our platforms. The fixed
price format on eBay allows buyers and sellers to close transactions at a pre-determined price set by the seller. Sellers also are able to
signal that they would be willing to close the transaction at a lower price through the Best Offer feature. Additionally, our auction-style
format allows a seller to select a minimum price for opening bids.
•
Sellers can list items that are new, refurbished and used, and common and rare on our Marketplace platforms.
For buyers, this includes:
•
Buyers can search for and purchase items that are new, refurbished and used, and common and rare on our Marketplace platforms.
•
Buyers also can have items shipped to them through shipping options offered by the seller and selected by the buyer on our Marketplace
platforms. For certain items purchased from certain retailers, buyers can pick up items they purchased online or through mobile devices
in one of the retailer’s physical stores (which we refer to as in-store pickup).
Our Impact and Responsibility
eBay was founded on the simple belief that people are basically good. Our technology has levelled the playing field by enabling people to
connect and trade around the world, regardless of their circumstances or location. We believe that commerce should be not just transactional but
rather transformational. Through our platforms, we are creating a better, more sustainable form of commerce that empowers people and creates
opportunity. And we are committed to reducing the environmental impact of our platform by increasing efficiency, expanding our use of cleaner
energy and using our global marketplace to extend the life of goods in a more circular economy .
Financial Information
We measure our footprint in our addressable market according to Gross Merchandise Volume (“GMV”). GMV consists of the total value of all
successfully closed transactions between users on our Marketplace and StubHub platforms during the applicable period, regardless of whether the
buyer and seller actually consummated the transaction.
At the end of 2016, our Marketplace and StubHub platforms had more than 167 million active buyers and over one billion live listings globally.
The term “active buyer” means, as of any date, all buyers who successfully closed a transaction on our Marketplace and StubHub platforms within
the previous 12-month period. Buyers may register more than once and, as a result, may have more than one account.
We generate revenue from the transactions we successfully enable and through marketing services, including classifieds and advertising. The
majority of our revenue comes from a take rate on the GMV of transactions closed on our Marketplace and StubHub platforms. We define “take rate”
as net transaction revenues divided by GMV. In 2016 , we generated $84 billion in GMV, of which approximately 59% was generated outside the
U.S.
For  additional  financial  information  as  well  as  the  geographic  areas  where  we  conduct  business,  please  see  “Note  6  -  Segments”  to  the
consolidated financial statements included in this report. Additionally, please see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “Our
international operations are subject to increased risks, which may harm our business,” which describes risks associated with eBay Inc.’s foreign
operations.
6

Notable Business Transactions in 2016
eBay makes acquisitions to help enable commerce on our platforms for buyers and sellers.  In 2016, eBay completed six acquisitions —
Cargigi Inc., Expertmaker, SalesPredict, Ticketbis, Ticket Utils and Corrigon Ltd. — for an aggregate purchase consideration of approximately  $212
million ,  consisting  of  cash.   We  believe  these  acquisitions  will  help  us  build  a  better  user  experience,  improve  discoverability  and  grow  our
international presence. See “Note 3 - Business Combinations and Divestitures” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for
additional information.
           
We also regularly review and manage our investments to ensure that our investments support eBay’s strategic direction and complement our
disciplined  approach  to  value  creation,  profitability  and  capital  allocation.   During  the  fourth  quarter  of  2016,  we  sold  our  equity  holdings  of
MercadoLibre, Inc. for a pre-tax gain of $1.3 billion .  
Competition
We encounter vigorous competition in our business from numerous sources. Our users can find, buy, sell and pay for similar items through a
variety of competing online, mobile and offline channels. These include, but are not limited to, retailers, distributors, liquidators, import and export
companies,  auctioneers,  catalog  and  mail-order  companies,  classifieds,  directories,  search  engines,  commerce  participants  (consumer-to-
consumer, business-to-consumer and business-to-business), shopping channels and networks. As our product offerings continue to broaden into
new categories of items and new commerce formats, we expect to face additional competition from other online, mobile and offline channels for
those new offerings. We compete on the basis of price, product selection and services.
For more information regarding these risks, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the captions “Substantial and increasingly
intense  competition  worldwide  in  ecommerce  may  harm  our  business”  and  “We  are  subject  to  regulatory  activity  and  antitrust  litigation  under
competition laws.”
To compete effectively, we will need to continue to expend significant resources in technology and marketing. These efforts require substantial
expenditures, which could reduce our margins and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, operating results and cash
flows and reduce the market price of our common stock and outstanding debt. Despite our efforts to preserve and expand the size, diversity and
transaction  activity  of  our  buyers  and  sellers  and  to  enhance  the  user  experience,  we  may  not  be  able  to  effectively  manage  our  operating
expenses, to increase or maintain our revenue or to avoid a decline in our consolidated net income or a net loss.
Government Regulation
Government regulation impacts key aspects of our business. In particular, we are subject to laws and regulations that affect the ecommerce
industry in many countries where we operate. For more information regarding these risks, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the
caption “Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight.”
Seasonality
We expect transaction activity patterns on our platforms to mirror general consumer buying patterns. Please see the additional information in
“Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under the caption “Seasonality.”
Technology
eBay Inc.’s platforms utilize a combination of proprietary technologies and services as well as technologies and services provided by others.
We have developed intuitive user interfaces, buyer and seller tools and transaction processing, database and network applications that help enable
our users to reliably and securely complete transactions on our sites. Our technology infrastructure simplifies the storage and processing of large
amounts of data, eases the deployment and operation of large-scale global products and services and automates much of the administration of
large-scale clusters of computers. Our infrastructure has been designed around industry-standard architectures to reduce downtime in the event of
outages or catastrophic occurrences. We strive to continually improve our technology to enhance the buyer and seller experience and to increase
efficiency,  scalability  and  security.  Additionally,  we  recently  embarked  on  a  multi-year  evolution  of  our  shopping  platform  that  aims  to  deliver
relevant, persistent and personalized experiences for consumers. For information regarding technology-related risks, see the information in “Item
1A: Risk
7

Factors” under the caption “Systems failures or cyberattacks and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our
websites, applications, products or services could harm our business.”
Intellectual Property
We  regard  the  protection  of  our  intellectual  property,  including  our  trademarks  (particularly  those  covering  the  eBay  name),  patents,
copyrights, domain names, trade dress and trade secrets as critical to our success. We aggressively protect our intellectual property rights by relying
on federal, state and common law rights in the U.S. and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual
restrictions to protect our proprietary rights in products and services. We routinely enter into confidentiality and invention assignment agreements
with our employees and contractors and nondisclosure agreements with parties with whom we conduct business to limit access to and disclosure of
our proprietary information.
We pursue the registration of our domain names, trademarks and service marks in the U.S. and internationally. Additionally, we have filed
U.S.  and international  patent applications  covering  certain  aspects  of our proprietary  technology.  Effective  trademark,  copyright,  patent,  domain
name, trade dress and trade secret protection is typically expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We must protect our intellectual property
rights  and  other  proprietary  rights  in  an  increasing  number  of  jurisdictions,  a  process  that  is  expensive  and  time  consuming  and  may  not  be
successful.
We have registered our core brands as trademarks and domain names in the U.S. and a large number of other jurisdictions and have in place
an active program to continue to secure trademarks and domain names that correspond to our brands in markets of interest. If we are unable to
register or protect our trademarks or domain names, we could be adversely affected in any jurisdiction in which our trademarks or domain names
are  not  registered  or  protected.  We  have  licensed  in  the  past,  and  expect  to  license  in  the  future,  certain  of  our  proprietary  rights,  such  as
trademarks or copyrighted material, to others.
From time to time, third parties have claimed - and others will likely claim in the future - that we have infringed their intellectual property rights.
We are typically involved in a number of such legal proceedings at any time. Please see the information in “Item 3: Legal Proceedings” and in “Item
1A:  Risk  Factors”  under  the  captions  “We  are  subject  to  patent  litigation,”  “The  listing  or  sale  by  our  users  of  items  that  allegedly  infringe  the
intellectual property rights of rights owners, including pirated or counterfeit items, may harm its business,” and “We may be unable to adequately
protect or enforce our intellectual property rights, or third parties may allege that we are infringing their intellectual property rights.”
Employees
As of December 31, 2016 , we employed approximately 12,600 people globally. Approximately 6,600 of our employees were located in the
U.S.
Available Information
Our Internet address is www.ebay.com . Our investor relations website is located at https://investors.ebayinc.com . We make available free of
charge on our investor relations website under the heading “SEC Filings” our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly  Reports on Form 10-Q,
Current Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such materials are electronically filed with
(or furnished to) the SEC.
We  webcast  our  earnings  calls  and  certain  events  we  participate  in  or  host  with  members  of  the  investment  community  on  our  investor
relations  website.  Additionally,  we  provide  notifications  of  news  or  announcements  regarding  our  financial  performance,  including  SEC  filings,
investor events, press and earnings releases, and blogs on our investor relations website. Further corporate governance information, including our
governance guidelines for our board of directors, board committee charters and code of conduct, is also available on our investor relations website
under the heading “Corporate Governance.”
The contents of our websites and webcasts are not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or in any other report or
document we file with (or furnish to) the SEC, and any references to our websites and webcasts are intended to be inactive textual references only.
8

Item 1A: RISK FACTORS
You should carefully review the following discussion of the risks that may affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, as
well  as  our  consolidated  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  and  the  other  information  appearing  in  this  report,  for  important  information
regarding risks that affect us.
Risk Factors That May Affect our Business, Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Our operating and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows, as well as the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
Our operating and financial results have varied on a quarterly basis during our operating history and may continue to fluctuate significantly as a
result of a variety of factors, including as a result of the risks set forth in this “Risk Factors” section. It is difficult for us to forecast the level or source
of our revenues or earnings (loss) accurately. In view of the rapidly evolving nature of our business, period-to-period comparisons of our operating
results may not be meaningful, and you should not rely upon them as an indication of future performance. We do not have backlog, and substantially
all of our net revenues each quarter come from transactions involving sales during that quarter. Due to the inherent difficulty in forecasting revenues,
it is also difficult to forecast expenses as a percentage of net revenues. Quarterly and annual expenses as a percentage of net revenues reflected in
our consolidated financial statements may be significantly different from historical or projected rates. Our operating results in one or more future
quarters may fall below the expectations  of securities  analysts  and investors.  The trading  price of our common stock  and debt securities could
decline, perhaps substantially, as a result of the factors described in this paragraph.
Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business.
The businesses and markets in which we operate are intensely competitive. We currently and potentially compete with a wide variety of online
and offline companies providing goods and services to consumers and merchants. The Internet and mobile networks provide new, rapidly evolving
and intensely competitive channels for the sale of all types of goods and services. We compete in two-sided markets, and must attract both buyers
and sellers to use our platforms. Consumers who purchase or sell goods and services through us have more and more alternatives, and merchants
have more channels to reach consumers. We expect competition to continue to intensify. Online and offline businesses increasingly are competing
with each other and our competitors include a number of online and offline retailers with significant resources, large user communities and well-
established  brands.  Moreover,  the  barriers  to  entry  into  these  channels  can  be  low,  and  businesses  easily  can  launch  online  sites  or  mobile
platforms and applications at nominal cost by using commercially available software or partnering with any of a number of successful ecommerce
companies. As we respond to changes in the competitive environment, we may, from time to time, make pricing, service or marketing decisions or
acquisitions that may be controversial  with and lead to dissatisfaction  among sellers, which could reduce activity on our platform and harm our
profitability.
We face  increased competitive  pressure  online and offline.  In  particular,  the  competitive  norm  for,  and the  expected  level of  service  from,
ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce  has  significantly  increased,  due  to,  among  other  factors,  improved  user  experience,  greater  ease  of  buying
goods, lower (or no) shipping costs, faster shipping times and more favorable return policies. Also, certain platform businesses, such as Alibaba,
Apple,  Google  and  Facebook,  many  of  whom  are  larger  than  us  or  have  greater  capitalization,  have  a  dominant  and  secure  position  in  other
industries or certain significant markets, and offer other goods and services to consumers and merchants that we do not offer. If we are unable to
change  our  products,  offerings  and  services  in  ways  that  reflect  the  changing  demands  of  ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce  marketplaces,
particularly the higher growth of sales of fixed-price items and higher expected service levels (some of which depend on services provided by sellers
on our platforms), or compete effectively with and adapt to changes in larger platform businesses, our business will suffer.
Competitors with other revenue sources may also be able to devote more resources to marketing and promotional campaigns, adopt more
aggressive pricing policies and devote more resources to website, mobile platforms and applications and systems development than we can. Other
competitors  may offer  or continue to offer faster  and/or free shipping, delivery on Sunday, same-day delivery, favorable return  policies or other
transaction-related services which improve the user experience on their sites and which could be impractical or inefficient for our sellers to match.
Competitors  may  be  able  to  innovate  faster  and  more  efficiently,  and  new  technologies  may  increase  the  competitive  pressures  by  enabling
competitors to offer more efficient or lower-cost services.
9

Some of our  competitors  control  other  products  and services  that  are  important  to our  success,  including credit  card interchange,  Internet
search, and mobile operating systems. Such competitors could manipulate pricing, availability, terms or operation of service related to their products
and services in a manner that impacts our competitive offerings. For example, Google, which operates a shopping platform service, has from time to
time made changes to its search algorithms that reduced the amount of search traffic directed to us from searches on Google. If we are unable to
use or adapt to operational changes in such services, we may face higher costs for such services, face integration or technological barriers or lose
customers, which could cause our business to suffer.
Consumers who might use our sites to buy goods have a wide variety of alternatives, including traditional department, warehouse, boutique,
discount and general merchandise stores (as well as the online and mobile operations of these traditional retailers), online retailers and their related
mobile offerings, online and offline classified services and other shopping channels, such as offline and online home shopping networks. In the
United  States,  these  include  Amazon.com,  Facebook,  Google,  Wal-Mart,  Target,  Sears,  Macy’s,  JC  Penney,  Costco,  Office  Depot,  Staples,
OfficeMax, Sam’s Club, Rakuten, Yahoo! Shopping, MSN, QVC and Home Shopping Network, among others. In addition, consumers have a large
number of online and offline channels focused on one or more of the categories of products offered on our site.
Consumers also can turn to many companies that offer a variety of services that provide other channels for buyers to find and buy items from
sellers of all sizes, including social media, online aggregation and classifieds platforms, such as craigslist, Oodle.com and a number of international
websites operated by Schibsted ASA or Naspers Limited. Consumers also can turn to shopping-comparison sites, such as Google Shopping. In
certain  markets,  our  fixed-price  listing  and  traditional  auction-style  listing  formats  increasingly  are  being  challenged  by  other  formats,  such  as
classifieds.
Our Classifieds platforms offer classifieds listings in the United States and a variety of international markets. In many markets in which they
operate, our Classifieds platforms compete for customers and for advertisers against more established online and offline classifieds platforms or
other competing websites.
Our  online  shopping  comparison  websites  (Shopping.com)  compete  with  sites  such  as  Google  Shopping,  Rakuten,  Nextag.com,
Pricegrabber.com, Shopzilla, Buscapé in Latin America (owned by Naspers) and Yahoo! Product Search, which offer shopping search engines that
allow consumers to search the Internet for specified products. In addition, sellers are increasingly utilizing multiple sales channels, including the
acquisition of new customers by paying for search-related advertisements on horizontal search engine sites, such as Google, Yahoo!, Naver and
Baidu. We use product search engines and paid search advertising to help users find our sites, but these services also have the potential to divert
users  to  other  online  shopping  destinations.  Consumers  may  choose  to  search  for  products  and  services  with  a  horizontal  search  engine  or
shopping comparison website, and such sites may also send users to other shopping destinations.
Consumers and merchants who might use our sites to sell goods also have many alternatives, including general ecommerce sites, such as
Amazon  and  Alibaba,  and  more  specialized  sites,  such  as  Etsy.  Our  international  sites  also  compete  for  sellers  with  general  and  specialized
ecommerce sites. Sellers may also choose to sell their goods through other channels, such as classifieds platforms. Consumers and merchants also
can create and sell through their own sites, and may choose to purchase online advertising instead of using our services. In some countries, there
are online sites that have larger customer bases and greater brand recognition, as well as competitors that may have a better understanding of local
culture and commerce. We increasingly may compete with local competitors in developing countries that have unique advantages, such as a greater
ability to operate under local regulatory authorities.
In addition, certain manufacturers may limit or cease distribution of their products through online channels, such as our sites. Manufacturers
may attempt to use contractual obligations or existing or future government regulation to prohibit or limit ecommerce in certain categories of goods
or services. Manufacturers may also attempt to enforce minimum resale price maintenance or minimum advertised price arrangements to prevent
distributors from selling on our platforms or on the Internet generally, or at prices that would make us less attractive relative to other alternatives.
The adoption by manufacturers of policies, or their use of laws or regulations, in each case discouraging or restricting the sales of goods or services
over the Internet, could force our users to stop selling certain products on our platforms, which could result in reduced operating margins, loss of
market share and diminished value of our brands.
10

The principal competitive factors for us include the following:
    
•
ability to attract, retain and engage buyers and sellers;
•
volume of transactions and price and selection of goods;
•
trust in the seller and the transaction;
•
customer service;
•
brand recognition;    
•
community cohesion, interaction and size;
•
website, mobile platform and application ease-of-use and accessibility;
•
system reliability and security;
•
reliability of delivery and payment, including customer preference for fast delivery and free shipping and returns;
•
level of service fees; and
•
quality of search tools.
We  may  be  unable  to  compete  successfully  against  current  and  future  competitors.  Some  current  and  potential  competitors  have  longer
operating histories, larger customer bases and greater brand recognition in other business and Internet sectors than we do.
Global and regional economic conditions could harm our business.
Our operations and performance depend significantly on global and regional economic conditions. Adverse economic conditions and events
(including volatility or distress in the equity and/or debt or credit markets) have in the past negatively impacted regional and global financial markets
and will likely continue to do so from time to time in the future. These events and conditions, including uncertainties and instability in economic and
market conditions caused by the United Kingdom’s vote to exit the European Union, could have a negative and adverse impact on companies and
customers with which we do business or cause us to write down our assets or investments. In addition, financial turmoil affecting the banking system
or financial markets could cause additional consolidation of the financial services industry, or significant financial service institution failures, new or
incremental  tightening  in  the  credit  markets,  low  liquidity,  and  extreme  volatility  in  fixed  income,  credit,  currency,  and  equity  markets.  Adverse
impacts to the companies and customers with which we do business, the banking system, or financial markets could have a material adverse effect
on our business, including a reduction in the volume and prices of transactions on our commerce platforms.
We are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Because we generate the majority of our revenues outside the United States but report our financial results in U.S. dollars, our financial results
are impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, or foreign exchange rates. The results of operations of many of our internationally
focused platforms are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations as the financial results of the applicable subsidiaries are translated from the
local currency into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. If the U.S. dollar weakens against foreign currencies, the translation of these foreign
currency denominated revenues or expenses will result in increased U.S. dollar denominated revenues and expenses. Similarly, if the U.S. dollar
strengthens  against  foreign  currencies,  particularly  the  Euro,  British  pound,  Korean  won  or  Australian  dollar,  our  translation  of  foreign  currency
denominated revenues or expenses will result in lower U.S. dollar denominated net revenues and expenses. In addition to this translation effect, a
strengthening U.S. dollar will typically adversely affect the volume of goods being sold by U.S. sellers to Europe and Australia more than it positively
affects the volume of goods being sold by sellers in those geographies to buyers in the United States, thereby further negatively impacting our
financial results.
While from time to time we enter into transactions to hedge portions of our foreign currency translation exposure, it is impossible to predict or
eliminate  the  effects  of  this  exposure.  Fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  could  significantly  impact  our  financial  results,  which  may  have  a
significant impact on the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
11

Our international operations are subject to increased risks, which could harm our business.
Our international businesses, especially in the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia and Korea, and cross-border business from greater China,
have generated a majority of our net revenues in recent years. In addition to uncertainty about our ability to generate revenues from our foreign
operations and expand into international markets, there are risks inherent in doing business internationally, including:
•
uncertainties and instability in economic and market conditions caused by the United Kingdom’s vote to exit the European Union;
•
uncertainty regarding how the United Kingdom’s access to the European Union Single Market and the wider trading, legal, regulatory and
labor  environments,  especially  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  European  Union,  will  be  impacted  by  the  United  Kingdom’s  vote  to  exit  the
European Union, including the resulting impact on our business and that of our clients;
•
expenses  associated  with  localizing  our  products  and  services  and  customer  data,  including  offering  customers  the  ability  to  transact
business in the local currency and adapting our products and services to local preferences (e.g., payment methods) with which we may
have limited or no experience;
•
trade barriers and changes in trade regulations;
•
difficulties  in  developing,  staffing,  and  simultaneously  managing  a  large  number  of  varying  foreign  operations  as  a  result  of  distance,
language, and cultural differences;
•
stringent local labor laws and regulations;
•
credit risk and higher levels of payment fraud;
•
profit  repatriation  restrictions,  foreign  currency  exchange  restrictions  or  extreme  fluctuations  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates  for  a
particular currency;
•
political or social unrest, economic instability, repression, or human rights issues;
•
geopolitical events, including natural disasters, public health issues, acts of war, and terrorism;
•
import or export regulations;
•
compliance with U.S. laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and foreign laws prohibiting corrupt payments to government officials,
as well as U.S. and foreign laws designed to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities;
•
antitrust and competition regulations;
•
potentially adverse tax developments and consequences;
•
economic uncertainties relating to sovereign and other debt;
•
different, uncertain, or more stringent user protection, data protection, privacy, and other laws;
•
risks related to other government regulation or required compliance with local laws;
•
national or regional differences in macroeconomic growth rates;
•
local licensing and reporting obligations; and
•
increased difficulties in collecting accounts receivable.
 
Violations of the complex foreign and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international operations may result in fines, criminal actions,
or sanctions against us, our officers, or our employees; prohibitions on the conduct of our business; and damage to our reputation. Although we
have  implemented  policies  and  procedures  designed  to  promote  compliance  with  these  laws,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  our  employees,
contractors, or agents will not violate our policies. These risks inherent in our international operations and expansion increase our costs of doing
business internationally and could harm our business.
Any factors that reduce cross-border trade or make such trade more difficult could harm our business.
Cross-border  trade  is  an  important  source  of  both  revenue  and  profits  for  us.  Cross-border  trade  also  represents  our  primary  (or  in some
cases, only) presence in certain important markets, such as Brazil/Latin America, China, and various other countries. In addition, our cross-border
trade is also subject to, and may be impacted by, foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
The interpretation and application of specific national or regional laws, such as those related to intellectual property rights of authentic products,
selective distribution networks, and sellers in other countries listing items on the Internet, and the potential interpretation and application of laws of
multiple jurisdictions (e.g., the jurisdiction of the buyer, the seller, and/or the location of the item being sold) are often extremely complicated in the
context of cross-border trade. The interpretation and/or application of such laws could impose restrictions on, or increase the costs of, purchasing,
selling, shipping, or returning goods across national borders.
12

  
The shipping of goods across national borders is often more expensive and complicated than domestic shipping. Customs and duty procedures
and reviews, including duty-free thresholds in various key markets, the interaction of national postal systems, and security related governmental
processes at international borders, may increase costs, discourage cross-border purchases, delay transit and create shipping uncertainties. Any
factors  that  increase  the  costs  of  cross-border  trade  or  restrict,  delay,  or  make  cross-border  trade  more  difficult  or  impractical  would  lower  our
revenues and profits and could harm our business.
Our business may be adversely affected by geopolitical events, natural disasters, seasonal factors and other factors that cause our users to
spend less time on our websites or mobile platforms and applications, including increased usage of other websites.
Our  users  may  spend  less  time  on  our  websites  and  our  applications  for  mobile  devices  as  a  result  of  a  variety  of  diversions,  including:
geopolitical events, such as war, the threat of war, or terrorist activity; natural disasters; power shortages or outages, major public health issues,
including pandemics; social networking or other entertainment websites or mobile applications; significant local, national or global events capturing
the attention of a large part of the population; and seasonal fluctuations due to a variety of factors. If any of these, or any other factors, divert our
users from using of our websites or mobile applications, our business could be materially adversely affected.
Our success depends to a large degree on our ability to successfully address the rapidly evolving market for transactions on mobile devices.
Mobile devices are increasingly used for ecommerce transactions. A significant and growing portion of our users access our platforms through
mobile devices. We may lose users if we are not able to continue to meet our users’ mobile and multi-screen experience expectations. The variety of
technical  and  other  configurations  across  different  mobile  devices  and  platforms  increases  the  challenges  associated  with  this  environment.  In
addition,  a  number  of  other  companies  with  significant  resources  and  a  number  of  innovative  startups  have  introduced  products  and  services
focusing on mobile markets.
Our  ability  to  successfully  address  the  challenges  posed  by  the  rapidly  evolving  market  for  mobile  transactions  is  crucial  to  our  continued
success, and any failure to continuously increase the volume of mobile transactions effected through our platforms could harm our business.
If we cannot keep pace with rapid technological developments to provide new and innovative programs, products and services, the use of our
products and our revenues could decline.
Rapid, significant technological changes continue to confront the industries in which we operate. We cannot predict the effect of technological
changes on our business. In addition to our own initiatives and innovations, we rely in part on third parties, including some of our competitors, for the
development of and access to new technologies. We expect that new services and technologies applicable to the industries in which we operate will
continue to emerge. These new services and technologies may be superior to, or render obsolete, the technologies we currently use in our products
and services. Incorporating new technologies into our products and services may require substantial expenditures and take considerable time, and
ultimately may not be successful. In addition, our ability to adopt new services and develop new technologies may be inhibited by industry-wide
standards, new laws and regulations, resistance to change from clients or merchants, or third parties’ intellectual property rights. Our success will
depend on our ability to develop new technologies and adapt to technological changes and evolving industry standards.
Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight.
We  are  subject  to  laws  and  regulations  affecting  our  domestic  and  international  operations  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  consumer
protection, data privacy requirements, intellectual property ownership and infringement, prohibited items and stolen goods, resale of event tickets,
tax, anti-competition, export requirements, anti-corruption, labor, advertising, digital content, real estate, billing, ecommerce, promotions, quality of
services, telecommunications, mobile communications and media, environmental, and health and safety regulations, as well as laws and regulations
intended to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities.
13

Compliance with these laws, regulations, and similar requirements may be onerous and expensive, and variances and inconsistencies from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction may further increase the cost of compliance and doing business. Any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of
changes in these laws and regulations or in their interpretation, could individually or in the aggregate make our products and services less attractive
to our customers, delay the introduction of new products or services in one or more regions, or cause us to change or limit our business practices.
We have implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance
that our employees, contractors, or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or our policies and procedures.  
Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.
We are subject to laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security, and transfer of personally identifiable information about our users
around  the  world.  Much  of  the  personal  information  that  we  collect,  especially  financial  information,  is  regulated  by  multiple  laws.  User  data
protection  laws  may  be  interpreted  and  applied  inconsistently  from  country  to  country.  In  many  cases,  these  laws  apply  not  only  to  third-party
transactions, but also to transfers of information between or among ourselves, our subsidiaries, and other parties with which we have commercial
relations. These laws continue to develop in ways we cannot predict and that may harm our business.
Regulatory scrutiny of privacy, user data protection, use of data and data collection is increasing on a global basis. We are subject to a number
of privacy and similar laws and regulations in the countries in which we operate and these laws and regulations will likely continue to evolve over
time, both through regulatory and legislative action and judicial decisions. Some of these laws impose requirements that are inconsistent with one
another, yet regulators may claim that both apply. Complying with these varying national requirements could cause us to incur substantial costs or
require us to change our business practices in a manner adverse to our business and violations of privacy-related laws can result in significant
penalties. In addition, compliance with these laws may restrict our ability to provide services to our customers that they may find to be valuable. A
determination that there have been violations of laws relating to our practices under communications-based laws could expose us to significant
damage awards, fines and other penalties that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business. In particular, because of the
enormous number of texts, emails and other communications we send to our users, communications laws that provide a specified monetary damage
award or fine for each violation (such as those described below) could result in particularly large awards or fines.
For example, the Federal Communications Commission amended certain of its regulations under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, or
TCPA, in 2012 and 2013 in a manner that could increase our exposure to liability for certain types of telephonic communication with customers,
including but not limited to text messages to mobile phones. Under the TCPA, plaintiffs may seek actual monetary loss or statutory damages of $500
per violation, whichever is greater, and courts may treble the damage award for willful or knowing violations. We are regularly subject to class-action
lawsuits, as well as individual lawsuits, containing allegations that our businesses violated the TCPA. These lawsuits, and other private lawsuits not
currently alleged as class actions, seek damages (including statutory damages) and injunctive relief, among other remedies. Given the enormous
number of communications we send to our users, a determination that there have been violations of the TCPA or other communications-based
statutes could expose us to significant damage awards that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business.
We post on our websites our privacy policies and practices concerning the collection, use and disclosure of user data. Any failure, or perceived
failure, by us to comply with our posted privacy policies or with any regulatory requirements or orders or other federal, state or international privacy
or consumer protection-related laws and regulations could result in proceedings or actions against us by governmental entities or others (e.g., class
action privacy litigation), subject us to significant penalties and negative publicity, require us to change our business practices, increase our costs
and adversely affect our business. Data collection, privacy and security have become the subject of increasing public concern. If Internet and mobile
users were to reduce their  use of our websites, mobile platforms,  products,  and services  as a result  of these concerns,  our business could be
harmed. As noted above, we are also subject to the possibility of security breaches, which themselves may result in a violation of these laws.
14

Other laws and regulations could harm our business.
It  is  not  always  clear  how  laws  and  regulations  governing  matters  relevant  to  our  business,  such  as  property  ownership,  copyrights,
trademarks, and other intellectual property issues, parallel imports and distribution controls, taxation, libel and defamation, and obscenity apply to
our businesses. Many of these laws were adopted prior to the advent of the Internet, mobile, and related technologies and, as a result, do not
contemplate or address the unique issues of the Internet and related technologies. Many of these laws, including some of those that do reference
the Internet are subject to interpretation by the courts on an ongoing basis and the resulting uncertainty in the scope and application of these laws
and  regulations  increases  the  risk  that  we  will  be  subject  to  private  claims  and  governmental  actions  alleging  violations  of  those  laws  and
regulations.
As our activities, the products and services we offer, and our geographical scope continue to expand, regulatory agencies or courts may claim
or  hold  that  we  or  our  users  are  subject  to  additional  requirements  (including  licensure)  or  prohibited  from  conducting  our  business  in  their
jurisdiction, either generally or with respect to certain actions. Financial and political events have increased the level of regulatory scrutiny on large
companies,  and regulatory  agencies may view matters  or interpret  laws and regulations  differently  than they have in the past and in a manner
adverse  to  our  businesses.  Our  success  and  increased  visibility  have  driven  some  existing  businesses  that  perceive  us  to  be  a  threat  to  their
businesses to  raise concerns  about our  business models  to policymakers  and regulators.  These  businesses  and their trade  association  groups
employ significant resources in their efforts to shape the legal and regulatory regimes in countries where we have significant operations. They may
employ these resources in an effort to change the legal and regulatory regimes in ways intended to reduce the effectiveness of our businesses and
the  ability  of  users  to  use  our  products  and  services.  These  established  businesses  have  raised  concerns  relating  to  pricing,  parallel  imports,
professional seller obligations, selective distribution networks, stolen goods, copyrights, trademarks and other intellectual property rights and the
liability  of  the  provider  of  an  Internet  marketplace  for  the  conduct  of  its  users  related  to  those  and  other  issues.  Any  changes  to  the  legal  or
regulatory regimes in a manner that would increase our liability for third-party listings could negatively impact our business.
Numerous U.S. states and foreign jurisdictions, including the State of California, have regulations regarding “auctions” and the handling of
property by “secondhand dealers” or “pawnbrokers.” Several states and some foreign jurisdictions have attempted to impose such regulations upon
us or our users, and others may attempt to do so in the future. Attempted enforcement of these laws against some of our users appears to be
increasing and we could be required to change the way we or our users do business in ways that increase costs or reduce revenues, such as
forcing us to prohibit listings of certain items or restrict certain listing formats in some locations. We could also be subject to fines or other penalties,
and any of these outcomes could harm our business.
A number of the lawsuits against us relating to trademark issues seek to have our platforms subject to unfavorable local laws. For example,
“trademark exhaustion” principles provide trademark owners with certain rights to control the sale of a branded authentic product until it has been
placed on the market by the trademark holder or with the holder’s consent. The application of “trademark exhaustion” principles is largely unsettled
in the context of the Internet, and if trademark owners are able to force us to prohibit listings of certain items in one or more locations, our business
could be harmed.
As we expand and localize our international activities,  we are increasingly  becoming obligated to comply with the laws of the countries or
markets in which we operate. In addition, because our services are accessible worldwide and we facilitate sales of goods and provide services to
users worldwide, one or more jurisdictions may claim that we or our users are required to comply with their laws based on the location of our servers
or one or more of our users, or the location of the product or service being sold or provided in an ecommerce transaction. For example, we were
found liable in France, under French law, for transactions on some of our websites worldwide that did not involve French buyers or sellers. Laws
regulating Internet, mobile and ecommerce technologies outside of the United States are generally less favorable to us than those in the United
States. Compliance may be more costly or may require us to change our business practices or restrict our service offerings, and the imposition of
any regulations on us or our users may harm our business. In addition, we may be subject to multiple overlapping legal or regulatory regimes that
impose conflicting requirements on us (e.g., in cross-border trade). Our alleged failure to comply with foreign laws could subject us to penalties
ranging from criminal prosecution to significant fines to bans on our services, in addition to the significant costs we may incur in defending against
such actions.
15

We are regularly subject to general litigation, regulatory disputes, and government inquiries.
We are regularly subject to claims, lawsuits (including class actions and individual lawsuits), government investigations, and other proceedings
involving competition and antitrust, intellectual property, privacy, consumer protection, accessibility claims, securities, tax, labor and employment,
commercial disputes, content generated by our users, services and other matters. The number and significance of these disputes and inquiries have
increased as our company has grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope and geographic reach, and our products and services have
increased in complexity.
The outcome and impact of such claims, lawsuits, government investigations, and proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. Regardless
of  the  outcome,  such  investigations  and  proceedings  can  have  an  adverse  impact  on  us  because  of  legal  costs,  diversion  of  management
resources, and other factors. Determining reserves for our pending litigation is a complex, fact-intensive process that is subject to judgment calls. It
is possible that a resolution of one or more such proceedings could require us to make substantial payments to satisfy judgments, fines or penalties
or  to  settle  claims  or  proceedings,  any  of  which  could  harm  our  business.  These  proceedings  could  also  result  in  reputational  harm,  criminal
sanctions, consent decrees, or orders preventing us from offering certain products, or services, or requiring a change in our business practices in
costly ways, or requiring development of non-infringing or otherwise altered products or technologies. Any of these consequences could harm our
business.
We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation under competition laws.
We are subject to scrutiny by various government agencies under U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including competition laws. Some
jurisdictions also provide private rights of action for competitors or consumers to assert claims of anti-competitive conduct. Other companies and
government agencies have in the past and may in the future allege that our actions violate the antitrust or competition laws of the United States,
individual states, the European Commission or other countries, or otherwise constitute unfair competition. An increasing number of governments are
regulating  competition  law  activities,  including  increased  scrutiny  in  large  markets  such  as  China.  Our  business  partnerships  or  agreements  or
arrangements  with  customers  or  other  companies  could  give  rise  to  regulatory  action  or  antitrust  litigation.  Some  regulators,  particularly  those
outside of the United States, may perceive our business to be used so broadly that otherwise uncontroversial business practices could be deemed
anticompetitive. Certain competition authorities have conducted market studies of our industries. Such claims and investigations, even if without
foundation, may be very expensive to defend, involve negative publicity and substantial diversion of management time and effort and could result in
significant judgments against us or require us to change our business practices.
We are subject to patent litigation.
We have repeatedly been sued for allegedly infringing other parties’ patents. We are a defendant in a number of patent suits and have been
notified of several other potential patent disputes. We expect that we will increasingly be subject to patent infringement claims because, among
other reasons:
•
our products and services continue to expand in scope and complexity;
•
we continue to expand into new businesses, including through acquisitions; and
•
the universe of patent owners who may claim that we, any of the companies that we have acquired, or our customers infringe their patents,
and the aggregate number of patents controlled by such patent owners, continues to increase.
Such claims may be brought directly against us and/or against our customers whom we may indemnify either because we are contractually
obligated  to  do  so  or  we  choose  to  do  so  as  a  business  matter.  We  believe  that  an  increasing  number  of  these  claims  against  us  and  other
technology companies have been, and continue to be, initiated by third parties whose sole or primary business is to assert such claims. In addition,
we have seen significant patent disputes between operating companies in some technology industries. Patent claims, whether meritorious or not,
are time-consuming and costly to defend and resolve, and could require us to make expensive changes in our methods of doing business, enter into
costly  royalty  or  licensing  agreements,  make  substantial  payments  to  satisfy  adverse  judgments  or  settle  claims  or  proceedings,  or  cease
conducting certain operations, which would harm our business.
16

We have identified  a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting  which, if not remediated,  could adversely affect  our
reputation, business or stock price.
In reviewing the accounting for certain  transactions  we completed  in December  2016, as part of the realignment of our legal structure,  as
described below under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Provision for Income
Taxes,” our management identified a deficiency in the effectiveness of a control intended to properly document and review relevant facts and apply
the appropriate tax accounting under standards generally accepted in the United States of America, which impacted the Deferred tax asset and
Income tax benefit accounts and related disclosures. As described under “Item 9A - Controls and Procedures,” our management has concluded that
the deficiency constitutes a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting and, as a result, internal control over financial reporting
was not effective as of December 31, 2016.
A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable
possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim consolidated financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
Although we have developed and are implementing a plan to remediate this material weakness and believe, based on our evaluation to date, that
this material weakness will be remediated during 2017, we cannot assure you that this will occur within the contemplated timeframe. Moreover, we
cannot assure you that we will not identify additional material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting in the future. If we are
unable  to  remediate  the  material  weakness,  our  ability  to  record,  process  and  report  financial  information  accurately,  and  to  prepare  financial
statements within the time periods specified by the rules and forms of the Securities and Exchange Commission, could be adversely affected. The
occurrence of or failure to remediate the material weakness may adversely affect our reputation and business and the market price of our common
stock and any other securities we may issue.
We are exposed to fluctuations in interest rates.
Some of our borrowings bear interest at floating rates and we have entered into agreements intended to convert the interest rate on some of
our fixed rate debt instruments to floating rates. To the extent that prevailing rates increase, our interest expense under these debt instruments will
increase.
Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of
our fixed-rate investment securities may be adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates. In general, fixed-rate securities with longer maturities
are subject to greater interest-rate risk than those with shorter maturities. While floating rate securities generally are subject to less interest-rate risk
than fixed-rate securities, floating-rate securities may produce less income than expected if interest rates decrease and may also suffer a decline in
market  value  if interest  rates  increase.  Due in part  to  these  factors,  our investment  income  may  decline  or  we may  suffer  losses  in principal  if
securities are sold that have declined in market value due to changes in interest rates. In addition, relatively low interest rates limit our investment
income. Fluctuations in interest rates that increase the cost of our current or future indebtedness, cause the market value of our assets to decline or
reduce our investment income could adversely affect our financial results.
Our tickets business is subject to regulatory, competitive and other risks that could harm this business.
Our tickets business, which includes StubHub, is subject to numerous risks, including:
•
Some  jurisdictions,  in  particular  jurisdictions  outside  the  United  States,  prohibit  the  resale  of  event  tickets  (anti-scalping  laws)  at  prices
above the face value of the tickets or at all, or highly regulate the resale of tickets, and new laws and regulations or changes to existing laws
and regulations imposing these or other restrictions could limit or inhibit our ability to operate, or our users’ ability to continue to use, our
tickets business.
•
Regulatory agencies or courts may claim or hold that we are responsible for ensuring that our users comply with these laws and regulations.
•
In many jurisdictions, our tickets business depends on commercial partnerships with event organizers or licensed ticket vendors, which we
must develop and maintain on acceptable terms for our tickets business to be successful.
•
Our tickets business is subject to seasonal fluctuations and the general economic and business conditions that impact the sporting events
and live entertainment industries.
17

•
A portion of the tickets inventory sold by sellers on the StubHub platform is processed by StubHub in digital form. Systems failures, security
breaches, theft or other disruptions that result in the loss of such sellers’ tickets inventory, could result in significant costs and a loss of
consumer confidence in our tickets business.
•
Lawsuits  alleging  a variety  of  causes  of actions  have in the  past,  and may  in the  future,  be filed  against  StubHub  and eBay  by venue
owners, competitors, ticket buyers, and unsuccessful ticket buyers. Such lawsuits could result in significant costs and require us to change
our business practices in ways that negatively affect our tickets business.
•
Our tickets business also faces significant competition from a number of sources, including ticketing service companies, event organizers,
ticket brokers, and online and offline ticket resellers. Some ticketing service companies, event organizers, and professional sports teams
have  begun  to  issue  event  tickets  through  various  forms  of  electronic  ticketing  systems  that  are  designed  to  restrict  or  prohibit  the
transferability (and by extension, the resale) of such event tickets either to favor their own resale affiliates or to discourage resale or restrict
resale  of  season  tickets  to  a preferred,  designated  website.  Ticketing  service  companies  have  also  begun  to  use  market-based  pricing
strategies or dynamic pricing to charge much higher prices, and impose additional restrictions on transferability, for premium tickets.
•
Some sports teams have threatened to revoke the privileges of season ticket owners if they resell their tickets through a platform that is not
affiliated with, or approved by, such sports teams.
The listing or sale by our users of items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners, including pirated or counterfeit
items, may harm our business.
The listing or sale by our users of unlawful, counterfeit or stolen goods or unlawful services, or sale of goods or services in an unlawful manner,
has resulted and may continue to result in allegations of civil or criminal liability for  unlawful activities  against us (including the employees  and
directors of our various entities) involving activities carried out by users through our services. In a number of circumstances, third parties, including
government regulators and law enforcement officials, have alleged that our services aid and abet violations of certain laws, including laws regarding
the sale of counterfeit  items,  laws restricting  or  prohibiting  the  transferability  (and  by extension,  the  resale)  of  digital goods (e.g.,  event  tickets,
books, music and software), the fencing of stolen goods, selective distribution channel laws, customs laws, distance selling laws, anti-scalping laws
with respect to the resale of tickets, and the sale of items outside of the United States that are regulated by U.S. export controls. For example:
•
In  Turkey,  local  prosecutors  and  courts  are  investigating  our  liability  for  allegedly  illegal  actions  by  users  of  our  Turkish  Marketplace
business (GittiGidiyor). In accordance with local law and custom, they have indicted one or more members of the board of directors of our
local  Turkish  subsidiary.  We  intend  to  defend  vigorously  against  any  such  actions  and  a  growing  number  of  these  cases  have  been
dismissed by the relevant courts.
•
In  August  2012,  we  were  informed  that  U.S.  listings  of  footwear  with  religious  imagery  were  visible  on  our  local  Indian  site  and  we
immediately removed these listings. In September 2012, a criminal case was registered against us in India in regard to these listings, and
we are challenging the prosecution of this case.
In addition, allegations of infringement of intellectual property rights, including but not limited to counterfeit items, have resulted in threatened
and actual litigation from time to time by rights owners, including the following luxury brand owners: Tiffany & Co. in the United States; Rolex S.A.
and Coty Prestige Lancaster Group GmbH in Germany; Louis Vuitton Malletier and Christian Dior Couture in France; and L’Oréal SA, Lancôme
Parfums et Beauté & Cie, and Laboratoire Garnier & Cie in several European countries.  Plaintiffs in these and similar suits seek, among other
remedies, injunctive relief and damages. Statutory damages for copyright or trademark violations could range up to $150,000 per copyright violation
and $2,000,000 per trademark violation in the United States, and may be even higher in other jurisdictions. In the past, we have paid substantial
amounts  in  connection  with  resolving  certain  trademark  and  copyright  suits.  These  and  similar  suits  may  also  force  us  to  modify  our  business
practices in a manner that increases costs, lowers revenue, makes our websites and mobile platforms less convenient to customers, and requires us
to spend substantial resources to take additional protective measures or discontinue certain service offerings in order to combat these practices. In
addition, we have received significant media attention relating to the listing or sale of illegal or counterfeit goods, which could damage our reputation,
diminish the value of our brand names, and make users reluctant to use our products and services.
18

We are subject to risks associated with information disseminated through our services.
Online  services  companies  may  be  subject  to  claims  relating  to  information  disseminated  through  their  services,  including  claims  alleging
defamation, libel, breach of contract, invasion of privacy, negligence, copyright or trademark infringement, among other things. The laws relating to
the liability of online services companies for information disseminated through their services are subject to frequent challenges both in the United
States and foreign jurisdictions. Any liabilities incurred as a result of these matters could require us to incur additional costs and harm our reputation
and our business.
Our potential liability to third parties for the user-provided content on our sites, particularly in jurisdictions outside the United States where laws
governing Internet transactions are unsettled, may increase. If we become liable for information provided by our users and carried on our service in
any jurisdiction in which we operate, we could be directly harmed and we may be forced to implement new measures to reduce our exposure to this
liability, including expending substantial resources or discontinuing certain service offerings, which could harm our business.
Changes to our programs to protect buyers and sellers could increase our costs and loss rate.
Our eBay Money Back Guarantee program represents the means by which we compensate users who believe that they have been defrauded,
have not received the item that they purchased  or have received  an item  different  from what was described.  We expect  to continue to receive
communications  from  users  requesting  reimbursement  or  threatening  or commencing  legal action  against us if no reimbursement  is made. Our
liability for these sort of claims is slowly beginning to be clarified in some jurisdictions and may be higher in some non-U.S. jurisdictions than it is in
the  United  States.  Litigation  involving  liability  for  any  such  third-party  actions  could  be  costly  and  time  consuming  for  us,  divert  management
attention, result in increased costs of doing business, lead to adverse judgments or settlements or otherwise harm our business. In addition, affected
users will likely complain to regulatory agencies that could take action against us, including imposing fines or seeking injunctions.
We  may  be  unable to  adequately  protect  or  enforce  our  intellectual  property  rights,  or  third  parties  may  allege  that  we  are  infringing  their
intellectual property rights.
We believe the protection of our intellectual property, including our trademarks, patents, copyrights, domain names, trade dress, and trade
secrets, is critical to our success. We seek to protect our intellectual property rights by relying on applicable laws and regulations in the United
States and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual restrictions to protect our proprietary rights
when offering or procuring products and services, including confidentiality and invention assignment agreements entered into with our employees
and contractors and confidentiality agreements with parties with whom we conduct business.
However, effective intellectual property protection may not be available in every country in which our products and services are made available,
and contractual arrangements and other steps we have taken to protect our intellectual property may not prevent third parties from infringing or
misappropriating  our  intellectual  property  or  deter  independent  development  of  equivalent  or  superior  intellectual  property  rights  by  others.
Trademark, copyright, patent, domain name, trade dress and trade secret protection is very expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We
must protect our intellectual property rights and other proprietary rights in an increasing number of jurisdictions, a process that is expensive and time
consuming and may not be successful in every jurisdiction. Also, we may not be able to discover or determine the extent of any unauthorized use of
our proprietary rights. We have licensed in the past, and expect to license in the future, certain of our proprietary rights, such as trademarks or
copyrighted material, to others. These licensees may take actions that diminish the value of our proprietary rights or harm our reputation. Any failure
to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights, or significant costs incurred in doing so, could materially harm our business.
As  the  number  of  products  in  the  software  industry  increases  and  the  functionality  of  these  products  further  overlap,  and  as  we  acquire
technology through acquisitions or licenses, we may become increasingly subject to infringement claims, including patent, copyright, and trademark
infringement claims. Litigation may be necessary to determine the validity and scope of the patent and other intellectual property rights of others.
The ultimate outcome of any allegation is uncertain and, regardless of the outcome, any such claim, with or without merit, may be time-consuming,
result  in  costly  litigation,  divert  management’s  time  and  attention  from  our  business,  require  us  to  stop  selling,  delay  roll-out,  or  redesign  our
products, or require us to pay substantial amounts to satisfy judgments or settle claims or lawsuits or to pay substantial royalty or licensing fees, or
to satisfy indemnification obligations that we have
19

with some of our customers. Our failure to obtain necessary license or other rights, or litigation or claims arising out of intellectual property matters,
may harm our business.
Failure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our platforms would increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely
diminish merchant and consumer confidence in and use of our services.
We face risks with respect to fraudulent activities on our platforms and periodically receive complaints from buyers and sellers who may not
have received the goods that they had contracted to purchase or payment for the goods that a buyer had contracted to purchase. In some European
and Asian jurisdictions, buyers may also have the right to withdraw from a sale made by a professional seller within a specified time period. While
we can, in some cases, suspend the accounts of users who fail to fulfill their payment or delivery obligations to other users, we do not have the
ability to require users to make payment or deliver goods, or otherwise make users whole other than through its buyer protection program, which in
the United States we refer to as the eBay Money Back Guarantee. Although we have implemented measures to detect and reduce the occurrence of
fraudulent activities, combat bad buyer experiences and increase buyer satisfaction, including evaluating sellers on the basis of their transaction
history  and  restricting  or  suspending  their  activity,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  these  measures  will  be  effective  in  combating  fraudulent
transactions or improving overall satisfaction among sellers, buyers, and other participants. Additional measures to address fraud could negatively
affect the attractiveness of our services to buyers or sellers, resulting in a reduction in the ability to attract new users or retain current users, damage
to our reputation, or a diminution in the value of our brand names.
We have substantial indebtedness, and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, and we may not generate sufficient
cash flow from our business to service our indebtedness. Failure to comply with the terms of our indebtedness could result in the acceleration of our
indebtedness, which could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and liquidity.
We have a substantial amount of outstanding indebtedness and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, including under
our commercial paper program and revolving credit facility or through public or private offerings of debt securities. Our outstanding indebtedness
and any additional indebtedness we incur may have significant consequences, including, without limitation, any of the following:
    
•
requiring us to use a significant portion of our cash flow from operations and other available cash to service our indebtedness, thereby
reducing the amount of cash available for other purposes, including capital expenditures and acquisitions;
•
our  indebtedness  and  leverage  may  increase  our  vulnerability  to  downturns  in  our  business,  to  competitive  pressures,  and  to  adverse
changes in general economic and industry conditions;
•
adverse changes in the ratings assigned to our debt securities by credit rating agencies will likely increase our borrowing costs;
•
our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, share repurchases or other general corporate
and other purposes may be limited; and
•
our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and our industry may be limited.
Our ability to make payments of principal of and interest on our indebtedness depends upon our future performance, which will be subject to
general economic conditions, industry cycles and financial, business and other factors affecting our consolidated results of operations and financial
condition, many of which are beyond our control. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future to service our debt,
we may be required to, among other things:
    
•
repatriate funds to the United States at substantial tax cost;
•
seek additional financing in the debt or equity markets;
•
refinance or restructure all or a portion of our indebtedness;
•
sell selected assets; or
•
reduce or delay planned capital or operating expenditures.
Such measures might not be sufficient to enable us to service our debt. In addition, any such financing, refinancing or sale of assets might not
be available on economically favorable terms or at all.
20

Our revolving credit facility and the indenture pursuant to which certain of our outstanding debt securities were issued contain, and any debt
instruments we enter into in the future may contain, financial and other covenants that restrict or could restrict, among other things, our business and
operations. If we fail to pay amounts due under, or breach any of the covenants in, a debt instrument, then the lenders would typically have the right
to demand immediate repayment of all borrowings thereunder (subject in certain cases to grace or cure period). Moreover, any such acceleration
and required repayment of or default in respect of any of our indebtedness could, in turn, constitute an event of default under other debt instruments,
thereby resulting in the acceleration and required repayment of that other indebtedness. Any of these events could materially adversely affect our
liquidity and financial condition.
A downgrade in our credit ratings could materially adversely affect our business.
Some of our outstanding indebtedness has received credit ratings from certain rating agencies. Such ratings are limited in scope and do not
purport to address all risks relating to an investment in those debt securities, but rather reflect only the view of each rating agency at the time the
rating was issued. The credit ratings assigned to our debt securities could change based upon, among other things, our results of operations and
financial condition. These ratings are subject to ongoing evaluation by credit rating agencies, and there can be no assurance that such ratings will
not be lowered, suspended or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency or placed on a so-called “watch list” for a possible downgrade or assigned a
negative ratings outlook if, in any rating agency’s judgment, circumstances so warrant. Moreover, these credit ratings are not recommendations to
buy, sell or hold any of our debt securities. Actual or anticipated changes or downgrades in our credit ratings, including any announcement that our
ratings are under review for a downgrade or have been assigned a negative outlook, would likely increase our borrowing costs, which could in turn
have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and could harm our business.
Our credit ratings were downgraded as a result of the distribution of 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal to our stockholders
(the “Distribution”), pursuant to which PayPal became an independent company. As of January 1, 2014, our long-term debt and short-term funding
were  rated  investment  grade  by  Standard  and  Poor’s  Financial  Services,  LLC  (long-term  rated  A,  short-term  rated  A-1,  with  a  stable  outlook),
Moody’s Investor Service (long-term rated A2, short-term rated P-1, with a stable outlook), and Fitch Ratings, Inc. (long-term rated A, short-term
rated F-1, with a stable outlook). All of these credit rating agencies lowered their ratings in connection with the Distribution, which occurred on July
17, 2015. Since July 20, 2015, we have been rated investment grade by Standard and Poor’s Financial Services, LLC (long-term rated BBB+, short-
term  rated  A-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  Moody’s  Investor  Service  (long-term  rated  Baa1,  short-term  rated  P-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  and  Fitch
Ratings, Inc. (long-term rated BBB, short-term rated F-2, with a stable outlook). We disclose these ratings to enhance the understanding of our
sources of liquidity and the effects of these ratings on our costs of funds. Our borrowing costs depend, in part, on our credit ratings and any further
actions taken by these credit rating agencies to lower our credit ratings, as described above, will likely increase our borrowing costs. 
Our business and users may be subject to sales tax and other taxes.
The application of indirect taxes (such as sales and use tax, value-added tax (VAT), goods and services tax, business tax and gross receipt
tax) to ecommerce businesses and to our users is a complex and evolving issue. Many of the fundamental statutes and regulations that impose
these taxes were established before the adoption and growth of the Internet and ecommerce. In many cases, it is not clear how existing statutes
apply  to  the  Internet  or  ecommerce.  In  addition,  governments  are  increasingly  looking  for  ways  to  increase  revenues,  which  has  resulted  in
discussions about tax reform and other legislative action to increase tax revenues, including through indirect taxes. There are many transactions that
occur during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
We  do  not  collect  taxes  on  the  goods  or  services  sold  by  users  of  our  services.  However,  some  jurisdictions  have  implemented,  or  may
implement, laws that require remote sellers of goods and services to collect and remit taxes on sales to customers located within the jurisdiction. In
particular, the Streamlined Sales Tax Project (an ongoing, multi-year effort by U.S. state and local governments to pursue federal legislation that
would require collection and remittance of sales tax by out-of-state sellers) could allow states that meet certain simplification and other criteria to
require out-of-state sellers to collect and remit sales taxes on goods purchased by in-state residents. The adoption of such legislation could result in
a use tax collection responsibility for certain of our sellers. This collection responsibility and the additional costs associated with complex use tax
collection, remittance and audit requirements would make selling on our websites and mobile platforms less attractive for small business retailers
and would harm our business, and the proliferation of
21

state legislation to expand sales and use tax collection on Internet sales could adversely affect some of our sellers and indirectly harm our business.
Several proposals have been made at the U.S. state and local levels that would impose additional taxes on the sale of goods and services over
the Internet. These proposals, if adopted, could substantially impair the growth of ecommerce and our brands, and could diminish our opportunity to
derive financial benefit from our activities. While the U.S. federal government’s moratorium on state and local taxation of Internet access or multiple
or  discriminatory  taxes  on ecommerce  has  been  temporarily  extended,  this  moratorium  does  not  prohibit  federal,  state  or  local  authorities  from
collecting  taxes  on  our  income  or  from  collecting  certain  taxes  that  were  in  effect  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  moratorium  and/or  one  of  its
extensions.
From time to time, some taxing authorities in the United States have notified us that they believe we owe them certain taxes imposed on our
services. These notifications have not resulted in any significant tax liabilities to date, but there is a risk that some jurisdiction may be successful in
the future, which would harm our business.
Similar issues exist outside of the United States, where the application of VAT or other indirect taxes on ecommerce providers is complex and
evolving. While we attempt to comply in those jurisdictions where it is clear that a tax is due, some of our subsidiaries have, from time to time,
received claims relating to the applicability of indirect taxes to our fees. We have been paying VAT on fees charged to certain of our users in the
European Union based on the service provider’s location. On January 1, 2015, changes to the rules determining the place of supply (and thus the
country  of taxation)  for  all European Union based providers  of  electronically  supplied services  were  implemented  that  require  that  we pay VAT
based on the residence or normal place of business of our customers. These changes may result in our paying a higher rate of VAT on such fees.
Additionally, we pay input VAT on applicable taxable purchases within the various countries in which we operate. In most cases, we are entitled to
reclaim this input VAT from the various countries. However, because of our unique business model, the application of the laws and rules that allow
such reclamation is sometimes uncertain. A successful assertion by one or more countries that we are not entitled to reclaim VAT could harm our
business.
In certain jurisdictions, we collect and remit indirect taxes on our fees and pay taxes on our purchases of goods and services. However, tax
authorities may raise questions about our calculation, reporting and collection of taxes and may ask us to remit additional taxes, as well as the
proper calculation of such taxes. Should any new taxes become applicable or if the taxes we pay are found to be deficient, our business could be
harmed.
A  taxing  authority  may  seek  to  impose  a  tax  collection,  reporting  or  record-keeping  obligation  on  companies  that  engage  in  or  facilitate
ecommerce. For example, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) now requires that certain payments to sellers be reported to the sellers and the
IRS on an annual basis. Any failure by us to meet these requirements could result in substantial monetary penalties and other sanctions and could
harm our business. Taxing authorities may also seek to impose tax collection or reporting obligations based on the location of the product or service
being sold or provided in an ecommerce transaction, regardless of where the respective users are located. Some jurisdictions could assert that we
are responsible for tax on the underlying goods or services sold on our sites. Imposition of a record keeping or tax collecting requirement could
decrease seller activity on our sites and would harm our business. Tax authorities may also require us to help ensure compliance by our users by
promulgating legislation regulating professional sellers, including tax reporting and collection requirements. In addition, we have periodically received
requests from tax authorities in many jurisdictions for information regarding the transactions of large classes of sellers on our sites, and in some
cases we have been legally obligated to provide this data. The imposition of any requirements on us to disclose transaction records for all or a class
of sellers to tax or other regulatory authorities or to file tax forms on behalf of any sellers, especially requirements that are imposed on us but not on
alternative means of ecommerce, and any use of those records to investigate, collect taxes from or prosecute sellers, could decrease seller activity
on our sites and harm our business.
22

We may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities.
The determination of our worldwide provision for income taxes and other tax liabilities requires estimation and significant judgment, and there
are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Like many other multinational corporations, we are subject
to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions and have structured our operations to reduce our effective tax rate. Our determination of our tax
liability  is  always  subject  to  audit  and  review  by  applicable  domestic  and  foreign  tax  authorities,  and  we  are  currently  undergoing  a  number  of
investigations, audits and reviews by taxing authorities throughout the world, including with respect to our business structure. Any adverse outcome
of any such audit or review could harm our business, and the ultimate tax outcome may differ from the amounts recorded in our financial statements
and may materially affect our financial results in the period or periods for which such determination is made. While we have established reserves
based on assumptions and estimates that we believe are reasonable to cover such eventualities, these reserves may prove to be insufficient.
In addition, our future income taxes could be adversely affected by a shift in our jurisdictional earning mix, by changes in the valuation of our
deferred tax assets and liabilities, as a result of gains on our foreign exchange risk management program, or changes in tax laws, regulations, or
accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items.
In light of continuing fiscal challenges in certain U.S. states and in many countries in Europe, various levels of government are increasingly
focused on tax reform and other legislative action to increase tax revenue, including corporate income taxes. For example, the economic downturn
reduced tax revenues for United States federal and state governments, and a number of proposals to increase taxes from corporate entities have
been implemented or are being considered at various levels of government. These include a number of proposals to modify the U.S. federal income
tax  laws  applicable  to  companies,  like  ours,  operating  in  multiple  U.S.  and  foreign  jurisdictions  which,  if  enacted,  could  materially  increase  our
effective tax rate. A number of U.S. states have attempted to increase corporate tax revenues by taking an expansive view of corporate presence to
attempt to impose corporate income taxes and other direct business taxes on companies that have no physical presence in their state, and taxing
authorities in foreign jurisdictions may take similar actions. Many U.S. states are also altering their apportionment formulas to increase the amount of
taxable income or loss attributable to their state from certain out-of-state businesses. Similarly, in Europe, and elsewhere in the world, there are
various tax reform efforts underway designed to ensure that corporate entities are taxed on a larger percentage of their earnings. Companies that
operate over the Internet, such as eBay, are a target of some of these efforts. If more taxing authorities are successful in applying direct taxes to
Internet companies that do not have a physical presence in their respective jurisdictions, this could increase our effective tax rate.
We may be subject to sales reporting and record-keeping obligations.
One  or  more  states,  the  U.S.  federal  government  or  foreign  countries  may  seek  to  impose  reporting  or  record-keeping  obligations  on
companies that engage in or facilitate ecommerce. Such an obligation could be imposed by legislation intended to improve tax compliance (and
legislation  to  such  effect  has  been  contemplated  by  several  states  and  a  number  of  foreign  jurisdictions)  or  if  one  of  our  companies  was  ever
deemed to be the legal agent of the users of our services by a jurisdiction in which it operates. Certain of our companies are required to report to the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on customers subject to U.S. income tax who receive more than $20,000 in payments and more than 200 payments
in  a calendar  year.  As  a result,  we are  required  to  request  tax  identification  numbers  from  certain  payees,  track  payments  by  tax  identification
number and, under certain conditions, withhold a portion of payments and forward such withholding to the IRS. We have modified our systems to
meet  these  requirements  and  expect  increased  operational  costs  and  changes  to  our  user  experience  in  connection  with  complying  with  these
reporting obligations. Any failure by us to meet these requirements could result in substantial monetary penalties and other sanctions and could
harm our business.
Our business is subject to online security risks, including security breaches and cyberattacks.
Our businesses involve the storage and transmission of users’ personal financial information. In addition, a significant number of our users
authorize us to bill their payment card accounts directly for all transaction and other fees charged by us. An increasing number of websites, including
those  owned  by  several  other  large  Internet  and  offline  companies,  have  disclosed  breaches  of  their  security,  some  of  which  have  involved
sophisticated and highly targeted attacks on portions of their websites or infrastructure. The techniques used to obtain unauthorized access, disable,
or degrade service, or sabotage systems, change frequently, may be difficult to detect for a long time, and often are not recognized until launched
against a target. Certain efforts may be state sponsored and supported by significant financial and technological resources and therefore may be
even more difficult to detect. As a result, we
23

may be unable to anticipate these techniques or to implement adequate preventative measures. Unauthorized parties may also attempt to gain
access to our systems or facilities through various means, including hacking into our systems or facilities, fraud, trickery or other means of deceiving
our employees, contractors and temporary staff. A party that is able to circumvent our security measures could misappropriate our or our users’
personal information, cause interruption or degradations in our operations, damage our computers or those of our users, or otherwise damage our
reputation.  In  addition,  our  users  have  been  and  likely  will  continue  to  be  targeted  by  parties  using  fraudulent  “spoof”  and  “phishing”  emails  to
misappropriate user names, passwords, payment card numbers, or other personal information or to introduce viruses or other malware through
“trojan  horse”  programs  to  our  users’  computers.  Our  information  technology  and  infrastructure  may  be  vulnerable  to  cyberattacks  or  security
incidents and third parties may be able to access our users’ proprietary information and payment card data that are stored on or accessible through
our systems. Any security breach at a company providing services to us or our users could have similar effects.
In  May  2014,  we  publicly  announced  that  criminals  were  able  to  penetrate  and  steal  certain  data,  including  user  names,  encrypted  user
passwords and other non-financial user data. Upon making this announcement, we required all buyers and sellers on our platform to reset their
passwords in order to log into their account. The breach and subsequent password reset have negatively impacted the business. In July 2014, a
putative class action lawsuit was filed against us for alleged violations and harm resulting from the breach. The lawsuit was recently dismissed with
leave to amend.  In addition, we have received  requests for information  and are subject to investigations  regarding this incident from numerous
regulatory and other government agencies across the world.
We may also need to expend significant additional resources to protect against security breaches or to redress problems caused by breaches.
These issues are likely to become more difficult and costly as we expand the number of markets where we operate. Additionally, our insurance
policies carry low coverage limits, which may not be adequate to reimburse us for losses caused by security breaches and we may not be able to
fully collect, if at all, under these insurance policies.
Systems  failures  or  cyberattacks  and  resulting  interruptions  in  the  availability  of  or  degradation  in  the  performance  of  our  websites,
applications, products or services could harm our business.
Our systems may experience service interruptions or degradation due to of hardware and software defects or malfunctions, computer denial-of-
service  and  other  cyberattacks,  human  error,  earthquakes,  hurricanes,  floods,  fires,  natural  disasters,  power  losses,  disruptions  in
telecommunications services, fraud, military or political conflicts, terrorist attacks, computer viruses, or other events. Our systems are also subject to
break-ins,  sabotage  and  intentional  acts  of  vandalism.  Some  of  our  systems  are  not  fully  redundant  and  our  disaster  recovery  planning  is  not
sufficient for all eventualities.
We have experienced and will likely continue to experience system failures, denial of service attacks and other events or conditions from time
to time that interrupt the availability or reduce the speed or functionality of our websites and mobile applications. These events have resulted and
likely will result in loss of revenue. A prolonged interruption in the availability or reduction in the speed or other functionality of our websites and
mobile applications could materially harm our business. Frequent or persistent interruptions in our services could cause current or potential users to
believe that our systems are unreliable, leading them to switch to our competitors or to avoid our sites, and could permanently harm our reputation
and  brands.  Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  any  system  failure  or  similar  event  results  in  damages  to  our  customers  or  their  businesses,  these
customers could seek significant compensation from us for their losses and those claims, even if unsuccessful, would likely be time-consuming and
costly for us to address. We also rely on facilities, components and services supplied by third parties and our business may be materially adversely
affected to the extent these components or services do not meet our expectations or these third parties cease to provide the services or facilities. In
particular, a decision by any of our third party hosting providers to close a facility that we use could cause system interruptions and delays, result in
loss of critical data and cause lengthy interruptions in our services. We do not carry business interruption insurance sufficient to compensate us for
losses that may result from interruptions in our service as a result of systems failures and similar events.
24

Acquisitions, dispositions, joint ventures, and strategic investments could result in operating difficulties and could harm our business.
We have acquired a significant number of businesses of varying size and scope, technologies, services, and products and have in July 2015
distributed 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal to our stockholders, pursuant to which PayPal became an independent company, and
sold our Enterprise business in November 2015. We also expect to continue to evaluate and consider a wide array of potential strategic transactions
as  part  of  our  overall  business  strategy,  including  business  combinations,  acquisitions,  and  dispositions  of  businesses,  technologies,  services,
products, and other assets, as well as strategic investments and joint ventures.
These transactions may involve significant challenges and risks, including:
•
the  potential  loss  of  key  customers,  merchants,  vendors  and  other  key  business  partners  of  the  companies  we  acquire,  or  dispose  of,
following and continuing after announcement of our transaction plans;
•
declining employee morale and retention issues affecting employees of companies that we acquire or dispose of, which may result from
changes in compensation, or changes in management, reporting relationships, future prospects or the direction of the acquired or disposed
business;
•
difficulty making new and strategic hires of new employees;
•
diversion of management time and a shift of focus from operating the businesses to the transaction,  and in the case of an acquisition,
integration and administration;
•
the need to provide transition services to a disposed of company, which may result in the diversion of resources and focus;
•
the need to integrate the operations, systems (including accounting, management, information, human resource and other administrative
systems), technologies, products and personnel of each acquired company, which is an inherently risky and potentially lengthy and costly
process;
•
the  inefficiencies  and  lack  of  control  that  may  result  if  such  integration  is  delayed  or  not  implemented,  and  unforeseen  difficulties  and
expenditures that may arise as a result;
•
the need to implement or improve controls,  procedures  and policies appropriate for a larger public company at companies that prior to
acquisition may have lacked such controls, procedures and policies or whose controls, procedures and policies did not meet applicable
legal and other standards;
•
risks associated with our expansion into new international markets;
•
derivative lawsuits resulting from the acquisition or disposition;
•
liability for activities of the acquired or disposed of company before the transaction, including intellectual property and other litigation claims
or disputes, violations of laws, rules and regulations, commercial disputes, tax liabilities and other known and unknown liabilities and, in the
case of dispositions, liabilities to the acquirors of those businesses under contractual provisions such as representations, warranties and
indemnities;
•
the potential loss of key employees following the transaction;
•
the acquisition of new customer and employee personal information by us or a third party acquiring assets or businesses from us, which in
and of itself may require regulatory approval and or additional controls, policies and procedures and subject us to additional exposure; and
•
our dependence on the acquired business’ accounting, financial reporting, operating metrics and similar systems, controls and processes
and the risk that errors or irregularities in those systems, controls and processes will lead to errors in our consolidated financial statements
or make it more difficult to manage the acquired business.
At any given time, we may be engaged in discussions or negotiations with respect to one or more of these types of transactions and any of
these transactions could be material to our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, it may take us longer than expected to fully
realize the anticipated benefits of these transactions, and those benefits may ultimately be smaller than anticipated or may not be realized at all,
which could adversely  affect  our business and operating  results.  Any acquisitions or dispositions  may also require us to issue additional equity
securities, spend our cash, or incur debt (and increased interest expense), liabilities, and amortization expenses related to intangible assets or write-
offs of goodwill, which could adversely affect our results of operations and dilute the economic and voting rights of our stockholders.
    
We have made certain investments, including through joint ventures, in which we have a minority equity interest and/or lack management and
operational control. The controlling joint venture partner in a joint venture may have business interests, strategies, or goals that are inconsistent with
ours, and business decisions or other actions or omissions of the controlling joint venture partner or the joint venture company may result in harm to
our reputation or
25

adversely  affect  the  value  of  our  investment  in  the  joint  venture.  Our  strategic  investments  may  also  expose  us  to  additional  risks.  Any
circumstances,  which  may  be  out  of  our  control,  that  adversely  affect  the  value  of  our  investments,  or  cost  resulting  from  regulatory  action  or
lawsuits in connection with our investments, could harm our business or negatively impact our financial results.
Our success largely depends on key personnel. Because competition for our key employees is intense, we may not be able to attract, retain,
and develop the highly skilled employees we need to support our business. The loss of senior management or other key personnel could harm our
business.
Our future performance depends substantially on the continued services of our senior management and other key personnel, including key
engineering and product development personnel, and our ability to attract, retain, and motivate key personnel. Competition for key personnel is
intense, especially in the Silicon Valley where our corporate headquarters are located, and we may be unable to successfully attract, integrate, or
retain sufficiently qualified key personnel. In making employment decisions, particularly in the Internet and high-technology industries, job candidates
often consider the value of the equity awards they would receive in connection with their employment and fluctuations in our stock price may make it
more  difficult  to  attract,  retain,  and  motivate  employees.  In  addition,  we  do  not  have  long-term  employment  agreements  with  any  of  our  key
personnel and do not maintain any “key person” life insurance policies. The loss of the services of any of our senior management or other key
personnel, or our inability to attract highly qualified senior management and other key personnel, could harm our business.
Problems with or price increases by third parties who provide services to us or to our sellers could harm our business.
A  number  of  third  parties  provide  services  to  us  or  to  our  sellers.  Such  services  include  seller  tools  that  automate  and  manage  listings,
merchant  tools  that  manage  listings  and interface  with  inventory  management  software,  storefronts  that  help  our  sellers  list  items  and shipping
providers  that  deliver  goods  sold  on  our  platform,  among  others.  Financial  or  regulatory  issues,  labor  issues  (e.g.,  strikes,  lockouts,  or  work
stoppages), or other problems that prevent these companies from providing services to us or our sellers could harm our business.
Price increases by, or service terminations, disruptions or interruptions at, companies that provide services to us and our sellers and clients
could also reduce the number of listings on our platforms or make it more difficult for our sellers to complete transactions, thereby harming our
business. Some third parties who provide services to us or our sellers may have or gain market power and be able to increase their prices to us
without competitive constraint. In addition, the U.S. Postal Service, which is facing ongoing fiscal challenges, has instituted postal rate increases and
announced that it is considering closing thousands of local post offices and ending Saturday mail delivery. While we continue to work with global
carriers  to  offer  our  sellers  a  variety  of  shipping  options  and  to  enhance  their  shipping  experience,  postal  rate  increases  may  reduce  the
competitiveness of certain sellers’ offerings, and postal service changes could require certain sellers to utilize alternatives which could be more
expensive or inconvenient, which could in turn decrease the number of transactions on our sites, thereby harming our business.
We have outsourced certain functions to third-party providers, including some customer support and product development functions, which are
critical  to  our  operations.  If  our  service  providers  do  not  perform  satisfactorily,  our  operations  could  be  disrupted,  which  could  result  in  user
dissatisfaction and could harm our business.
There can be no assurance that third parties who provide services directly to us or our sellers will continue to do so on acceptable terms, or at
all. If any third parties were to stop providing services to us or our sellers on acceptable terms, including as a result of bankruptcy, we may be
unable to procure alternatives from other third parties in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at all.
26

Our developer platforms, which are open to merchants and third-party developers, subject us to additional risks.
We provide third-party developers with access to application programming interfaces, software development kits and other tools designed to
allow them to produce applications for use, with a particular focus on mobile applications. There can be no assurance that merchants or third-party
developers will develop and maintain applications and services on our open platforms on a timely basis or at all, and a number of factors could
cause  such  third-party  developers  to  curtail  or  stop  development  for  our  platforms.  In  addition,  our  business  is  subject  to  many  regulatory
restrictions. It is possible that merchants and third-party developers who utilize our development platforms or tools could violate these regulatory
restrictions and we may be held responsible for such violations, which could harm our business.
 
The Distribution may not achieve some or all of the anticipated benefits and may adversely affect our business.
We may not realize some or all of the anticipated benefits from the Distribution and the Distribution may in fact adversely affect our business.
As an independent, publicly traded company,  we will be a smaller,  less diversified company  with a narrower  business focus and may be more
vulnerable to changing market conditions, which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Separating the businesses may also eliminate or reduce synergies or economies of scale that existed prior to the Distribution, which could harm our
business.
We could incur significant liability if the Distribution is determined to be a taxable transaction.
We have received an opinion from outside tax counsel to the effect that the Distribution qualifies as a transaction that is described in Sections
355 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code. The opinion relies on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from PayPal
and  us  regarding  the  past  and  future  conduct  of  the  companies’  respective  businesses  and  other  matters.  If  any  of  these  facts,  assumptions,
representations or undertakings are incorrect or not satisfied, our shareholders and we may not be able to rely on the opinion of tax counsel and
could be subject to significant tax liabilities. Notwithstanding the opinion of tax counsel we have received, the IRS could determine on audit that the
Distribution is taxable if it determines that any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are not correct or have been violated or
if  it  disagrees  with  the  conclusions  in  the  opinion.  If  the  Distribution  is  determined  to  be  taxable  for  U.S.  federal  income  tax  purposes,  our
shareholders that are subject to U.S. federal income tax and we could incur significant U.S. federal income tax liabilities.
We may be exposed to claims and liabilities as a result of the Distribution.
We  entered  into  a  separation  and  distribution  agreement  and  various  other  agreements  with  PayPal  to  govern  the  Distribution  and  the
relationship of the two companies going forward. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes
between us and PayPal. The indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us. In addition, our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant and these risks could negatively affect our results of operations and financial condition.
ITEM 1B: UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not applicable.
27

ITEM 2: PROPERTIES     
We  own  and  lease  various  properties  in  the  U.S.  and  34  other  countries  around  the  world.  We  use  the  properties  for  executive  and
administrative offices, data centers, product development offices, fulfillment centers and customer service offices. Our headquarters are located in
San Jose, California and occupy approximately 0.5 million square feet. Our owned data centers are primarily located in Utah. As of December 31,
2016 , our owned and leased properties provided us with aggregate square footage as follows (in millions):
United States
Other Countries
Total
Owned facilities
1.1
—
1.1
Leased facilities
0.8
2.0
2.8
Total facilities
1.9
2.0
3.9
From time to time we consider various alternatives related to long-term facilities needs. While we believe that our existing facilities are
adequate to meet our immediate needs, it may become necessary to develop and improve land that we own or lease or acquire additional or
alternative space to accommodate any future growth.
28

ITEM 3: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS     
Litigation and Other Legal Matters
Overview
We are involved in legal and regulatory proceedings on an ongoing basis. Many of these proceedings are in early stages and may seek an
indeterminate amount of damages. If we believe that a loss arising from such matters is probable and can be reasonably estimated, we accrue the
estimated liability in our financial statements. If only a range of estimated losses can be determined, we accrue an amount within the range that, in
our judgment, reflects the most likely outcome; if none of the estimates within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the
low  end  of  the  range.  For  those  proceedings  in  which  an  unfavorable  outcome  is  reasonably  possible  but  not  probable,  we  have  disclosed  an
estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses or we have concluded that an estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses
arising directly from the proceeding (i.e., monetary damages or amounts paid in judgment or settlement) are not material. If we cannot estimate the
probable or reasonably possible loss or range of losses arising from a proceeding, we have disclosed that fact. In assessing the materiality of a
proceeding, we evaluate, among other factors, the amount of monetary damages claimed, as well as the potential impact of non-monetary remedies
sought by plaintiffs (e.g., injunctive relief) that may require us to change our business practices in a manner that could have a material adverse
impact on our business. With respect to the matters disclosed in this Item 3, we are unable to estimate the possible loss or range of losses that
could potentially result from the application of such non-monetary remedies.
Amounts  accrued  for  legal  and  regulatory  proceedings  for  which  we  believe  a  loss  is  probable  were  not  material  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2016 . Except as otherwise noted for the proceedings described in this Item 3, we have concluded, based on currently available
information,  that  reasonably  possible  losses  arising  directly  from  the  proceedings  (i.e.,  monetary  damages  or  amounts  paid  in  judgment  or
settlement) in excess of our recorded accruals are also not material. However, legal and regulatory proceedings are inherently unpredictable and
subject to significant uncertainties. If one or more matters were resolved against us in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s
expectations, the impact on our operating results or financial condition for that reporting period could be material.
Litigation
In March 2015, StubHub filed suit against Ticketmaster and the Golden State Warriors, alleging antitrust and various state law violations
arising out of the defendants’ restrictive ticketing practices, which include prohibiting the resale of Warriors tickets on StubHub or any other non-
Ticketmaster secondary exchange (StubHub, Inc. v. Golden State Warriors, LLC et al, N.D. Cal. No. 3:15-cv-01436). StubHub filed a First Amended
Complaint on June 30, 2015. The defendants filed a Motion to Dismiss the Amended Complaint which was granted in November 2015. StubHub will
no longer pursue appealing this decision.
Regulatory Proceedings
In May 2014, we publicly announced that criminals were able to penetrate our network and steal certain data, including user names, encrypted
user passwords and other non-financial user data. Upon making this announcement, we required all buyers and sellers on our platform to reset their
passwords in order to login to their account. In addition to making this public announcement, we proactively approached a number of regulatory and
governmental bodies, including those with the most direct supervisory authority over our data privacy and data security programs, to specifically
inform them of the incident and our actions to protect our customers in response. Certain of those regulatory agencies have requested us to provide
further, more detailed information regarding the incident, and we believe that we have fully cooperated in all of those requests. To date, we have not
been informed by any regulatory authority of an intention to bring any enforcement action arising from this incident; however, in the future we may
be subject to fines or other regulatory action. In addition, in July 2014, a putative class action lawsuit was filed against us for alleged violations and
harm resulting from the incident. The lawsuit was dismissed with leave to amend.
29

General Matters
Other third parties have from time to time claimed, and others may claim in the future, that we have infringed their intellectual property rights.
We are subject to patent disputes, and expect that we will increasingly be subject to additional patent infringement claims involving various aspects
of our business as our products and services continue to expand in scope and complexity. Such claims may be brought directly or indirectly against
our companies and/or against our customers (who may be entitled to contractual indemnification under their contracts with us), and we are subject
to increased exposure to such claims as a result of our acquisitions and divestitures and in cases where we are entering new lines of business. We
have  in  the  past  been  forced  to  litigate  such  claims.  We  may  also  become  more  vulnerable  to  third-party  claims  as  laws  such  as  the  Digital
Millennium Copyright Act, the Lanham Act and the Communications Decency Act are interpreted by the courts, and as we expand the scope of our
business  (both  in  terms  of  the  range  of  products  and  services  that  we  offer  and  our  geographical  operations)  and  become  subject  to  laws  in
jurisdictions  where  the  underlying  laws  with  respect  to  the  potential  liability  of  online  intermediaries  like  ourselves  are  either  unclear  or  less
favorable. We believe that additional lawsuits alleging that we have violated patent, copyright or trademark laws will be filed against us. Intellectual
property claims, whether meritorious or not, are time consuming and costly to defend and resolve, could require expensive changes in our methods
of doing business or could require us to enter into costly royalty or licensing agreements on unfavorable terms.
From time to time, we are involved in other disputes or regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business, including suits by our
users (individually or as class actions) alleging, among other things, improper disclosure of our prices, rules or policies, that our practices, prices,
rules, policies or customer/user agreements violate applicable law or that we have acted unfairly and/or not acted in conformity with such prices,
rules, policies or agreements. Further, the number and significance of these disputes and inquiries are increasing as we have grown larger, our
businesses have expanded in scope (both in terms of the range of products and services that we offer and our geographical operations) and our
products  and  services  have  increased  in  complexity.  Any  claims  or  regulatory  actions  against  us,  whether  meritorious  or  not,  could  be  time
consuming, result in costly litigation, damage awards (including statutory damages for certain causes of action in certain jurisdictions), injunctive
relief or increased costs of doing business through adverse judgment or settlement, require us to change our business practices in expensive ways,
require significant amounts of management time, result in the diversion of significant operational resources or otherwise harm our business.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies going forward. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us
and PayPal, which may be significant.  In addition,  the indemnity rights  we have against PayPal under the agreements  may not be sufficient  to
protect us and our indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application-programming-interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, losses recorded
in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant, either individually or collectively.
ITEM 4: MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable
30

PART II
ITEM 5: MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES          
Price Range of Common Stock
Our common stock has been traded on The Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol “EBAY” since September 24, 1998. The following
table sets forth the high and low closing sale prices per share of our common stock, as actually reported by The Nasdaq Global Select Market for
the following periods.
 
High
Low
Year Ended December 31, 2016
First Quarter
$
26.65
$
22.01
Second Quarter
25.43  
22.72
Third Quarter
32.90
23.76
Fourth Quarter
32.56
 
27.39
 
High
Low
Year Ended December 31, 2015
First Quarter (1)
$
60.81
$
53.00
Second Quarter (1)
63.23  
55.79
Third Quarter to July 17, 2015 (1)
66.29
60.43
Third Quarter from July 20, 2015
28.75  
24.08
Fourth Quarter
29.59
 
24.00
(1)
The prices on and before July 17, 2015 include the value of PayPal Holdings, Inc. (“PayPal”), which was distributed on that date. Subsequent to the Distribution of PayPal
on July 17, 2015, the Nasdaq Global Select Market restated the historical prices of our common stock for all periods prior to the Distribution to exclude the value of
PayPal.
As  of January  30,  2017 ,  there  were  approximately  3,919  holders  of  record  of  our  common  stock,  although  we  believe  that  there  are  a
significantly larger number of beneficial owners of our common stock.
Dividend Policy
We have never paid cash dividends on our stock and do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
31

Performance Measurement Comparison
The graph below shows the cumulative total stockholder return of an investment of $100 (and the reinvestment of any dividends thereafter) on
December 31, 2011 (the last trading day for the year ended December 31, 2011) in (i) our common stock, (ii) the Nasdaq Composite Index, (iii) the
S&P  500  Index  and  (iv)  the  S&P  Information  Technology  Index.  The  S&P  Information  Technology  Index  replaces  the  S&P  North  American
Technology Internet Index, which is no longer tracked by S&P. For the purpose of this graph, the distribution of 100% of the outstanding common
stock of PayPal Holdings, Inc. (“PayPal”) to our stockholders, pursuant to which PayPal became an independent company, is treated as a non-
taxable cash dividend of $41.46, an amount equal to the opening price of PayPal common stock on July 20, 2015 which was deemed reinvested in
eBay common stock at the opening price on July 20, 2015.
 
Our stock price performance shown in the graph below is not indicative of future stock price performance. The graph and related information
shall not be deemed “soliciting material” or be deemed to be “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be incorporated by reference into any
past or future filing with the SEC, except to the extent that such filing specifically states that such graph and related information are incorporated by
reference into such filing.
32

Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Stock repurchase activity during the three months ended December 31, 2016 was as follows:
Period Ended
Total Number of 
Shares 
Purchased
Average Price Paid 
per Share (2)
Total Number of 
Shares Purchased 
as Part of Publicly 
Announced 
Programs
Maximum Dollar 
Value that May Yet 
be Purchased Under 
the Programs (1)
October 31, 2016
4,814,400
$
28.93
4,814,400
November 30, 2016
15,298,049
$
28.48
15,298,049
December 31, 2016
14,454,674
$
29.40
14,454,674
$
1,336,231,167
34,567,123
34,567,123
(1)
In January 2015, our Board of Directors (the “Board”) authorized a stock repurchase program that provided for the repurchase of up to $2 billion of our common stock. In
June 2015, our Board authorized an additional $1 billion stock repurchase program and in July 2016, our Board authorized an additional $2.5 billion stock repurchase
program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and subject to market conditions
and  other  factors,  to  make  opportunistic  repurchases  of  our  common  stock  to  reduce  outstanding  share  count.  Any  share  repurchases  under  our  stock  repurchase
programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase transactions) or other
means at times and in such amounts as management deems appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
During the three  months  ended December 31, 2016 ,  we  repurchased  approximately  $1.0  billion  of  our  common  stock  under  our  stock  repurchase  programs.  As  of
December 31, 2016 , a total of approximately $1.3 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our July 2016 repurchase program. 
We expect, subject to market conditions and other uncertainties, to continue making opportunistic repurchases of our common stock. However, our stock repurchase
programs may be limited or terminated at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including
corporate and regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
33

ITEM 6: SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto
and  “Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of  Operations”  appearing  elsewhere  in  this  Annual  Report  on
Form 10-K. The consolidated statement of income for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 , 2014 and 2013 are derived from our audited
consolidated financial statements. The consolidated balance sheet data as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 , and consolidated statement of income
for the year ended December 31, 2012 are derived from our unaudited consolidated financial statements.
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016 (5)
2015
2014 (2)
2013
2012
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Consolidated Statement of Income Data: (1)
Net revenues
$
8,979
$
8,592
$
8,790
$
8,257
$
7,371
Gross profit
6,972
6,821
7,127
6,765
6,126
Income from operations
2,325
2,197
2,476
2,454
2,165
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
3,651
2,406
2,515
2,571
2,355
Income (loss) from continuing operations
7,285
1,947
(865)
2,067
1,931
Income (loss) per share from continuing operations:
Basic
$
6.43
$
1.61
$
(0.69)
$
1.60
$
1.49
Diluted
$
6.37
$
1.60
$
(0.69)
$
1.57
$
1.47
Weighted average shares:
Basic
1,133
1,208
1,251
1,295
1,292
Diluted
1,144
1,220
1,251
1,313
1,313
 
As of December 31,
 
2016 (5)
2015
2014
2013
2012
 
(In millions)
Consolidated Balance Sheet Data: (1)
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,816
$
1,832
$
4,105
$
2,848
$
5,294
Short-term investments
5,333
4,299
3,730
4,204
2,533
Long-term investments
3,969
3,391
5,736
4,747
2,848
Working capital - continuing operations
5,028
5,641
4,463
6,649
7,404
Working capital - discontinued operations
—
—
4,537
3,995
3,070
Working capital total (3)
5,028
5,641
9,000
10,644
10,474
Total assets - continuing operations
23,847
17,785
21,716
20,236
18,708
Total assets - discontinued operations
—
—
23,416
21,252
18,366
Total assets
23,847
17,785
45,132
41,488
37,074
Short-term debt
1,451
—
850
2
402
Long-term debt
7,509
6,779
6,777
4,106
4,089
Total stockholders’ equity (4)
10,539
6,576
19,906
23,647
20,865
(1)
Includes the impact of acquisitions and dispositions. For a summary of recent significant acquisitions and dispositions, please see “Note 3 - Business Combinations and
Divestitures” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
(2)
The consolidated statement of income data for the year ended December 31, 2014 includes an income tax provision of approximately $3.0 billion to recognize deferred
tax liabilities on $9.0 billion of undistributed foreign earnings of certain of our foreign subsidiaries for 2013 and prior years.
(3)
Working capital is calculated as the difference between total current assets and total current liabilities.
(4)
Includes the impact of the Distribution of PayPal on July 17, 2015.
(5)
The consolidated balance sheet data for the year ended December 31, 2016 includes the impact of a $4.6 billion deferred tax benefit recognized in the fourth quarter of
2016  as  a result  of  the  initial  stages  of  realigning  our  legal  structure  and  the  associated  tax  rulings.  The  consolidated  statement  of  income  data  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2016 includes a $4.6 billion income tax benefit associated with such deferred tax asset.
34

ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future business, future results of operations or financial condition, new or planned features or services, or management strategies). You can identify
these  forward-looking  statements  by  words  such  as  “may,”  “will,”  “would,”  “should,”  “could,”  “expect,”  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “estimate,”  “intend,”
“plan” and other similar expressions. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ
materially from those expressed or implied in our forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed
in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other
information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with the SEC. We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of
our  forward-looking  statements  after  the  date  of  this  report  to  reflect  actual  results  or  future  events  or  circumstances.  Given  these  risks  and
uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. You should read the following Management’s
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related
notes included in this report.
OVERVIEW
 
Business
eBay  Inc.  is  a  global  commerce  leader,  which  includes  our  Marketplace,  StubHub  and  Classifieds  platforms.  Our  Marketplace  platforms
include our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay mobile apps. Our StubHub platforms include our
online ticket platform located at www.stubhub.com, the StubHub mobile apps and Ticketbis. Our Classifieds platforms include a collection of brands
such as Mobile.de, Kijiji, Gumtree, Marktplaats, eBay Kleinanzeigen and others. 
Seasonality
We  expect  transaction  activity  patterns  on  our  platforms  to  mirror  general  consumer  buying  patterns  and  expect  that  these  trends  will
continue.  The following table sets  forth,  for  the  periods  presented,  our total  net  revenues  and the  sequential  quarterly  movements  of these  net
revenues (in millions, except percentages):
 
Quarter Ended
 
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2014
Net revenues
$
2,149
$
2,168
$
2,150
$
2,323
Percent change from prior quarter
(6)%
1%
(1)%
8%
2015
Net revenues
$
2,061
$
2,110
$
2,099
$
2,322
Percent change from prior quarter
(11)%
2%
(1)%
11%
2016
Net revenues
$
2,137
$
2,230
$
2,217
$
2,395
Percent change from prior quarter
(8)%
4%
(1)%
8%
35

Impact of Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the Euro, British
pound, Korean won and Australian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency risk which may adversely impact our financial results. Because of this
and the fact that we generated a majority of our net revenues internationally during the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014, we are
subject to the risks related to doing business in foreign countries as discussed under “Part I - Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
In addition to the corresponding measures under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), management uses non-GAAP measures
in reviewing our financial results. The foreign exchange (“FX-Neutral”), or constant currency, net revenue amounts discussed below are non-GAAP
financial measures and are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Accordingly, the FX-Neutral
information appearing in the following discussion of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information provided in “Non-
GAAP Measure of Financial Performance,” which includes reconciliations of FX-Neutral financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP
measures. We calculate the year-over-year impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year
transactional currency amounts.
The effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements during 2016 was due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against other currencies,
primarily the British pound, Korean won, Canadian dollar and Australian dollar.
Fiscal Year Highlights
Net revenues increased  5%  to  $9.0 billion  in 2016 compared to 2015, primarily driven by StubHub net transaction revenues and marketing,
services and other revenues, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar. FX-Neutral net
revenues increased 7% in 2016 compared to 2015.
In the fourth quarter of 2016, we recognized a tax benefit of $4.6 billion as a result of the initial stages of realigning our legal structure and the
associated tax rulings. In addition, we sold our equity holdings of MercadoLibre, Inc. for net proceeds of $1.3 billion. The pre-tax gain of $1.3 billion
was recorded in interest and other, net on our consolidated statement of income.
Operating margin increased to 25.9% in 2016 compared to 25.6% in 2015. Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations increased to
$6.37 for 2016 compared to $1.60 for 2015. In addition, we generated cash flow from continuing operating activities of $2.8 billion in 2016 compared
to  $2.9 billion  in 2015.
36

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Revenues
We generate  two types  of net  revenues:  net  transaction  revenues  and marketing  services  and other  (“MS&O”)  revenues.  Net transaction
revenues are derived principally from final value fees (which are fees payable on transactions closed on our Marketplace and StubHub platforms),
listing  fees  and  other  service  fees.  MS&O  revenues  consists  of  Marketplace,  StubHub  and  Classifieds  revenue  principally  from  the  sale  of
advertisements, vehicles classifieds listing on Marketplace platforms, revenue sharing arrangements, classifieds fees, marketing service fees and
lead referral fees. Revenues are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily based upon the country in which the seller, platform that
displays advertising, other service provider or customer, as the case may be, is located. To drive traffic to our platforms, we provide incentives to our
users in the form of coupons and buyer and seller rewards. These incentives are generally treated as reductions in revenue.
The following table presents net revenues by type and geography (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
% Change
2015
% Change
2014
Net Revenues by Type:
 
 
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace
$
6,107
—%
$
6,103
(4)%
$
6,351
StubHub
937
29%
725
15 %
629
Total net transaction revenues
7,044
3%
6,828
(2)%
6,980
Marketing services and other revenues:
Marketplace
1,137
6%
1,078
(2)%
1,103
Classifieds
791
13%
703
(2)%
716
StubHub, Corporate and other
7
**
(17)
**
(9)
Total marketing services and other revenues
1,935
10%
1,764
(3)%
1,810
Total net revenues
$
8,979
5%
$
8,592
(2)%
$
8,790
Net Revenues by Geography:
 
 
U.S.
$
3,866
  
7%
$
3,624
  
3 %
$
3,525
International
5,113
3%
4,968
(6)%
5,265
Total net revenues
$
8,979
5%
$
8,592
(2)%
$
8,790
**    Not meaningful
The following table presents certain key operating metrics that we believe are significant factors affecting our net transaction revenues (in
millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
% Change
2015
% Change
2014
Supplemental Operating Data:
 
 
 
GMV (1) :
Marketplace
$
79,448
2 %
$
78,099
(2)%
$
79,581
StubHub
4,310
21 %
3,574
13 %
3,172
Total GMV
$
83,758
3 %
$
81,673
(1)%
$
82,753
Transaction take rate:
Marketplace (2)
7.69%
(0.12)%
7.81%
(0.17)%
7.98%
StubHub (3)
21.76%
1.47 %
20.29%
0.46 %
19.83%
Total transaction take rate (4)
8.41%
0.05 %
8.36%
(0.07)%
8.43%
(1)
We define Gross Merchandise Volume (“GMV”) as the total value of all successfully closed transactions between users on our Marketplace and StubHub platforms during
the applicable period regardless of whether the buyer and seller actually consummated the transaction. We
37

believe that GMV provides a useful measure of the overall volume of closed transactions that flow through our platforms in a given period, notwithstanding the inclusion in
GMV of closed transactions that are not ultimately consummated.
(2)
We define Marketplace transaction take rate as Marketplace net transaction revenues divided by Marketplace GMV.
(3)
We define StubHub transaction take rate as StubHub net transaction revenues divided by StubHub GMV.
(4)
We define total transaction take rate as total net transaction revenues divided by GMV.
Net Transaction Revenues
The following table presents net transaction revenues and supplemental operating data (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2016
2015
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2015
2014
As Reported
FX-Neutral
Total net transaction
revenues
7,044
6,828
3%
6%
6,828
6,980
(2)%
4%
Percentage of net
revenues
78%
79%
79%
79%
Total GMV
83,758
81,673
3%
5%
81,673
82,753
(1)%
5%
Total transaction take
rate
8.41%
8.36%
0.05%
8.36%
8.43%
(0.07)%
The  increase  in  net  transaction  revenues  in  2016  compared  to  2015  was  primarily  driven  by  an  increase  in  StubHub  GMV  and  a  higher
transaction take rate, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar. The total transaction take
rate was higher in 2016 compared to 2015 due to an increase in our StubHub transaction take rate, partially offset by a decrease in our Marketplace
transaction take rate.
The decrease in net transaction revenues in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily driven by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency
movements relative to the U.S. dollar and a lower transaction take rate, partially offset by an increase in FX-Neutral Marketplace GMV, and to a
lesser extent, StubHub GMV. The total transaction take rate was lower in 2015 compared to 2014 due to a decrease in our Marketplace transaction
take rate, partially offset by an increase in our StubHub transaction take rate.
Net  transaction  revenues  earned  internationally  totaled $3.8  billion , $3.8  billion and $4.0  billion in 2016 , 2015 and 2014 ,  respectively,
representing 54% , 55% and 57% of total net transaction revenues in the respective periods. The decrease in net transaction revenues earned
internationally as a percentage of total net transaction revenue in 2016 compared to 2015, and in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily driven by an
unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar.
Marketplace Net Transaction Revenues
The following table presents Marketplace net transaction revenues and supplemental operating data (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2016
2015
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2015
2014
As Reported
FX-Neutral
Marketplace transaction
revenues
6,107
6,103
— %
3%
6,103
6,351
(4)%
3%
Marketplace GMV
79,448
78,099
2 %
5%
78,099
79,581
(2)%
5%
Marketplace take rate
7.69%
7.81%
(0.12)%
7.81%
7.98%
(0.17)%
The  increase  in  Marketplace  net  transaction  revenues  in  2016  compared  to  2015  was  primarily  driven  by  an  increase  in  volume  in  local
currencies on our Marketplace platforms internationally, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the
U.S. dollar. The increase in FX-Neutral Marketplace net transaction revenue was less than the increase in FX-Neutral Marketplace GMV due to a
lower Marketplace transaction take rate. The Marketplace transaction take rate was lower in 2016 compared to 2015 primarily due to a shift in seller
mix and an increase in our buyer and seller incentives.
38

The decrease in Marketplace net transaction revenues and Marketplace GMV in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to an unfavorable
impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in FX-Neutral Marketplace
GMV that was primarily driven by an increase in volume in local currencies on our Marketplace platforms internationally and to a lesser extent, the
U.S. The increase in FX-Neutral Marketplace net transaction revenue was less than the increase in FX-Neutral Marketplace GMV due to a lower
Marketplace transaction take rate. The Marketplace transaction take rate was lower in 2015 compared to 2014 due to a shift in geographical and
vertical mix, as well as an increase in our buyer and seller incentives, which are accounted for as a reduction of revenue.
StubHub Net Transaction Revenues
The following table presents StubHub net transaction revenues and supplemental operating data (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2016
2015
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2015
2014
As Reported
FX-Neutral
StubHub transaction
revenues
937
725
29%
29%
725
629
15%
15%
StubHub GMV
4,310
3,574
21%
21%
3,574
3,172
13%
13%
StubHub take rate
21.76%
20.29%
1.47%
20.29%
19.83%
0.46%
The increase in StubHub net transaction revenues in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily driven by an increase in Sports, Concerts and
Theater transactions on our platform, as well as a higher StubHub transaction take rate. The increase in StubHub transaction take rate was primarily
due to a change in mix of events and sellers on the StubHub platforms. The increase in StubHub net transaction revenue was greater than the
increase in StubHub GMV due to the higher StubHub transaction take rate.
The increase in StubHub net transaction revenues in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily driven by an increase in StubHub GMV and an
increase in StubHub transaction take rate. The StubHub GMV increase was primarily driven by an increase in volume of ticket sales related to
Sports and Concerts. The increase in StubHub net transaction revenue was greater than the increase in StubHub GMV due to a higher StubHub
transaction take rate. The StubHub transaction take rate was higher in 2015 compared to 2014 primarily due to a change in mix of events and
sellers on the StubHub platforms.
Marketing Services and Other Revenues
The following table presents marketing services and other (“MS&O”) revenues (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2016
2015
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2015
2014
As Reported
FX-Neutral
MS&O revenues:
Marketplace
$
1,137
$
1,078
6%
8%
$
1,078
$
1,103
(2)%
4%
Classifieds
791
703
13%
15%
703
716
(2)%
14%
StubHub,
Corporate and
other
7
(17)
**
**
(17)
(9)
**
**
Total MS&O
revenues
$
1,935
$
1,764
10%
12%
$
1,764
$
1,810
(3)%
8%
Percentage of
net revenues
22%
21%
21%
21%
The increase in total MS&O revenues in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily attributable to an increase in FX-Neutral Classifieds MS&O
revenues and FX-Neutral Marketplace MS&O revenues, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the
U.S.  dollar.  The  decrease  in  total  MS&O  revenues  in  2015  compared  to  2014  was  primarily  attributable  to  an  unfavorable  impact  from  foreign
currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by increased FX-Neutral Classifieds revenue, and to a lesser extent, increased FX-
Neutral revenue from Marketplace marketing services.
39

Marketplace MS&O Revenues
The increase in Marketplace MS&O revenues in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily driven by increased fees earned for referral services
and increased revenue from our revenue share programs, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the
U.S. dollar. The increase in fees earned for referral services primarily consisted of fees for customers acquired and incentives for the usage of
PayPal Holdings, Inc. (“PayPal”) products on certain Marketplace platforms, which were not included in marketing services and other revenues prior
to the distribution of 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal to our stockholders (the “Distribution”).
The decrease in Marketplace MS&O revenues in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to an unfavorable impact from foreign currency
movements relative to the U.S. dollar and decreased revenue in local currencies from advertising display on our international Marketplace platforms,
partially  offset  by  increased  fees  earned  for  referral  services.  The  increase  in  fees  earned  for  referral  services  primarily  consisted  of  fees  for
customers  acquired  and  incentives  for  the  usage  of  PayPal  products  on  certain  Marketplace  platforms,  which  were  not  included  in  marketing
services and other revenues prior to the Distribution.
Classifieds MS&O Revenues
The  increase  in  Classifieds  MS&O  revenues  in  2016  compared  to  2015  was  primarily  driven  by  increased  revenue  from  our  Classifieds
platforms in our developed markets of Germany, Canada and Australia, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency movements
relative to the U.S. dollar. The decrease in Classifieds MS&O revenues in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily driven by an unfavorable impact
from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by increased revenue from our Classifieds platforms in our developed
markets of Germany, Canada and the UK.
Cost of Net Revenues
Cost  of  net  revenues  primarily  consists  of  costs  associated  with  customer  support,  site  operations,  and  payment  processing.  Significant
components of these costs include employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs, depreciation of equipment and amortization expense,
bank transaction  fees,  and credit  card  interchange  and assessment  fees.  The following  table presents  cost  of  net  revenues (in  millions,  except
percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
% Change
  
2015
% Change
  
2014
Cost of net revenues
$
2,007
13%
  $
1,771
6%
  $
1,663
As a percentage of net revenues
22.4%
20.6%
18.9%
The increase in cost of net revenues in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily due to our continued investment in site operations and data
centers and an increase in transaction fees for payment services. The increase in cost of net revenues in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due
to  continued  investment  in  our  site  operations  and  data  centers  and  an  increase  in  transaction  fees  for  payment  services,  partially  offset  by  a
favorable impact due to foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar. The increase in transaction fees for payment services primarily
consisted of the impact of transaction fees for payment services provided by PayPal which were not included in cost of net revenues prior to the
Distribution.
 
Cost of net revenues, net of  $4 million  from hedging activities, was favorably impacted by $16 million due to foreign currency movements
relative to the U.S. dollar in 2016 compared to 2015. Cost of net revenues, net of $24 million from hedging activities, was favorably impacted by $80
million due to foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2015 compared to 2014.
40

Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
% Change
2015
% Change
2014
Sales and marketing
$
2,368
4 %
$
2,267
(7)%
$
2,442
Percentage of net revenues
26%
26%
28%
Product development
1,114
21 %
923
(6)%
983
Percentage of net revenues
12%
11%
11%
General and administrative
900
(20)%
1,122
26 %
889
Percentage of net revenues
10%
13%
10%
Provision for transaction losses
231
(15)%
271
3 %
262
Percentage of net revenues
3%
3%
3%
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
34
(17)%
41
(45)%
75
Operating expenses, net of $3 million  from hedging activities, were favorably impacted by $66 million due to foreign currency movements
relative  to  the  U.S.  dollar  in  2016  compared  to  2015.  Operating  expenses,  net  of  $47  million  from  hedging  activities,  were  favorably  impacted
by $194 million due to foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2015 compared to 2014.
Sales and Marketing
 
Sales  and  marketing  expenses  primarily  consist  of  advertising  costs  and  marketing  programs  (both  online  and  offline),  employee
compensation,  contractor  costs,  facilities  costs  and  depreciation  on  equipment.  Online  marketing  expenses  represent  traffic  acquisition  costs  in
various  channels  such  as  paid  search,  affiliates  marketing  and  display  advertising.  Offline  advertising  includes  primarily  brand  campaigns  and
buyer/seller communications.
The increase in sales and marketing expense in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily due to an increase in marketing program costs (both
online and offline programs) partially offset by a favorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar. The decrease in sales
and marketing expense in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to a favorable impact from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S.
dollar,  a  decrease  in  marketing  program  costs  due  in  part  to  a  shift  in  certain  buyer  and  seller  incentives  (for  which  associated  expenses  are
recorded as a reduction in revenue instead of sales and marketing expense) and employee-related savings from our global workforce reduction.
Product Development
 
Product development expenses primarily consist of employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs and depreciation on equipment.
Product  development  expenses  are  net  of  required  capitalization  of  major  platform  and  other  product  development  efforts,  including  the
development of our platform architecture, migration of certain platforms, and seller tools. Our top technology priorities include structured data, multi-
screen capabilities, improved seller tools and buyer experiences.
Capitalized internal use and platform development costs were $137 million and $136 million in 2016 and 2015 , respectively, and are primarily
reflected as a cost of net revenues when amortized in future periods.
The increase  in product  development  expenses  in 2016 compared  to 2015 was primarily  due to higher  employee-related  costs  driven  by
increased  headcount;  and  increased  depreciation  on  equipment  driven  by  capital  expenditures  as  we  continue  to  invest  in  our  platform.  The
decrease in product development expenses in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to a favorable impact from foreign currency movements
and hedging relative to the U.S. dollar.
41

General and Administrative
 
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs, depreciation of equipment,
employer  payroll  taxes  on  stock-based  compensation,  legal  expenses,  restructuring,  insurance  premiums  and  professional  fees.  Our  legal
expenses, including those related to various ongoing legal proceedings, may fluctuate substantially from period to period.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily due to restructuring expenses from our global
workforce reduction, costs related to the Distribution and expenses related to litigation proceedings in 2015 that did not recur in 2016. The reduction
in these expenses were partially offset by an increase in corporate costs in 2016 due to a reduction in synergies that existed prior to the Distribution.
The increase general and administrative expenses in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to restructuring costs related to our global
workforce reduction, costs related to the Distribution, expenses related to craigslist, Inc. litigation proceedings and an increase in corporate costs
due to a reduction in synergies that existed prior to the Distribution.
  
Provision for Transaction Losses
Provision for transaction losses primarily consists of transaction loss expense associated with our customer protection programs, fraud and
bad debt expense associated with our accounts receivable balance. We expect our provision for transaction losses to fluctuate depending on many
factors, including changes to our customer protection programs and the impact of regulatory changes.
The decrease in provision for transaction losses in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily driven by lower customer protection program costs.
The  increase  in  provision  for  transaction  losses  in  2015  compared  to  2014  was  primarily  driven  by  higher  customer  protection  program  costs,
partially offset by a decrease in bad debt expense.
Interest and Other, Net
 
Interest  and  other,  net  primarily  consists  of  interest  earned  on  cash,  cash  equivalents  and  investments,  as  well  as  foreign  exchange
transaction gains and losses, our portion of operating results from investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting, investment
gain/loss  on  acquisitions  or  disposals  and  interest  expense,  consisting  of  interest  charges  on  any  amounts  borrowed  and  commitment  fees  on
unborrowed  amounts  under  our  credit  agreement  and  interest  expense  on  our  outstanding  debt  securities  and  commercial  paper,  if  any.  The
following table presents interest and other, net (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
% Change
  
2015
% Change
  
2014
Interest income
$
125
29%
  $
97
(22)%   $
125
Interest expense
(225)
56%
(144)
32 %
(109)
Gains on investments
1,343
**
268
**
33
Other
83
**
  
(12)
20 %   
(10)
Total interest and other, net
$
1,326
**
  $
209
**
  $
39
The increase in interest and other, net in 2016 compared to 2015 was primarily due to the $1.3 billion pre-tax gain from the sale of our equity
holdings of MercadoLibre, Inc., and our hedging strategy, partially offset by an increase in interest expense related to the issuance of senior notes
during the first quarter of 2016. The increase in interest and other, net in 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to gains on sale of investments,
partially offset by an increase in interest expense due to the issuance of debt securities in 2014 and a decrease in interest income attributable to the
lower overall balance of cash, short-term investments and long-term investments after the Distribution.
42

Provision for Income Taxes
The following table presents provision for income taxes (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
Provision for income taxes
$
(3,634)
$
459
$
3,380
Effective tax rate
(99.5)%   
19.1%   
134.4%
Our effective tax rate was (99.5)% in 2016 compared to 19.1% in 2015 . The decrease in our effective tax rate during 2016 compared to 2015
was primarily due to the recognition in 2016 of deferred tax assets of approximately $4.6 billion as a result of the realignment of our legal structure
and the associated tax agreements. This was partially off-set by the $485 million tax effect on the $1.3 billion gain on the sale of our equity holdings
of MercadoLibre, Inc.
Our effective tax rate was  19%  in 2015 compared to  134%  in 2014. The decrease in our effective tax rate during 2015 compared to 2014
was due to the recognition in 2014 of deferred tax liabilities of approximately $3.0 billion of U.S. income and applicable foreign withholding taxes
on $9.0 billion of undistributed foreign earnings of certain of our foreign subsidiaries for 2013 and prior years. This was partially offset by the tax
effect of gains on sale of certain investments in 2015.
 
During the fourth quarter of 2016, we began the process of realigning our legal structure, subsequent to the distribution of PayPal Holdings,
Inc., to better reflect how we manage and operate our platforms. We consider many factors in effecting this realignment, including foreign exchange
exposures, long-term cash flows and cash needs of our platforms, capital allocation considerations and the associated tax effects. As a result of the
initial stages of this realignment and the associated tax agreements, we have achieved a substantial step-up in the tax basis of the intangible assets
in our foreign eBay platforms. We recognized a tax benefit of $4.6 billion, which represents the income tax effect of the step-up in tax basis. In the
future, we expect the noncash tax impacts of the realignment in our foreign eBay platforms will significantly increase our income tax provision.
The realignment is expected to extend into 2018 and primarily impact our international entities. In the first half of 2017, we may achieve a
step-up in the tax basis of the intangible assets in our foreign Classifieds platforms. Accordingly, the noncash tax impacts of the realignment in our
foreign Classifieds platforms will impact our tax provision in a manner similar to the impact from our foreign eBay platforms.
We benefit from tax rulings concluded in several different jurisdictions, most significantly Switzerland and Luxembourg. The cash tax benefit of
these rulings totaled approximately $307 million in 2016, $319 million in 2015 and $339 million in 2014. We expect the ongoing realignment of our
legal structure will result in the termination, amendment or replacement of certain tax rulings. However, we expect to continue to benefit from tax
rulings that lower our cash tax obligations in certain foreign jurisdictions.  In the future,  we expect these cash tax benefits to remain consistent,
subject to the performance of our foreign platforms.
Our provision for income taxes differs from the provision computed by applying the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to lower
tax rates associated with certain earnings from our operations in certain lower-tax jurisdictions outside the U.S. The impact on our provision for
income taxes of foreign income being taxed at different rates than the U.S. federal statutory rate was a benefit of approximately $346 million in 2016,
$399 million in 2015 and $432 million in 2014. The foreign jurisdictions with lower tax rates that had the most significant impact on our provision for
income  taxes  in  the  periods  presented  include  Switzerland  and  Luxembourg.  We  expect  to  continue  to  benefit  from  lower  tax  rates  due  to  our
continued operations in foreign jurisdictions, in particular, in Switzerland. See “Note 15 - Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements
included in this report for more information on our tax rate reconciliation.
Our relative pretax earnings and revenues attributable to the U.S. as compared to the rest of the world may differ over time. For the year
ended December 31, 2016 our US share of pretax income and net revenues was 41.9% and 43.1%, respectively. For the year ended December 31,
2015, our U.S. share of pretax income and net revenues was 16.5% and 42.2%%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2014, our U.S.
share of pretax income and net revenues was 20.3% and 40.1%, respectively. The difference in relative pretax income and net revenues attributable
to the U.S., as compared to the rest of the world for both 2016 and 2015, was primarily related to larger stock-based
43

compensation expense recorded in the U.S. for U.S. based employees, overhead related to our corporate operations which are primarily U.S. based
and higher average margins earned by non-U.S. businesses. In addition, the U.S. pretax income for 2016 includes a $979 million gain on the sale of
the U.S. portion of our equity holdings of MercadoLibre, Inc.
Our provision for income taxes is volatile and, in general, is adversely impacted by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries that
have lower tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher tax rates. Our provision for income taxes does not include provisions
for U.S. income taxes and foreign withholding taxes associated with $7.4 billion of undistributed earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries because we
intend to reinvest those earnings indefinitely in our foreign subsidiaries. If these earnings were distributed into the U.S. in the form of dividends to
eBay companies domiciled in the U.S. or if the shares of the relevant foreign subsidiaries were sold or otherwise transferred, we would be subject to
additional U.S. income taxes (subject to an adjustment for foreign tax credits) and foreign withholding taxes. Additionally, please see the information
in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “We may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities.”
From time to time we engage in certain intercompany transactions. We consider many factors when evaluating these transactions. These
transactions may impact our tax rate and/or result in additional cash tax payments. The impact in any period may be significant. These transactions
are complex and the impact of such transactions on future periods may be difficult to estimate.
We are regularly under examination by tax authorities both domestically and internationally. We believe that adequate amounts have been
reserved for any adjustments that may ultimately result from these examinations, although we cannot assure you that this will be the case given the
inherent uncertainties in these examinations. Due to the ongoing tax examinations, we believe it is impractical to determine the amount and timing of
these adjustments.
Non-GAAP Measure of Financial Performance
To  supplement  our  consolidated  financial  statements  presented  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  we  use  FX-
Neutral net revenues, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses the foregoing non-GAAP measures in reviewing our financial
results. We define FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the exchange rate effect. We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year
impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional currency amounts.
These  non-GAAP  measures  are  not  in  accordance  with,  or  an  alternative  to,  measures  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP  and  may  be
different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not based on any comprehensive set of
accounting rules or principles. Non-GAAP measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of
operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. These measures should only be used to evaluate our results of operations in conjunction with
the corresponding GAAP measures.
These non-GAAP measures are provided to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our current financial performance and its prospects
for the future. Specifically, we believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to both management and investors by excluding the
foreign currency exchange rate impact that may not be indicative of our core operating results and business outlook. In addition, because we have
historically reported certain non-GAAP results to investors, we believe that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures provide consistency in our
financial reporting.
44

The following tables set forth a reconciliation of FX-Neutral GMV and FX-Neutral net revenues (each as defined below) to our reported GMV
and net revenues for the periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended 
December 31, 2016
Year Ended 
December 31, 2015
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate Effect
(1)
FX-Neutral (2)
As Reported
As Reported % Change
FX-Neutral
% Change
GMV:
Marketplace
$
79,448
$
(2,229)
$
81,677
$
78,099
2%
5%
StubHub
4,310
(12)
4,322
3,574
21%
21%
Total GMV
$
83,758
$
(2,241)
$
85,999
$
81,673
3%
5%
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace
$
6,107
$
(170)
$
6,277
$
6,103
—%
3%
StubHub
937
(2)
939
725
29%
29%
Total net transaction revenues
7,044
(172)
7,216
6,828
3%
6%
Marketing services and other
revenues:
Marketplace
1,137
(25)
1,162
1,078
6%
8%
Classifieds
791
(13)
804
703
13%
15%
StubHub, Corporate and other
7
—
7
(17)
**
**
Total marketing services and
other revenues
1,935
(38)
1,973
1,764
10%
12%
Total net revenues
$
8,979
$
(210)
$
9,189
$
8,592
5%
7%
 
Year Ended 
December 31, 2015
Year Ended 
December 31, 2014
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate Effect
(1)
FX-Neutral (2)
As Reported
As Reported % Change
FX-Neutral
% Change
GMV:
Marketplace
$
78,099
$
(5,554)
$
83,653
$
79,581
(2)%
5%
StubHub
3,574
(5)
3,579
3,172
13 %
13%
Total GMV
$
81,673
$
(5,559)
$
87,232
$
82,753
(1)%
5%
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace
$
6,103
$
(407)
$
6,510
$
6,351
(4)%
3%
StubHub
725
(1)
726
629
15 %
15%
Total net transaction revenues
6,828
(408)
7,236
6,980
(2)%
4%
Marketing services and other
revenues:
Marketplace
1,078
(71)
1,149
1,103
(2)%
4%
Classifieds
703
(120)
823
716
(2)%
14%
StubHub, Corporate and other
(17)
—
(17)
(9)
**
**
Total marketing services and
other revenues
1,764
(191)
1,955
1,810
(3)%
8%
Total net revenues
$
8,592
$
(599)
$
9,191
$
8,790
(2)%
5%
(1)
We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional
currency amounts.
(2)
We define FX-Neutral GMV as GMV minus the exchange rate effect. We define the non-GAAP financial measures of FX-Neutral net revenue as net revenue minus the
exchange rate effect.    
45

Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows  
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
 
(In millions)
Net cash provided by (used in):
 
 
Continuing operating activities
$
2,827
$
2,877
$
3,228
Continuing investing activities
(2,008)
(673)
(1,325)
Continuing financing activities
(744)
(2,960)
(1,047)
Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents
(90)
(364)
(148)
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents - discontinued operations
(1)
(3,376)
1,126
Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
$
(16)
$
(4,496)
$
1,834
 
Continuing Operating Activities
The  net  cash  provided  by  continuing  operating  activities  of   $2.8  billion in 2016  was  primarily  due  to  net  income  of   $7.3  billion with
adjustments for $682 million in depreciation and amortization, $416 million in stock-based compensation and $20 million in changes in assets and
liabilities, net of acquisition effects, partially offset by a decrease of $4.6 billion related to deferred income taxes and $1.2 billion related to gain on
sale of investments.
The net cash provided by continuing operating activities of $2.9 billion in 2015 was due primarily to net income of $1.7 billion with adjustments
for loss from discontinued operations of $222 million, $687 million in depreciation and amortization, $379 million in stock-based compensation and
$271 million in provision for transaction losses and a decrease of $195 million related to gain on sale of investments and $106 million in changes in
assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects.
The net cash provided by continuing operating activities of $3.2 billion in 2014 was due primarily to net income of $46 million with adjustments
for income from discontinued operations of $911 million, $682 million in depreciation and amortization, $344 million in stock-based compensation,
$262 million in provision for transaction losses, $2.7 billion in deferred income taxes and $148 million in changes in assets and liabilities, net of
acquisition effects.
Cash paid for income taxes in 2016 , 2015 and 2014 was $492 million , $256 million and $343 million , respectively.
Continuing Investing Activities
The net cash used in continuing investing activities of $2.0 billion in 2016 was primarily due to cash paid for investments of $11.2 billion ,
property and equipment of $626 million and net cash paid for acquisition of businesses of $212 million , partially offset by proceeds of $10.1 billion
from the maturities and sales of investments.
The net cash used in continuing investing activities of $673 million in 2015 was due primarily to cash paid for purchases of investments of $6.7
billion,  purchases  of  property  and  equipment  of  $668  million  and  net  cash  paid  for  acquisition  of  businesses  of  $24  million,  partially  offset  by
proceeds of $6.8 billion from the maturities and sales of investments.
The net cash used in continuing investing activities of $1.3 billion in 2014 was due primarily to cash paid for purchases of investments of $8.8
billion,  purchases  of  property  and  equipment  of  $622  million  and  net  cash  paid  for  acquisition  of  businesses  of  $55  million,  partially  offset  by
proceeds of $8.1 billion from the maturities and sales of investments.
The  largely  offsetting  effects  of  purchases  of  investments  and  maturities  and  sale  of  investments  results  from  the  management  of  our
investments. As our immediate cash needs change, purchase and sale activity will fluctuate.
46

Continuing Financing Activities
The  net  cash  used  in  continuing  financing  activities  of $744  million in 2016 was  primarily  due  to $2.9  billion of  cash  paid  to  repurchase
common stock, partially offset by $2.2 billion of proceeds from debt issuances.
The net cash used in continuing financing activities of $3.0 billion in 2015 was due primarily to cash outflows from $2.1 billion to repurchase
common stock, $850 million payment of debt upon maturity and cash paid for tax withholdings in the amount of $245 million related to net share
settlements of restricted stock units and awards. These cash outflows were partially offset by cash inflows of $221 million from the issuance of
common stock in connection with the exercise of stock options and the effect of $74 million of excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation.
The net cash used in continuing financing activities of $1.0 billion in 2014 was due primarily to cash outflows of $4.7 billion to repurchase
common stock and cash paid for tax withholdings in the amount of $252 million related to net share settlements of restricted stock units and awards.
These cash outflows were partially offset by cash inflows from $3.5 billion from the issuance of senior notes, $300 million from the issuance of
common stock in connection with the exercise of stock options and the effect of $75 million of excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation.
The unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates on our cash and cash equivalents during 2016 was due to the strengthening of the U.S.
dollar against other currencies, primarily the Euro. The unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates on our cash and cash equivalents during
2015 was due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against other currencies, primarily the Euro. The unfavorable impact of currency exchange
rates on our cash and cash equivalents during 2014 was due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against certain foreign currencies, primarily the
Euro and Korean won.  
Stock Repurchases
In January 2015, our Board authorized a stock repurchase program that provided for the repurchase of up to  $2 billion of our common stock.
In June 2015, our Board authorized an additional  $1 billion  stock repurchase program and in July 2016, our Board authorized an additional $2.5
billion  stock  repurchase  program.  These  stock  repurchase  programs  have  no  expiration  from  the  date  of  authorization.  Our  stock  repurchase
programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and, subject to market conditions
and other factors, to make opportunistic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding share count. Any share repurchases under our
stock repurchase programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately negotiated transactions (including accelerated
share  repurchase  transactions)  or  other  means  at  times  and in such amounts  as management  deems  appropriate  and will be funded  from  our
working capital or other financing alternatives.
During 2016 , we repurchased approximately  $3.0 billion  of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. As of December 31,
2016 , a total of approximately $1.3 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our July 2016 repurchase program
and no amounts remained under our January 2015 and June 2015 repurchase programs. 
We  expect,  subject  to  market  conditions  and  other  uncertainties,  to  continue  making  opportunistic  repurchases  of  our  common  stock.
However, our stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares
repurchased  will  depend  on  a  variety  of  factors,  including  corporate  and  regulatory  requirements,  price  and  other  market  conditions  and
management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash.  
Shelf Registration Statement and Long-Term Debt
As of December 31, 2016 , we had an effective shelf registration statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission that allows
us to issue various types of debt securities, as well as common stock, preferred stock, warrants, depositary shares representing fractional interest in
shares  of  preferred  stock,  purchase  contracts  and  units  from  time  to  time  in  one  or  more  offerings.  Each  issuance  under  the  shelf  registration
statement  will  require  the  filing  of  a  prospectus  supplement  identifying  the  amount  and  terms  of  the  securities  to  be  issued.  The  registration
statement does not limit the amount of securities that may be issued thereunder. Our ability to issue securities is subject to market conditions and
other factors including, in the case of our debt securities, our credit ratings and compliance with the covenants in our credit agreement.
47

In the first quarter of 2016, we issued senior unsecured notes, or senior notes, in an aggregate principal amount of $2.25 billion. This consists
of $750 million aggregate principal amount of 2.500% fixed rate notes due 2018, $750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.800% fixed rate notes
due 2022 and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056.
We  previously  issued  senior  notes  in  underwritten  public  offerings  under  prior  registration  statements.  The  senior  notes  that  remained
outstanding as of December 31, 2016 consisted of $450 million aggregate principal amount of floating rate notes due 2017, $1.0 billion aggregate
principal  amount  of  1.35%  fixed  rate  notes  due  2017,  $400  million  aggregate  principal  amount  of  floating  rate  notes  due  2019,  $1.15  billion
aggregate principal amount of 2.2% fixed rate notes due 2019, $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.250% fixed rate notes due 2020, $750
million aggregate principal amount of 2.875% fixed rate notes due 2021, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.60% fixed rate notes due 2022,
$750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.45% fixed rate notes due 2024 and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% fixed rate notes
due 2042.
The  net  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  these  senior  notes  were  used  for  general  corporate  purposes,  including,  among  other  things,  capital
expenditures, share repurchases, repayment of indebtedness and possible acquisitions.
The floating rate notes are not redeemable prior to maturity. On and after March 1, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the fixed rate notes
due 2056 at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be
redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. We may redeem some or all of the other fixed rate notes of each series at any time and from time to
time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price plus accrued and unpaid interest. If a change of control triggering event (as
defined in the applicable notes) occurs with respect to the 2.500% fixed rate notes due 2018, the 3.800% fixed rate notes due 2022 or the 6.000%
fixed rate notes due 2056, we must, subject to certain exceptions, offer to repurchase all of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to
101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest.
To  help  achieve  our  interest  rate  risk  management  objectives,  we  previously  entered  into  interest  rate  swap  agreements  that  effectively
converted $2.4 billion of the fixed rate notes to floating rate debt based on the London InterBank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus a spread. These swaps
were designated as fair value hedges against changes in the fair value of certain fixed rate senior notes resulting from changes in interest rates.
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default.
Other Indebtedness
Our other indebtedness is comprised of overdraft facilities. We have formal overdraft facilities in India bearing interest on drawn balances at
approximately a 9.1% rate per annum.
Commercial Paper
We have an up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes with maturities of up to 397
days from the date of issue in an aggregate principal amount at maturity of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time. As of December 31, 2016 ,
there were no commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In November 2015, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year revolving credit facility. We may
also, subject to the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase the commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to an aggregate amount
of $1 billion . Funds borrowed under the credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general
corporate purposes.
As of December 31, 2016 , no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and therefore maintain $1.5 billion of available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order
to repay commercial paper borrowings in the event we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due. As a result,
$500 million of borrowing capacity was available as of December 31, 2016 for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement.  
48

Loans under the credit agreement bear interest at either (i) the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a margin (based on our public
debt credit ratings) ranging from 0.875 percent to 1.5 percent or (ii) a formula based on the agent bank’s prime rate, the federal funds effective rate
plus 0.5 percent or LIBOR plus 1.0 percent, plus a margin (based on our public debt credit ratings) ranging from zero percent to 0.5 percent. The
credit agreement will terminate and all amounts owing thereunder will be due and payable on November 9, 2020, unless (a) the commitments are
terminated earlier, either at our request or, if an event of default occurs, by the lenders (or automatically in the case of certain bankruptcy-related
events of default), or (b) the maturity date is extended upon our request, subject to the agreement of the lenders. The credit agreement includes
customary  representations,  warranties,  affirmative  and  negative  covenants,  including  financial  covenants,  events  of  default  and  indemnification
provisions in favor of the banks. The negative covenants include restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and subsidiary indebtedness, in each
case, subject to certain exceptions. The financial covenants require us to meet a quarterly financial test with respect to a minimum consolidated
interest coverage ratio and a maximum consolidated leverage ratio. The events of default include the occurrence of a change of control (as defined
in the credit agreement) with respect to us.
We were in compliance with all covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2016 .
Credit Ratings
As of December 31, 2016 , we were rated investment grade by Standard and Poor’s Financial Services, LLC (long-term rated BBB+, short-
term  rated  A-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  Moody’s  Investor  Service  (long-term  rated  Baa1,  short-term  rated  P-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  and  Fitch
Ratings, Inc. (long-term rated BBB, short-term rated F-2, with a stable outlook). We disclose these ratings to enhance the understanding of our
sources of liquidity and the effects of our ratings on our costs of funds. Our borrowing costs depend, in part, on our credit ratings and any further
actions taken by these credit rating agencies to lower our credit ratings, as described above, will likely increase our borrowing costs. 
Commitments and Contingencies
We  have  certain  fixed  contractual  obligations  and  commitments  that  include  future  estimated  payments  for  general  operating  purposes.
Changes  in  our  business  needs,  contractual  cancellation  provisions,  fluctuating  interest  rates,  and  other  factors  may  result  in  actual  payments
differing from the estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of these payments. The following table summarizes our
fixed contractual obligations and commitments (in millions):
Payments Due During the Year Ending December 31,
Debt
 Leases
Purchase Obligations   
Total
2017
$
1,703
$
64
$
177
$
1,944
2018
978
46
107
1,131
2019
1,761
42
75
1,878
2020
690
35
66
791
2021
918
23
61
1,002
Thereafter
6,236
21
86
6,343
$
12,286
$
231
$
572
$
13,089
The significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the above table are as follows:
•
Debt amounts include the principal and interest amounts of the respective debt instruments. For additional details related to our debt,
please see “Note 11 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements  included in this report. This table does not reflect any amounts
payable under our $2 billion revolving credit facility or $1.5 billion commercial paper program, for which no borrowings were outstanding
as of December 31, 2016 .
•
Lease amounts include minimum rental payments under our non-cancelable operating leases for office facilities, fulfillment centers, as
well as computer and office equipment that we utilize under lease arrangements. The amounts presented are consistent with contractual
terms  and  are  not  expected  to  differ  significantly  from  actual  results  under  our  existing  leases,  unless  a  substantial  change  in  our
headcount needs requires us to expand our occupied space or exit an office facility early.
49

•
Purchase  obligation  amounts  include  minimum  purchase  commitments  for  advertising,  capital  expenditures  (computer  equipment,
software  applications,  engineering  development  services,  construction  contracts)  and  other  goods  and  services  entered  into  in  the
ordinary course of business.
As we are unable to reasonably  predict the timing  of settlement  of liabilities related  to unrecognized tax benefits,  net, the table does not
include $436 million of such non-current liabilities included in deferred and other tax liabilities recorded on our consolidated balance sheet as of
December 31, 2016 .
Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
As of December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015 , we had assets classified as cash and cash equivalents, as well as short-term and long-
term non-equity investments, in an aggregate amount of $11.0 billion and $8.5 billion , respectively. As of December 31, 2016 , this amount included
assets  held  in  certain  of  our  foreign  operations  totaling  approximately $8.2  billion .  Of  the $8.2  billion held  by  our  non-U.S.  subsidiaries,
approximately $4.6 billion was available for use in the U.S. without incurring additional U.S. income taxes in excess of the amounts already accrued
in our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2016 . As of December 31, 2016 , we had not repatriated any of these funds to the U.S.
and, as a result, we have not yet paid U.S. tax on any portion of these funds. However, to the extent we repatriate these funds to the U.S., we will be
required  to  pay  U.S.  income  and  applicable  foreign  withholding  taxes  on  those  amounts  during  the  period  when  such  repatriation  occurs.  The
remaining  amount  of  non-U.S.  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  as  well  as  short-term  and  long-term  non-equity  investments,  have  been  indefinitely
reinvested  and,  therefore,  no  U.S.  current  or  deferred  taxes  have  been  accrued  as  this  amount  is  necessary  to  support  our  planned  ongoing
investments in our foreign operations. We believe our U.S. sources of cash and liquidity are sufficient to meet our business needs in the U.S., and
we do not expect that we will need to repatriate the funds we have designated as indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. Under current tax laws,
should our plans change and we were to choose to repatriate some or all of the funds we have designated as indefinitely reinvested outside the
U.S., such amounts would be subject to U.S. income taxes and applicable non-U.S. income and withholding taxes.
In the fourth quarter of 2016, we sold our equity holdings of MercadoLibre, Inc. for net proceeds of $1.3 billion. The pre-tax gain of $1.3 billion
was recorded in interest and other, net on our consolidated statement of income.
 
We actively monitor all counterparties that hold our cash and cash equivalents and non-equity investments, focusing primarily on the safety of
principal  and  secondarily  on  improving  yield  on  these  assets.  We  diversify  our  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  investments  among  various
counterparties  in  order  to  reduce  our  exposure  should  any  one  of  these  counterparties  fail  or  encounter  difficulties.  To  date,  we  have  not
experienced any material loss or lack of access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments; however, we can provide no
assurances that access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial
markets. At any point in time we have funds in our operating accounts and customer accounts that are deposited and invested with third party
financial institutions.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments, together with cash expected to be generated
from  operations,  borrowings  available  under  our  credit  agreement  and  commercial  paper  program,  and  our  access  to  capital  markets,  will  be
sufficient to fund our operating activities, anticipated capital expenditures and stock repurchases for the foreseeable future.
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2016 , we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or  income  under  the  arrangement.  As  of December  31,  2016 ,  we  had  a  total  of $1.6  billion in  cash  withdrawals  offsetting  our $1.6  billion in
Aggregate Cash Deposits held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
50

Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies going forward. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us
and PayPal, which may be significant.  In addition,  the indemnity rights  we have against PayPal under the agreements  may not be sufficient  to
protect us and our indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application-programming-interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, losses recorded
in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant, either individually or collectively.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
General
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based
our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of
which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our
senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are
highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting
estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. We believe the following
critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The following  descriptions  of critical  accounting  policies,  judgments  and estimates  should be read  in conjunction  with our consolidated  financial
statements and related notes and other disclosures included in this report.
Revenue Recognition
We  may  enter  into  certain  revenue  transactions,  primarily  related  to  certain  advertising  contracts,  that  are  considered  multiple  element
arrangements (arrangements with more than one deliverable). We also may enter into arrangements to purchase goods and/or services from certain
customers. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting for these transactions
including: (1) how the arrangement consideration should be allocated among potential multiple deliverables; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-
alone selling price of each deliverable; (3) whether revenue should be reported gross (as eBay is acting as a principal), or net (as eBay is acting as
an agent); (4) when we provide cash consideration to our customers, determining whether we are receiving an identifiable benefit that is separable
from the customer’s purchase of our products and/or services and for which we can reasonably estimate fair value; and (5) whether the arrangement
would be characterized as revenue or reimbursement of costs incurred. Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates
could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
51

Income Taxes
Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in
which  we  operate.  Tax  laws  are  complex  and  subject  to  different  interpretations  by  the  taxpayer  and  respective  government  taxing  authorities.
Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties. We review our
tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Our income tax rate is significantly affected by the tax rates
that apply to our foreign earnings. In addition to local country tax laws and regulations, our income tax rate depends on the extent that our earnings
are indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. Indefinite reinvestment is determined by management’s judgment about and intentions concerning our
future operations. As of December 31, 2016 , $7.4 billion of earnings had been indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S., primarily in active non-U.S.
business operations. We do not intend to repatriate these earnings to fund U.S. operations and, accordingly, we do not provide for U.S. federal
income and foreign withholding tax on these earnings.
Deferred  tax  assets  represent  amounts  available  to  reduce  income  taxes  payable  on  taxable  income  in  future  years.  Such  assets  arise
because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax
credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable
income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies.
These sources of income rely heavily on estimates that are based on a number of factors, including our historical experience and short-range and
long-range business forecasts. As of December 31, 2016 , we had a valuation allowance on certain loss carryforwards based on our assessment
that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
We  recognize  and  measure  uncertain  tax  positions  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  the  U.S.,  or  GAAP,
pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from
such  positions  are  then  measured  based  on  the  largest  benefit  that  has  a  greater  than  50  percent  likelihood  of  being  realized  upon  ultimate
settlement. We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
GAAP further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in
the quarter in which such change occurs. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. A number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax
position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution
of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these reserves, as
well as the related interest, where appropriate in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position could require the
use of cash.
The following table illustrates our effective tax rates for 2016 , 2015 and 2014 :
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
(In millions, except percentages)
Provision for income taxes
$
(3,634)
 $
459
 $
3,380
As a % of income before income taxes
(99.5)%  
19.1%  
134.4%
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory
rates  and  higher  than  anticipated  in  countries  where  we  have  higher  statutory  rates,  by  changes  in  the  valuation  of  our  deferred  tax  assets  or
liabilities, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination
of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service, as well as various state and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of
adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
52

Based  on  our  results  for  the  year  ended December  31,  2016 ,  a  one-percentage  point  change  in  our  provision  for  income  taxes  as  a
percentage of income before taxes would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the provision of approximately $37 million , resulting in an
approximate $0.03 change in diluted earnings per share.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The purchase price of an acquired company is allocated between intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with
the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments
and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the
appropriate weighted average cost of capital.
As of December 31, 2016 , our goodwill totaled $4.5 billion and our identifiable intangible assets, net totaled $102 million . We assess the
impairment of goodwill of our reporting units annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not
be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is
more  likely  than  not  that  the  fair  value  of  the  reporting  unit  is  less  than  its  carrying  value.  If  the  reporting  unit  does  not  pass  the  qualitative
assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market
and  discounted  cash  flow  approaches.  Goodwill  is  considered  impaired  if  the  carrying  value  of  the  reporting  unit  exceeds  its  fair  value.  The
discounted cash flow approach uses expected future operating results. The market approach uses comparable company information to determine
revenue  and  earnings  multiples  to  value  our  reporting  units.  Failure  to  achieve  these  expected  results  or  market  multiples  may  cause  a  future
impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill as of August 31, 2016 and 2015. Additionally, we
evaluated impairment based on the significant activities regarding the Distribution and Enterprise divestiture in 2015. See “Note 4 - Discontinued
Operations” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for further detail. As of December 31, 2016 , we determined that no
further  impairment  of  the  carrying  value  of  goodwill  for  any  reporting  units  was  required.  See  “Note  5  -  Goodwill  and  Intangible  Assets”  to  the
consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Legal Contingencies
In connection with certain pending litigation and other claims, we have estimated the range of probable loss, net of expected recoveries, and
provided for such losses through charges to our consolidated statement of income. These estimates have been based on our assessment of the
facts and circumstances at each balance sheet date and are subject to change based upon new information and future events.
From time to time, we are involved in disputes and regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business. We are currently involved
in  legal  proceedings,  some  of  which  are  discussed  in  “Item  1A:  Risk  Factors,”  “Item  3:  Legal  Proceedings”  and  “Note  12  -  Commitments  and
Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report. We believe that we have meritorious defenses to the claims against
us, and we intend to defend ourselves vigorously. However, even if successful, our defense against certain actions will be costly and could require
significant amounts of management’s time and result in the diversion of significant operational resources. If the plaintiffs were to prevail on certain
claims, we might be forced to pay significant damages and licensing fees, modify our business practices or even be prohibited from conducting a
significant part of our business. Any such results could materially harm our business and could result in a material adverse impact on the financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "Note 1 - The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements included in this report,
regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
53

ITEM 7A: QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Interest Rate Risk
We are exposed to interest rate risk relating to our investments and outstanding debt. We seek to reduce earnings volatility that may result
from changes in interest rates.
As of December 31, 2016 , approximately 16% of our total cash and investments was held in cash and cash equivalents. As such, changes in
interest rates will impact interest income. As discussed below, fixed rate securities may have their fair market value adversely affected due to a rise
in interest rates, and we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell securities that have declined in market value due to changes in interest
rates.
 
As  of December  31,  2016 ,  the  balance  of  our  government  bond  and  corporate  debt  securities  was $9.2  billion ,  which  represented
approximately 82% of our total cash and investments. Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying
degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of our fixed-rate investment securities may be adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates.
In general, fixed-rate securities with longer maturities are subject to greater interest-rate risk than those with shorter maturities. While floating rate
securities generally are subject to less interest-rate risk than fixed-rate securities, floating-rate securities may produce less income than expected if
interest rates decrease and may also suffer a decline in market value if interest rates increase. Due in part to these factors, our investment income
may fall short of expectations or we may suffer losses in principal if we sell securities that have declined in market value due to changes in interest
rates.  A  100  basis  point  increase  or  decrease  in  interest  rates  would  not  have  a  material  impact  on  our  financial  assets  or  liabilities  as  of
December 31, 2016 .
As of December 31, 2016 , we have $9.0 billion of outstanding senior notes, of which 91% bore interest at fixed rates. We entered into $2.4
billion of interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with $1.15 billion of our
2.2% senior notes due July 2019, $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021, and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July
2024 so that the interest payable on those notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR plus a spread. Further changes in interest rates will
impact  interest  expense on any borrowings  under our revolving  credit facility,  which bear interest  at floating rates,  and the interest  rate on any
commercial  paper  borrowings  we  make  and  any  debt  securities  we  may  issue  in  the  future  and,  accordingly,  will  impact  interest  expense.  For
additional details related to our debt, please see “Note 11 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Investment Risk
The  primary  objective  of  our  investment  activities  is  to  preserve  principal  while  at  the  same  time  improving  yields  without  significantly
increasing risk. To achieve this objective, we maintain our cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments in a variety of asset types,
including bank deposits, government bonds and corporate debt securities.
As of December 31, 2016 , our cost and equity method investments totaled $118 million , which represented approximately 1% of our total
cash  and  investments,  and  were  primarily  related  to  equity  method  investments  in  privately  held  companies.  We  review  our  investments  for
impairment  when  events  and  circumstances  indicate  a  decline  in  fair  value  of  such  assets  below  carrying  value  is  other-than-temporary.  Our
analysis includes a review of recent operating results and trends, recent sales/acquisitions of the securities in which we have invested and other
publicly available data.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues and costs that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the
Euro, British pound, Korean won and Australian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency risk which may adversely impact our financial results. We
transact business in various foreign currencies and have significant international revenues as well as costs. In addition, we charge our international
subsidiaries for their use of intellectual property and technology and for certain corporate services we provide. Our cash flow, results of operations
and certain of our intercompany balances that are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations may differ materially from expectations and we may
record significant gains or losses due to foreign currency fluctuations and related hedging activities.
54

We  have  a  foreign  exchange  exposure  management  program  designed  to  identify  material  foreign  currency  exposures,  manage  these
exposures and reduce the potential effects of currency fluctuations on our reported consolidated cash flows and results of operations through the
purchase of foreign currency exchange contracts. The effectiveness of the program and resulting usage of foreign exchange derivative contracts is
at times limited by our ability to achieve cash flow hedge accounting. Subsequent to the Distribution, fewer of our currency flows meet the U.S.
GAAP criteria for cash flow hedge accounting. While, economically, we face the same currency risks, our statement of income is more subject to
volatility due to currency fluctuations. These foreign currency exchange contracts are accounted for as derivative instruments; for additional details
related to our derivative instruments, please see “Note 9 – Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
We use foreign exchange derivative contracts and invest non-U.S. cash in U.S. denominated investments to ultimately protect our forecasted
U.S.  dollar-equivalent  earnings  from  adverse  changes  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  These  hedging  contracts  reduce,  but  do  not  entirely
eliminate, the impact of adverse currency exchange rate movements. Most of these contracts are designated as cash flow hedges for accounting
purposes. For qualifying cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported as a component of accumulated
other  comprehensive  income  (“AOCI”)  and  subsequently  reclassified  into  earnings  in  the  same  period  the  forecasted  transaction  affects
earnings. The ineffective portion of the unrealized gains and losses on these contracts, if any, is recorded immediately in earnings. For contracts not
designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, the derivative’s gain or loss is recognized immediately in earnings in our consolidated
statement of income. However, only certain revenue and costs are eligible for cash flow hedge accounting.
Certain  of  our  foreign  subsidiaries  hold  U.S.  denominated  marketable  securities.  The  U.S.  dollar/Euro  is  the  primary  foreign  exchange
exposure for these nonfunctional currency denominated marketable securities. These marketable securities are classified as available-for-sale and
as such,  fluctuations  in the foreign  exchange are  recorded  in accumulated  other  comprehensive  income within  the consolidated  balance sheet.
These fluctuations are subsequently reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income to interest and other, net in the period in which the
marketable  securities  are  sold.  The  realized  foreign  exchange  gains  and  losses  on  these  securities  offset  a  portion  of  the  foreign  exchange
fluctuations in earnings for the company.
The following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges and nonfunctional
currency denominated marketable securities and the before-tax effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change in the foreign exchange rates
that  existed  as  of December  31,  2016 .  The  sensitivities  for  foreign  currency  contracts  and  nonfunctional  currency  denominated  marketable
securities are based on a 20% adverse change in foreign exchange rates, against relevant functional currencies.
 
Fair Value
Asset/(Liability)
Fair Value Sensitivity
(1)
(In millions)
Foreign exchange contracts - Cash flow hedges
$
64
$
(126)
Marketable Securities
$
878
$
(176)
(1)
A hypothetical adverse change of 20% in the foreign exchange rates as of December 31, 2016 , would have resulted in a before-tax loss of $126 million and $176 million
to be recorded in AOCI related to foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges and nonfunctional currency denominated marketable securities.
Since our risk management programs are highly effective, the potential loss in value described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
In addition, we use foreign exchange contracts to offset the foreign exchange risk on our assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other
than  the  functional  currency  of  our  subsidiaries.  These  contracts  reduce,  but  do  not  entirely  eliminate,  the  impact  of  currency  exchange  rate
movements on our assets and liabilities. The foreign currency gains and losses on the assets and liabilities are recorded in interest and other, net,
which are offset by the gains and losses on the foreign exchange contracts.
We  considered  the  historical  trends  in  currency  exchange  rates  and  determined  that  it  was  reasonably  possible  that  adverse  changes  in
exchange rates of 20% for all currencies could be experienced in the near term. These changes would have resulted in an adverse impact on
income before income taxes of approximately $10 million as of
55

December 31, 2016 taking into consideration the offsetting effect of foreign exchange forwards in place as of December 31, 2016 .
ITEM 8: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
The  consolidated  financial  statements  and  accompanying  notes  listed  in  Part  IV,  Item  15(a)(1)  of  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  are
included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9: CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A: CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation  of  disclosure  controls  and  procedures.  Based  on  the  evaluation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  the
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or the Exchange Act) required by Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(b) or 15d-
15(b), our principal executive officer and our principal financial officer have concluded that as of the end of the period covered by this report, our
disclosure controls and procedures were not effective as a result of the material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting discussed
below.
Changes in internal controls.  There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-
15(f)  and  15d-15(f)  that  occurred  during  our  most  recently  completed  fiscal  quarter  that  have  materially  affected,  or  are  reasonably  likely  to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Material Weakness . In reviewing the accounting for certain transactions completed in December 2016 as part of the realignment of our legal
structure described above under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Provision for
Income Taxes,” our management identified a deficiency in our internal control over financial reporting that is described in Management’s Annual
Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our management has concluded that this deficiency constitutes a material weakness in our
internal control over financial reporting. Nonetheless, we have concluded that this material weakness does not require a change in the fourth quarter
or full year 2016 consolidated financial results that we released in January 2017, nor does it require a restatement of or change in our consolidated
financial statements for any prior annual or interim period. We also developed a remediation plan for this material weakness, which is also described
below.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.  Our management, including our principal executive officer and
principal  financial  officer,  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Our  management
conducted  an  evaluation  of  the  effectiveness  of  our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  based  on  the  framework  and  criteria  established  in
Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on its
evaluation, our management has concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was not effective as of December 31, 2016, due to the
material  weakness  in  our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  discussed  below.  A  material  weakness  is  a  deficiency,  or  combination  of
deficiencies,  in  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  such  that  there  is  a  reasonable  possibility  that  a  material  misstatement  of  our  annual or
interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
In  reviewing  the  accounting  for  certain  transactions  completed  in  December  2016  as  part  of  the  realignment  of  our  legal  structure,  our
management  identified  a  deficiency  in  the  effectiveness  of  a  control  intended  to  properly  document  and  review  relevant  facts  and  apply  the
appropriate tax accounting under accounting standards generally accepted in the United States of America, which impacted the Deferred tax asset
and Income tax benefit accounts and related disclosures. This control deficiency resulted in an adjustment to our annual financial statements as of
and for the year ended December 31, 2016. While the control deficiency did not result in a misstatement of our previously issued consolidated
financial statements, the control deficiency could result in a material misstatement of the aforementioned account balances or disclosures that would
result  in  a  material  misstatement  in  our  annual  or  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  that  would  not  be  prevented  or  detected.  Our
management has concluded that the deficiency constitutes a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting.
56

The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP,
an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which appears in Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Remediation  Plan. Management  has  begun  implementing  a  remediation  plan  to  address  the  control  deficiency  that  led  to  the  material
weakness. The remediation plan includes the following:
•
Implementing  specific  review  procedures,  including  the  added  involvement  of  our  chief  tax  officer  in  the  review  of  tax  accounting,
designed to enhance our income tax control; and
•
Strengthening our income tax control with improved documentation standards, technical oversight and training
We currently plan to have our enhanced review procedures and documentation standards in place and operating in the first quarter of 2017.
Our goal is to remediate this material weakness by the end of 2017, subject to there being sufficient opportunities to conclude, through testing, that
the enhanced control is operating effectively.
ITEM 9B: OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
57

PART III
ITEM 10: DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days
after the end of the year ended December 31, 2016 .
Code of Ethics, Governance Guidelines and Committee Charters
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to all eBay employees and directors. We have also adopted a Code of
Ethics for Senior Financial Officers that applies to our senior financial officers, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer and
principal accounting officer. The Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers is included in our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics posted on our
website at https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance.cfm. We will post any amendments to or waivers from the Code of Ethics for Senior
Financial Officers at that location.
We have also adopted Governance Guidelines for the Board of Directors and a written committee charter for each of our Audit Committee,
Compensation  Committee  and  Corporate  Governance  and  Nominating  Committee.  Each  of  these  documents  is  available  on  our  website  at
https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance.cfm.
ITEM 11: EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days
after the end of the year ended December 31, 2016 .
Annual stock option grants awarded to executives are priced and granted to executives on the same date and at the same price that they are
granted to and priced for the rest of our eligible employees and have the same four-year vesting schedule.  These annual stock option grants are
awarded on April 1 (or if April 1 is not a trading day, the next trading day with vesting effective as of April 1). Prior to 2012, these stock option grants
have been awarded on March 1 of each year (or if March 1 was not a trading day, the next trading day with vesting effective as of March 1). 
ITEM 12: SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days
after the end of the year ended December 31, 2016 .
ITEM 13: CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days
after the end of the year ended December 31, 2016 .
ITEM 14: PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days
after the end of the year ended December 31, 2016 .
58

PART IV
Item 15: EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
(a) The following documents are filed as part of this report:
1. Consolidated Financial Statements:
Page
Number
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-1
Consolidated Balance Sheet
F-2
Consolidated Statement of Income
F-3
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
F-4
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
F-5
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
F-6
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
F-8
2. Financial Statement Schedule
Schedule II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
F-43
All other schedules have been omitted because the information required to be set forth therein is not applicable or is shown in
the financial statements or notes thereto.
3. Exhibits Required by Item 601 of Regulation S-K
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index of Exhibits that follows the signature page of this Annual Report.
F-46
59

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of eBay Inc.:
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the index appearing under Item 15(a)(1) present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of eBay Inc. and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015 , and the results of their operations and their
cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2016 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. In addition, in our opinion, the financial statement schedule listed in the index   appearing under Item 15(a)(2) presents
fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements. Also in
our opinion, the Company did not maintain, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016, based
on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO) because a material weakness in internal control over financial reporting related to the ineffectiveness of a control intended to
properly document and review relevant facts and apply the appropriate tax accounting under accounting standards generally accepted in the United
States of America existed as of that date. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial
reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented
or  detected  on a timely  basis.  The material  weakness  referred  to above is described  in Management's  Annual Report  on Internal  Control  Over
Financial Reporting appearing under Item 9A. We considered this material weakness in determining the nature, timing, and extent of audit tests
applied in our audit of the 2016 consolidated financial statements, and our opinion regarding the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over
financial reporting does not affect our opinion on those consolidated financial statements. The Company’s management is responsible for these
financial statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in management’s report referred to above. Our responsibility is to express opinions
on these financial statements, on the financial statement schedule, and on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our
integrated audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material  misstatement  and  whether  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  was  maintained  in  all  material  respects.  Our  audits  of  the
financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our
audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk
that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk.
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A
company’s internal control  over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company;  and (iii)  provide  reasonable assurance  regarding  prevention  or timely  detection  of unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or disposition  of the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
February 6, 2017
F-1

PART II: FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Item 8:
Financial Statements
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
(In millions, except par value)
ASSETS
Current assets:
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,816
$
1,832
Short-term investments
5,333
4,299
Accounts receivable, net
592
619
Other current assets
1,134
1,154
Total current assets
8,875
7,904
Long-term investments
3,969
3,391
Property and equipment, net
1,516
1,554
Goodwill
4,501
4,451
Intangible assets, net
102
90
Deferred tax asset, non-current
4,608
—
Other assets
276
365
Total assets
$
23,847
$
17,755
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities:
 
 
Short-term debt
$
1,451
$
—
Accounts payable
283
349
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
1,893
1,736
Deferred revenue
110
106
Income taxes payable
110
72
Total current liabilities
3,847
2,263
Deferred and other tax liabilities, net
1,888
2,092
Long-term debt
7,509
6,749
Other liabilities
64
75
Total liabilities
13,308
11,179
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
Stockholders’ equity:
Common stock, $0.001 par value; 3,580 shares authorized; 1,087 and 1,184 shares outstanding
2
2
Additional paid-in capital
14,907
14,538
Treasury stock at cost, 557 and 443 shares
(19,205)
(16,203)
Retained earnings
14,959
7,713
Accumulated other comprehensive income
(124)
526
Total stockholders’ equity
10,539
6,576
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$
23,847
$
17,755
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-2

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Net revenues
$
8,979
$
8,592
$
8,790
Cost of net revenues
2,007
1,771
1,663
Gross profit
6,972
6,821
7,127
Operating expenses:
 
Sales and marketing
2,368
2,267
2,442
Product development
1,114
923
983
General and administrative
900
1,122
889
Provision for transaction losses
231
271
262
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
34
41
75
Total operating expenses
4,647
4,624
4,651
Income from operations
2,325
2,197
2,476
Interest and other, net
1,326
209
39
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
3,651
2,406
2,515
Income tax benefit (provision)
3,634
(459)
(3,380)
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
7,285
$
1,947
$
(865)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(19)
(222)
911
Net income
$
7,266
$
1,725
$
46
Income (loss) per share - basic:
 
 
Continuing operations
$
6.43
$
1.61
$
(0.69)
Discontinued operations
(0.02)
(0.18)
0.73
Net income per share - basic
$
6.41
$
1.43
$
0.04
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
6.37
$
1.60
$
(0.69)
Discontinued operations
(0.02)
(0.18)
0.73
Net income per share - diluted
$
6.35
$
1.42
$
0.04
Weighted average shares:
 
 
Basic
1,133
1,208
1,251
Diluted
1,144
1,220
1,251
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-3

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
 
(In millions)
Net income
$
7,266
$
1,725
$
46
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of reclassification adjustments:
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation loss
(185)
(431)
(323)
Unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
(794)
(187)
108
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
314
56
(37)
Unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
18
(65)
274
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
(3)
(6)
(7)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
(650)
(633)
15
Comprehensive income
$
6,616
$
1,092
$
61
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
(In millions)
Common stock:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
$
2
 $
2
 $
2
Common stock issued
—
 
—
 
—
Common stock repurchased/forfeited
—
—
—
Balance, end of year
2
 
2
 
2
Additional paid-in-capital:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
14,538
 
13,887
 
13,031
Common stock and stock-based awards issued and assumed
102
 
230
 
298
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and
units
(121)
(245)
(252)
Stock-based compensation
416
 
576
 
693
Stock-based awards tax impact
5
 
90
 
117
Other
(33)
—
—
Balance, end of year
14,907
 
14,538
 
13,887
Treasury stock at cost:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
(16,203)  
(14,054)  
(9,396)
Common stock repurchased
(3,002)  
(2,149)  
(4,658)
Balance, end of year
(19,205)  
(16,203)  
(14,054)
Retained earnings:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
7,713
 
18,900
 
18,854
Net income
7,266
 
1,725
 
46
Distribution of PayPal
(20)
(12,912)
—
Balance, end of year
14,959
 
7,713
 
18,900
Accumulated other comprehensive income:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
526
 
1,171
 
1,156
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on investments
(794)  
(187)  
108
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on derivative instruments
18
 
(65)  
274
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(185)  
(431)  
(323)
Tax benefit (provision) on above items
311
50
(44)
Distribution of PayPal
—
(12)
—
Balance, end of year
(124)  
526
 
1,171
Total stockholders’ equity
$
10,539
$
6,576
 $
19,906
Number of shares:
 
 
Common stock - shares outstanding:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
1,184
 
1,224
 
1,294
Common stock issued
22
 
19
 
18
Common stock repurchased/forfeited
(119)  
(59)  
(88)
Balance, end of year
1,087
 
1,184
 
1,224
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-5

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
 
(In millions)
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Net income
$
7,266
$
1,725
$
46
(Income) loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
19
222
(911)
Adjustments:
 
 
Provision for transaction losses
231
271
262
Depreciation and amortization
682
687
682
Stock-based compensation
416
379
344
Gain on sale of investments and other, net
(1,236)
(195)
(12)
Deferred income taxes
(4,556)
(32)
2,744
Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
(15)
(74)
(75)
Changes in assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects
Accounts receivable
(48)
(105)
51
Other current assets
23
(143)
(36)
Other non-current assets
94
143
(3)
Accounts payable
(28)
226
81
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
(130)
(202)
(81)
Deferred revenue
4
9
4
Income taxes payable and other tax liabilities
105
(34)
132
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities
2,827
2,877
3,228
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
(1)
1,156
2,449
Net cash provided by operating activities
2,826
4,033
5,677
Cash flows from investing activities:
 
 
 
Purchases of property and equipment
(626)
(668)
(622)
Purchases of investments
(11,212)
(6,744)
(8,752)
Maturities and sales of investments
10,063
6,781
8,115
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(212)
(24)
(55)
Other
(21)
(18)
(11)
Net cash used in continuing investing activities
(2,008)
(673)
(1,325)
Net cash used in discontinued investing activities
—
(2,938)
(1,348)
Net cash used in investing activities
(2,008)
(3,611)
(2,673)
Cash flows from financing activities:
 
 
 
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
102
221
300
Repurchases of common stock
(2,943)
(2,149)
(4,658)
Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
15
74
75
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and units
(121)
(245)
(252)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net
2,216
—
3,482
Repayment of debt
(20)
(850)
—
Other
7
(11)
6
Net cash used in continuing financing activities
(744)
(2,960)
(1,047)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
—
(1,594)
25
Net cash used in financing activities
(744)
(4,554)
(1,022)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(90)
(364)
(148)
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(16)
(4,496)
1,834
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
1,832
6,328
4,494
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
$
1,816
$
1,832
$
6,328
Less: Cash and cash equivalents of discontinued operations - Enterprise
—
—
29
Less: Cash and cash equivalents of discontinued operations - PayPal
—
—
2,194
Cash and cash equivalents of continuing operations at end of period
$
1,816
$
1,832
$
4,105

F-6

Supplemental cash flow disclosures:
 
 
 
Cash paid for interest
$
220
$
175
$
99
Cash paid for income taxes
$
492
$
256
$
343
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-7

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The Company
eBay  Inc.  is  a  global  commerce  leader,  which  includes  our  Marketplace,  StubHub  and  Classifieds  platforms.  Our  Marketplace  platforms
include our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay mobile apps. Our StubHub platforms include our
online ticket platform located at www.stubhub.com, the StubHub mobile apps and Ticketbis. Our Classifieds platforms include a collection of brands
such as Mobile.de, Kijiji, Gumtree, Marktplaats, eBay Kleinanzeigen and others. 
When  we  refer  to  “we,”  “our,”  “us”  or  “eBay”  in  this  document,  we  mean  the  current  Delaware  corporation  (eBay  Inc.)  and  its  California
predecessor, as well as all of our consolidated subsidiaries, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires.
In 2015, we completed the distribution of 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal Holdings, Inc. (“PayPal”) to our stockholders (the
“Distribution”) and closed the sale of our former Enterprise segment (“Enterprise”). As a result, the financial results and related assets and liabilities
of  PayPal  and  Enterprise  were  retrospectively  reflected  as  discontinued  operations  in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  and  consolidated
balance sheet. See “Note 4 - Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
Use of estimates
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (“GAAP”)  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an
ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to provisions for transaction losses, legal contingencies, income taxes, revenue
recognition, stock-based compensation, goodwill and the recoverability of intangible assets. We base our estimates on historical experience and on
various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Principles of consolidation and basis of presentation
The accompanying financial statements are consolidated and include the financial statements of eBay Inc., our wholly and majority-owned
subsidiaries  and  variable  interest  entities  (“VIE”)  where  we  are  the  primary  beneficiary.  All  intercompany  balances  and  transactions  have  been
eliminated in consolidation. Minority interests are recorded as a noncontrolling interest. A qualitative approach is applied to assess the consolidation
requirement for VIEs. Investments in entities where we hold at least a 20% ownership interest and have the ability to exercise significant influence,
but not control, over the investee are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. For such investments, our share of the investees’ results
of operations is included in interest and other, net and our investment balance is included in long-term investments. Investments in entities where we
hold less than a 20% ownership interest are generally accounted for using the cost method of accounting, and our share of the investees’ results of
operations is included in our consolidated statement of income to the extent dividends are received.
We have evaluated all subsequent events through the date the consolidated financial statements were issued.
F-8

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Revenue recognition
We generate net transaction revenues primarily from final value fees and listing fees paid by sellers. Final value fee revenues are recognized
at the time that the transaction is successfully closed, while listing fee revenues are recognized ratably over the estimated period of the listing. An
auction transaction is considered successfully closed when at least one buyer has bid above the seller’s specified minimum price or reserve price,
whichever is higher, at the end of the transaction term.
Our marketing services revenues are derived principally from the sale of advertisements, revenue sharing arrangements, classifieds fees,
marketing service fees and lead referral fees. Our advertising revenues are derived principally from the sale of online advertisements. The duration
of our advertising contracts has ranged from one week to five years, but is generally one week to one year. Advertising revenues on contracts are
recognized as “impressions” (i.e., the number of times that an advertisement appears in pages viewed by users of our platforms) are delivered, or as
“clicks” (which are generated each time users on our platforms click through our advertisements to an advertiser’s designated website) are provided
to advertisers. For contracts with minimum monthly or quarterly advertising commitments where the fee and commitments are fixed throughout the
term,  we  recognize  revenue  ratably  over  the  term  of  the  agreement.  We  also  may  enter  into  arrangements  to  purchase  services  from  certain
customers and if the service is not considered an identifiable benefit that is separable from the customer’s purchase of our services or for which we
cannot reasonably estimate fair value, the fees paid to the customer are recorded as a reduction in revenue. Some of our advertising contracts
consist  of  multiple  elements  which  generally  include  a  blend  of  various  impressions  and  clicks  as  well  as  other  marketing  deliverables.  Where
neither  vendor-specific  objective  evidence  nor  third-party  evidence  of  selling  price  exists,  we  use  management’s  best  estimate  of  selling  price
(“BESP”) to allocate arrangement consideration on a relative basis to each element. BESP is generally based on the selling prices of the various
elements when they are sold to customers of a similar nature and geography on a stand-alone basis or estimated stand-alone pricing when the
element  has  not  previously  been  sold  on  a  stand-alone  basis.  These  estimates  are  generally  based  on  pricing  strategies,  market  factors  and
strategic  objectives.  Revenues  related  to  revenue  sharing  arrangements  are  recognized  based  on  revenue  reports  received  from  our  partners,
provided that collectability is reasonably assured. Revenues related to fees for listing items on our Classifieds platforms are recognized over the
estimated period of the classified listing. Lead referral fee revenue is generated from lead referral fees based on the number of times users click
through to a merchant’s website from our platforms. Lead referral fees are recognized in the period in which a user clicks through to the merchant’s
website.
Our other revenues are derived principally from contractual arrangements with third parties that provide services to our users. Revenues from
contractual arrangements with third parties are recognized as the contracted services are delivered to end users.
To drive traffic to our platforms, we provide incentives to our users in the form of coupons and buyer and seller rewards. These incentives are
generally treated as reductions in revenue.
Internal use software and platform development costs
Direct costs incurred to develop software for internal use and platform development costs are capitalized and amortized over an estimated
useful life of one to five years. During the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 , we capitalized costs, primarily related to labor and stock-
based compensation, of $137 million and $136 million , respectively. Amortization of previously capitalized amounts was $149 million , $110 million
and $115  million for 2016 , 2015 and 2014 ,  respectively.  Costs  related  to  the  design  or  maintenance  of  internal  use  software  and  platform
development are expensed as incurred.
Advertising expense
We expense the costs of producing advertisements at the time production occurs and expense the cost of communicating advertisements in
the period during which the advertising space or airtime is used, in each case as sales and marketing expense. Internet advertising expenses are
recognized based on the terms of the individual agreements, which are generally over the greater of the ratio of the number of impressions delivered
over  the  total  number  of  contracted  impressions,  on  a  pay-per-click  basis,  or  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  term  of  the  contract.  Advertising
expense totaled $1.2 billion , $1.0 billion and $1.0 billion for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 , respectively.
F-9

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Stock-based compensation
We  have  equity  incentive  plans  under  which  we  grant  equity  awards,  including  stock  options,  restricted  stock  units,  performance-based
restricted stock units, and performance share units, to our directors, officers and employees. We primarily issue restricted stock units. We determine
compensation expense associated with restricted  stock units based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. We determine
compensation expense associated with stock options based on the estimated grant date fair value method using the Black-Scholes valuation model.
We generally recognize compensation expense using a straight-line amortization method over the respective vesting period for awards that are
ultimately expected to vest. Accordingly, stock-based compensation expense for 2016 , 2015 and 2014 has been reduced for estimated forfeitures.
When estimating forfeitures, we consider voluntary termination behaviors as well as trends of actual option forfeitures. We recognize a benefit from
stock-based compensation in equity to the extent that an incremental tax benefit is realized by following the ordering provisions of the tax law. In
addition,  we  account  for  the  indirect  effects  of  stock-based  compensation  on  the  research  tax  credit  and  the  foreign  tax  credit  through  our
consolidated statement of income.
Provision for transaction losses
Provision for transaction losses consists primarily of losses resulting from our customer protection programs, fraud and bad debt expense
associated  with  our  accounts  receivable  balance.  Provisions  for  these  items  represent  our  estimate  of  actual  losses  based  on  our  historical
experience and many other factors including changes to our customer protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes as well as economic
conditions.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach, which requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the
current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements
or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of enacted tax laws; the effects of future
changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated. If necessary, the measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by the amount of any tax benefits
that are not expected to be realized based on available evidence.
We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We
recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less when purchased and are
primarily comprised of bank deposits, certificates of deposit and commercial paper.
Allowance for doubtful accounts and authorized credits
We record our allowance for doubtful accounts based upon our assessment of various factors. We consider historical experience, the age of
the accounts receivable balances, current economic conditions and other factors that may affect our customers’ ability to pay. The allowance for
doubtful accounts and authorized credits was $81 million and $84 million as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Investments
Short-term  investments,  which  may  include  marketable  equity  securities,  time  deposits,  certificates  of  deposit,  government  bonds  and
corporate debt securities with original maturities of greater than three months but less than one year when purchased, are classified as available-for-
sale and are reported at fair value using the specific identification method. Unrealized gains and losses are excluded from earnings and reported as
a component of other comprehensive income (loss), net of related estimated income tax provisions or benefits.
Long-term investments may include marketable government bonds and corporate debt securities, time deposits, certificates of deposit and
cost and equity method investments. Debt securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value using the specific identification
method. Unrealized gains and losses on our available-
F-10

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
for-sale  investments  are  excluded  from  earnings  and  reported  as  a  component  of  other  comprehensive  income  (loss),  net  of  related  estimated
income tax provisions or benefits.
Our equity method investments are primarily investments in privately-held companies. Our consolidated results of operations include, as a
component  of interest  and other,  net, our share of the net income or loss of the equity method  investments.  Our share of investees’  results  of
operations is not significant for any period presented. Our cost method investments consist of investments in privately held companies and are
recorded at cost. Amounts received from our cost method investees were not material to any period presented.
We assess whether an other-than-temporary impairment loss on our investments has occurred due to declines in fair value or other market
conditions. With respect to our debt securities, this assessment takes into account the severity and duration of the decline in value, our intent to sell
the security, whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, and whether we
expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security (that is, whether a credit loss exists).
Property and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method
over the estimated useful lives of the assets, generally, one to three years for computer equipment and software, up to thirty  years for buildings and
building improvements, the shorter of five years or the term of the lease for leasehold improvements  and three years for furniture, fixtures and
vehicles.
 
Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a minimum on an annual basis. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. A qualitative
assessment can be performed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If
the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of
the reporting units are estimated using income and market approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit
exceeds its fair value. The discounted cash flow method, a form of the income approach, uses expected future operating results and a market
participant discount rate. The market approach uses comparable company prices and other relevant information generated by market transactions
(either publicly traded entities or merger and acquisitions) to develop pricing metrics to be applied to historical and expected future operating results
of  our  reporting  units.  Failure  to  achieve  these  expected  results,  changes  in  the  discount  rate  or  market  pricing  metrics  may  cause  a  future
impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill as of August 31, 2016 and 2015. Additionally, we
evaluated impairment based on the significant activities regarding the Distribution and Enterprise divestiture during 2015. See “Note 4 - Discontinued
Operations” for further detail. As a result of this test, we determined that no further adjustment to the carrying value of goodwill for any reporting
units was required. 
Intangible assets consist of purchased customer lists and user base, marketing related, developed technologies and other intangible assets,
including patents and contractual agreements. Intangible assets are amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method
and estimated useful lives ranging from one to five years. No significant residual value is estimated for intangible assets.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We evaluate long-lived assets (including intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable. An asset is considered impaired if its carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted
future net cash flow the asset is expected to generate. In 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , no impairment was noted.
F-11

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Foreign currency
 
Most  of our foreign  subsidiaries  use the local currency  of  their  respective  countries  as their  functional  currency.  Assets  and liabilities  are
translated  into U.S. dollars  using exchange  rates  prevailing at  the balance sheet  date,  while revenues  and expenses  are translated  at  average
exchange rates during the year. Gains and losses resulting from the translation of our consolidated balance sheet are recorded as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income.
Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are recognized as interest and other, net.
Derivative instruments
We use derivative financial instruments, primarily forwards, options and swaps, to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures.
We may also use other derivative instruments not designated as hedges, such as forwards to hedge foreign currency balance sheet exposures. We
do  not  use  derivative  financial  instruments  for  trading  purposes.  See  “Note  9  -  Derivative  Instruments”  for  a  full  description  of  our  derivative
instrument activities and related accounting policies.
Concentration of credit risk
Our cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable and derivative instruments are potentially subject to concentration of credit risk. Cash and
cash equivalents are placed with financial institutions that management believes are of high credit quality. Our accounts receivable are derived from
revenue earned from customers. In each of the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 , no customer accounted for more than 10% of net
revenues.  Our  derivative  instruments  expose  us  to  credit  risk  to  the  extent  that  our  counterparties  may  be  unable  to  meet  the  terms  of  the
agreements.
Recent accounting pronouncements
In 2015, the FASB issued new guidance related to presentation of debt issuance costs. The new standard requires that debt issuance costs
related to a recognized debt liability be presented in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of that debt liability. The new
standard is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2015. We adopted this standard
retrospectively in the first quarter of 2016. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2015 was retrospectively adjusted, which resulted in reductions to
other assets of $30 million and long-term debt of $30 million .
In  2014,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  new  accounting  guidance  related  to  revenue  recognition.  This  new
standard will replace all current GAAP guidance on this topic and eliminate all industry-specific guidance. The new revenue recognition guidance
provides a unified model to determine when and how revenue is recognized. The core principle is that a company should recognize revenue to
depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration for which the entity expects to be entitled
in  exchange  for  those  goods  or  services.  In  2016,  the  FASB  issued  several  amendments  to  the  standard,  including  principal  versus  agent
considerations  when  another  party  is  involved  in  providing  goods  or  services  to  a  customer  and  the  application  of  identifying  performance
obligations. While we continue to assess all potential impacts of the standard, we currently believe there will be an impact related to timing and
measurement of certain fees paid by sellers based on identification of performance obligations and whether certain services would be considered a
material right. In addition, we are currently assessing whether the principal versus agent considerations would change how we present revenue,
specifically in our advertising and shipping arrangements. Further, we believe incentives such as coupons and rewards provided to our users could
potentially be recognized as an expense which we generally record as a reduction of revenue under current guidance. The standard is required to
be  applied  either  retrospectively  to  each  prior  reporting  period  presented  or  retrospectively  with  the  cumulative  effect  of  initially  applying  it
recognized at the date of initial application. We have not yet selected the transition method. The Company will adopt the new revenue standards in
its first quarter of 2018.
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance related to accounting for equity investments, financial liabilities under the fair value option, and the
presentation  and  disclosure  requirements  for  financial  instruments.  In  addition,  the  FASB  clarified  guidance  related  to  the  valuation  allowance
assessment  when  recognizing  deferred  tax  assets  resulting  from  unrealized  losses  on  available-for-sale  debt  securities.  The  new  standard  is
effective for fiscal years, and interim
F-12

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2017. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting guidance on our
consolidated financial statements.
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance related to accounting for leases. The new guidance requires the recognition of lease assets and
lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous guidance. The new standard is effective for fiscal years,
and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2018. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting
guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance to revise aspects of stock-based compensation guidance which include income tax consequences,
classification of awards as equity or liabilities, and classification on the statement of cash flows. The Company will adopt the new standard in the first
quarter of 2017. Notwithstanding the effects of stock market volatility, we do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on
our consolidated financial statements.
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance that requires credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at
the  net  amount  expected  to  be  collected,  not  based  on  incurred  losses.  Further,  credit  losses  on  available-for-sale  debt  securities  should  be
recorded through an allowance for credit losses limited to the amount by which fair value is below amortized cost. The new standard is effective for
fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption for fiscal years, and interim periods
within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2018 is permitted. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting guidance
on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance which clarifies the classification of certain cash receipts and cash payments in the statement of cash
flows, including debt prepayment or extinguishment costs, settlement of contingent consideration arising from a business combination, insurance
settlement  proceeds,  and distributions  from  certain  equity method  investees.  The new standard  is effective  for fiscal  years,  and interim  periods
within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2017. While we continue to assess the potential impact of this standard, we do not expect
the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2016, the FASB issued new guidance which requires the recognition of the income tax consequences of an intra-entity transfer of an asset,
other than inventory, when the transfer occurs. This removes the exception to postpone recognition until the asset has been sold to an outside party.
This standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, including interim reporting periods within those annual
reporting  periods,  with  early  adoption  is  permitted.  It  is  required  to  be  applied  on  a  modified  retrospective  basis  through  a  cumulative-effect
adjustment to the balance sheet as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting
guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
F-13

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 2 – Net Income (loss) Per Share
Basic net income (loss)  per share is computed  by dividing net income (loss) for the period by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) for the period by the weighted
average number of shares of common stock and potentially dilutive common stock outstanding during the period. The dilutive effect of outstanding
options and equity incentive awards is reflected in diluted net income (loss) per share by application of the treasury stock method. The calculation of
diluted net income (loss) per share excludes all anti-dilutive common shares.
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted net income (loss) per share (in millions, except per share amounts):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
Numerator:
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
7,285
$
1,947
$
(865)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(19)
(222)
911
Net income
$
7,266
$
1,725
$
46
Denominator:
Weighted average shares of common stock - basic
1,133
1,208
1,251
Dilutive effect of equity incentive awards
11
12
—
Weighted average shares of common stock - diluted
1,144
1,220
1,251
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
6.43
$
1.61
$
(0.69)
Discontinued operations
(0.02)
(0.18)
0.73
Net income per share - basic
$
6.41
$
1.43
$
0.04
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
6.37
$
1.60
$
(0.69)
Discontinued operations
(0.02)
(0.18)
0.73
Net income per share - diluted
$
6.35
$
1.42
$
0.04
Common stock equivalents excluded from income per diluted share because their effect
would have been anti-dilutive
8
2
54
F-14

Note 3 – Business Combinations and Divestitures
Business Combinations
During 2016, we completed  six acquisitions — Cargigi Inc., Expertmaker, SalesPredict, Ticketbis, Ticket Utils and Corrigon Ltd. — for an
aggregate purchase consideration of approximately  $212 million , consisting of cash. We believe these acquisitions will help us build a better user
experience, improve discoverability and grow our international presence. Acquisition activity in 2015 was immaterial.
The  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  operating  results  of  acquired  businesses  from  the  date  of  each  acquisition.  Pro  forma
results of operations for these acquisitions have not been presented because the effect of the acquisitions were not material to our financial results.
The aggregate purchase consideration of our 2016 acquisitions was allocated as follows:
Ticketbis
Other
Total
Purchased intangible assets
$
48
$
28
$
76
Goodwill
128
57
185
Net liabilities
(35)
(14)
(49)
Total
$
141
$
71
$
212
These allocations have been prepared on a preliminary basis and changes to these allocations may occur as additional information becomes
available. We generally do not expect goodwill to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Divestitures
Divestiture activity in 2016 was immaterial. During 2015, we completed the Distribution of PayPal and the sale of Enterprise. See “Note 4 -
Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
Note 4 — Discontinued Operations
On  June  26,  2015,  our  Board  approved  the  separation  of  PayPal  through  the  Distribution.  To  consummate  the  Distribution,  our  Board
declared a pro rata dividend of PayPal Holdings, Inc. common stock to eBay’s stockholders of record as of the close of business on July 8, 2015
(the “Record Date”). Each eBay stockholder received one ( 1 ) share of PayPal Holdings, Inc. common stock for every share of eBay common stock
held at the close of business on the Record Date. The Distribution occurred on July 17, 2015. Immediately following the Distribution, PayPal became
an independent, publicly traded company listed on The NASDAQ Stock Market under the ticker “PYPL.” eBay continues to trade on The NASDAQ
Stock Market under the ticker “EBAY.” We classified the financial results of PayPal as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of
income. Additionally, the related assets and liabilities associated with the discontinued operations were classified as discontinued operations in our
consolidated balance sheet. In connection with the Distribution, we reviewed our capital allocation strategy to ensure that each of PayPal and eBay
would be well capitalized at Distribution. As part of this strategy, we contributed approximately $3.8 billion of cash to PayPal.
In 2015, our Board approved a plan to sell Enterprise. Based on the expected sales proceeds, we recorded a goodwill impairment of $786
million in 2015. On July 16, 2015, we signed a definitive agreement to sell Enterprise for $925 million and on November 2, 2015, the sale closed. We
recorded a loss of $35 million upon closing included within income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes. We have classified the
results  of  Enterprise  as  discontinued  operations  in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  were
classified as discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet.
F-15

The  financial  results  of  PayPal  and  Enterprise  are  presented  as  income  (loss)  from  discontinued  operations,  net  of  income  taxes  in  our
consolidated statement of income. The following table presents financial results of PayPal and Enterprise (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015 (1)
2014
PayPal income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
(10)
$
516
$
1,024
Enterprise loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(9)
(738)
(113)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
(19)
$
(222)
$
911
(1)
Includes PayPal financial results from January 1, 2015 to July 17, 2015 and Enterprise financial results from January 1, 2015 to November 2, 2015.
The following table presents cash flows of PayPal and Enterprise (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015 (1)
2014
PayPal net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
$
(1)
$
1,252
$
2,280
Enterprise net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
—
(96)
169
Net cash provided by discontinued operating activities
$
(1)
$
1,156
$
2,449
PayPal net cash used in discontinued investing activities
$
—
$
(3,725)
$
(1,218)
Enterprise net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
—
787
(130)
Net cash used in discontinued investing activities
$
—
$
(2,938)
$
(1,348)
PayPal net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities (2)
$
—
$
(1,594)
$
40
Enterprise net cash used in discontinued financing activities
—
—
(15)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
$
—
$
(1,594)
$
25
(1)
Includes PayPal financial results from January 1, 2015 to July 17, 2015 and Enterprise financial results from January 1, 2015 to November 2, 2015.
(2)
Includes $1.6 billion of PayPal cash and cash equivalents as of July 17, 2015.
F-16

PayPal
The following table presents financial results of PayPal (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015 (1)
2014
Net revenues
$
—
$
4,793
$
7,895
Cost of net revenues
—
1,918
3,140
Gross profit
—
2,875
4,755
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
—
534
1,027
Product development
—
527
879
General and administrative
23
741
892
Provision for transaction and loan losses
—
418
688
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
—
30
53
Total operating expenses
23
2,250
3,539
Income (loss) from operations of discontinued operations
(23)
625
1,216
Interest and other, net
—
1
(7)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations before income taxes
(23)
626
1,209
Income tax benefit (provision)
13
(110)
(185)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
(10)
$
516
$
1,024
(1)
Includes PayPal financial results from January 1, 2015 to July 17, 2015.
Enterprise
The following table presents financial results of Enterprise (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015 (1)
2014
Net revenues
$
—
$
904
$
1,217
Cost of net revenues
—
654
929
Gross profit
—
250
288
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
—
95
118
Product development
—
91
138
General and administrative
8
118
62
Provision for transaction losses
—
12
8
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
—
70
140
Goodwill impairment
—
786
—
Total operating expenses
8
1,172
466
Loss from operations of discontinued operations
(8)
(922)
(178)
Interest and other, net
—
1
(15)
Pretax loss on disposal of the discontinued operation
—
(35)
—
Loss from discontinued operations before income taxes
(8)
(956)
(193)
Income tax benefit (provision)
(1)
218
80
Loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
(9)
$
(738)
$
(113)
(1)
Includes Enterprise financial results from January 1, 2015 to November 2, 2015.
F-17

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 5 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
The following table presents goodwill activity for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 (in millions):
 
December 31, 
2014
Goodwill
Acquired
Adjustments
December 31, 
2015
Goodwill
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31, 
2016
Goodwill
$
4,671
23
(243)
$
4,451
185
(135)
 $
4,501
The adjustments to goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 were primarily due to foreign currency translation. There
were no impairments to goodwill in 2016 and 2015.
Intangible Assets
The components of identifiable intangible assets are as follows (in millions, except years): 
 
December 31, 2016
December 31, 2015
 
Gross
Carrying
Amount   
Accumulated
Amortization  
Net Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average
Useful Life
(Years)
Gross
Carrying
Amount  
Accumulated
Amortization  
Net Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average
Useful Life
(Years)
Intangible assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Customer lists and
user base
$
434
$
(393)
$
41
5
$
419
$
(399)
$
20
5
Marketing-related
568
(555)
13
5
594
(570)
24
5
Developed
technologies
263
(229)
34
3
238
(215)
23
4
All other
154
(140)
14
4
157
(134)
23
4
Total
$
1,419
$
(1,317)
$
102
 
$
1,408
$
(1,318)
$
90
 
  
Amortization expense for intangible assets was $56 million , $66 million and $120 million for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and
2014 , respectively.
Expected future intangible asset amortization as of December 31, 2016 is as follows (in millions):
Fiscal year:
2017
$
61
2018
27
2019
10
2020
4
Thereafter
—
Total
$
102
F-18

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 6 – Segments
We  have one operating  and  reportable  segment.  Our  chief  operating  decision  maker  reviews  financial  information  presented  on  a
consolidated  basis  for  purposes  of  allocating  resources  and  evaluating  financial  performance.  In  2015,  we  classified  the  results  of  Enterprise,
formerly  our  Enterprise  segment,  and  the  results  of  PayPal,  formerly  our  Payments  segment,  as  discontinued  operations  in  our  consolidated
statement of income. See “Note 4 - Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
The following table sets forth the breakdown of net revenues by type (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
Net revenues by type:
Net transaction revenues:
Marketplace
$
6,107
$
6,103
$
6,351
StubHub
937
725
629
Total net transaction revenues
7,044
6,828
6,980
Marketing services and other revenues:
Marketplace
1,137
1,078
1,103
Classifieds
791
703
716
StubHub, Corporate and other
7
(17)
(9)
Total marketing services and other revenues
1,935
1,764
1,810
Total net revenues
$
8,979
$
8,592
$
8,790
The following tables summarize the allocation of net revenues and long-lived tangible assets based on geography (in millions):  
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
  
2015
  
2014
Net revenues by geography:
U.S.
$
3,866
  $
3,624
  $
3,525
United Kingdom
1,315
  
1,403
  
1,464
Germany
1,340
  
1,310
  
1,511
Rest of world
2,458
  
2,255
  
2,290
Total net revenues
$
8,979
$
8,592
$
8,790
 
As of December 31,
 
2016
  
2015
Long-lived tangible assets by geography:
U.S.
$
1,643
  $
1,668
International
154
  
116
Total long-lived tangible assets
$
1,797
  $
1,784
Net revenues, inclusive of the effects of foreign exchange during each period, are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily
based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays advertising, other service provider, or customer, as the case may be, is located.
Long-lived assets attributed to the U.S. and international geographies are based upon the country in which the asset is located or owned.
F-19

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 7 – Investments
The following tables summarize the unrealized gains and losses and estimated fair value of our investments classified as available-for-sale as
of December 31, 2016 and 2015 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2016
 
Gross
Amortized
Cost
  
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
  
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
 
Estimated
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
19
  $
—
  $
—
 $
19
Corporate debt securities
5,203
  
44
  
(1)  
5,246
Government and agency securities
63
  
5
  
—
 
68
$
5,285
  $
49
  $
(1)  $
5,333
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
3,848
  
15
  
(12)  
3,851
$
3,848
  $
15
  $
(12)  $
3,851
 
 
December 31, 2015
 
Gross
Amortized
Cost
  
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
  
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
 
Estimated
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
28
  $
—
  $
—
 $
28
Corporate debt securities
3,302
  
1
  
(16)  
3,287
Government and agency securities
55
  
—
  
—
 
55
Equity instruments
9
920
—
929
$
3,394
$
921
$
(16)
$
4,299
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
3,327
  
7
  
(67)  
3,267
$
3,327
  $
7
  $
(67)  $
3,267
In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2016,  we sold  our  equity  holdings  of  MercadoLibre,  Inc.,  which  was  included  in  our  short-term  marketable  equity
instruments for net proceeds of $1.3 billion . The pre-tax gain of $1.3 billion was reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income into
interest and other, net on our consolidated statement of income.
Investment securities in a continuous loss position for greater than 12 months had an estimated fair value $123 million and an immaterial
amount  of  unrealized  losses  as  of December  31,  2016 and  an  estimated  fair  value  of $769  million and  unrealized  losses  of $40  million as  of
December 31, 2015 . As of December 31, 2016 , these securities had a weighted average remaining duration of approximately 12 months. Refer to
“Note 17 - Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income” for amounts reclassified to earnings from unrealized gains and losses.
 
Our fixed-income investments consist of predominantly investment grade corporate debt securities and government and agency securities
that have a maximum maturity of five years. The corporate debt and government and agency securities that we invest in are generally deemed to be
low risk based on their credit ratings from the major rating agencies. The longer the duration of these securities, the more susceptible they are to
changes in market interest rates and bond yields. As interest rates increase, those securities purchased at a lower yield show a mark-to-market
unrealized loss. The unrealized losses are due primarily to changes in credit spreads and interest rates. We regularly review investment securities
for other-than-temporary impairment using both qualitative and quantitative criteria. We presently do not intend to sell any of the securities in an
unrealized loss position and expect to realize the full value of all these investments upon maturity or sale. Restricted cash is held primarily in interest
bearing accounts for letters of credit primarily related to our global sabbatical program and various lease arrangements.
F-20

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The estimated fair values of our short-term and long-term investments classified as available-for-sale by date of contractual maturity as of
December 31, 2016 are as follows (in millions):  
 
December 31, 
2016
One year or less (including restricted cash of $19)
$
5,333
One year through two years
1,533
Two years through three years
1,776
Three years through four years
180
Four years through five years
362
Thereafter
—
Total
$
9,184
Equity and cost method investments
We have made multiple equity and cost method investments which are reported in long-term investments on our consolidated balance sheet.
As of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , our equity and cost method investments totaled $118 million and $124 million , respectively. In 2016, we sold a
portion of our equity interest in Jasper Infotech Private Limited (“Snapdeal”). In 2015, we sold our equity interest in craigslist, Inc., a portion of our
equity interest in Snapdeal and our entire interest in Baixing Holdings Limited. The resulting gains are recorded in interest and other, net on our
consolidated statement of income.
Note 8 – Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities
The following tables present our financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2016 and 2015
(in millions):
December 31, 2016
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1)  
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,816
$
1,816
$
—
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
19
19
—
Corporate debt securities
5,246
—
5,246
Government and agency securities
68
—
68
Total short-term investments
5,333
19
5,314
Derivatives
154
—
154
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
3,851
—
3,851
Total long-term investments
3,851
—
3,851
Total financial assets
$
11,154
$
1,835
$
9,319
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
48
$
—
$
48
F-21

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
December 31, 2015
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1)  
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,832
$
1,664
$
168
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
28
28
—
Corporate debt securities
3,287
—
3,287
Government and agency securities
55
—
55
Equity instruments
929
929
—
Total short-term investments
4,299
957
3,342
Derivatives
97
—
97
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
3,267
—
3,267
Total long-term investments
3,267
—
3,267
Total financial assets
$
9,495
$
2,621
$
6,874
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
25
$
—
$
25
 
Our  financial  assets  and  liabilities  are  valued  using  market  prices  on  both  active  markets  (“Level  1”)  and  less  active  markets  (“Level  2”).
Level 1 instrument valuations are obtained from real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets involving identical assets. Level 2
instrument valuations are obtained from readily available pricing sources for comparable instruments, identical instruments in less active markets, or
models  using  market  observable  inputs.  The  majority  of  our  derivative  instruments  are  valued  using  pricing  models  that  take  into  account  the
contract terms as well as multiple inputs where applicable, such as equity prices, interest rate yield curves, option volatility and currency rates. We
did not have any transfers of financial instruments between valuation levels during 2016 or 2015 .
Cash  and  cash  equivalents  are  short-term,  highly  liquid  investments  with  original  or  remaining  maturities  of  three  months  or  less  when
purchased and are primarily comprised of bank deposits, certificates of deposit and commercial paper.
 
In addition, we had cost and equity method investments of approximately $118 million and $124 million included in long-term investments on
our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Our derivative instruments vary in duration depending on contract type. Our foreign exchange derivative contracts are primarily short-term in
nature, generally one month to one year in duration. Certain foreign currency contracts designated as cash flow hedges may have a duration of up
to 18 months. The duration of our interest rate derivative contracts match the duration of the fixed rate notes due 2019, 2021 and 2024.
Other  financial  instruments,  including  accounts  receivable  and  accounts  payable  are  carried  at  cost,  which  approximates  their  fair  value
because of the short-term nature of these instruments.
F-22

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 9 – Derivative Instruments
Summary of Derivative Instruments
Our primary objective in holding derivatives is to reduce the volatility of earnings and cash flows associated with changes in foreign currency
exchange rates and interest rates. Our derivatives expose us to credit risk to the extent that the counterparties may be unable to meet the terms of
the arrangement. We seek to mitigate such risk by limiting our counterparties to, and by spreading the risk across, major financial institutions. In
addition, the potential risk of loss with any one counterparty resulting from this type of credit risk is monitored on an ongoing basis. To further limit
credit risk, we also enter into collateral security arrangements related to certain interest rate derivative instruments whereby collateral is posted
between counterparties if the fair value of the derivative instrument exceeds certain thresholds. Additional collateral would be required in the event
of a significant credit downgrade by either party.
Foreign Exchange Contracts
We  transact  business  in  various  foreign  currencies  and  have  significant  international  revenues  as  well  as  costs  denominated  in  foreign
currencies, which subjects us to foreign currency risk. We use foreign currency exchange contracts, primarily short-term in nature, generally one
month to one year in duration but with maturities up to 18 months, to reduce the volatility of cash flows primarily related to forecasted revenues,
expenses, assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. The objective of the foreign exchange contracts is to better ensure that ultimately
the  U.S.  dollar-equivalent  cash  flows  are  not  adversely  affected  by  changes  in  the  applicable  U.S.  dollar/foreign  currency  exchange  rate.  For
derivative  instruments  that  are  designated  as  cash  flow  hedges,  the  effective  portion  of  the  derivative’s  gain  or  loss  is  initially  reported  as  a
component  of  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (loss)  and  subsequently  reclassified  into  earnings  in  the  same  period  the  forecasted
transaction  affects  earnings.  The  ineffective  portion  of  the  unrealized  gains  and  losses  on  these  contracts,  if  any,  is  recorded  immediately  in
earnings. We evaluate the effectiveness of our foreign exchange contracts on a quarterly basis. We do not use any foreign exchange contracts for
trading purposes. Derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges must be de-designated as hedges when it is probable the forecasted
hedged transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a subsequent two-month time period. Unrealized gains and losses in
AOCI associated with such derivative instruments are immediately reclassified into earnings .
As of December 31, 2016 , we have estimated that approximately $51 million of net derivative gains related to our cash flow hedges included
in accumulated other comprehensive income will be reclassified into earnings within the next 12 months. For our derivative instruments designated
as cash flow hedges, the amounts recognized in earnings related to the ineffective portion were not material in each of the periods presented, and
we did not exclude any component of the changes in fair value of the derivative instruments from the assessment of hedge effectiveness.
Interest Rate Contracts
In  connection  with  the  July  2014  issuance  of  our  fixed  rate  notes  due  2019,  2021  and  2024,  we  entered  into  certain  interest  rate  swap
agreements that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with $2.4 billion of these notes so that the interest
payable on these senior notes effectively became variable based on London InterBank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a spread. We have designated
these swap agreements as qualifying hedging instruments and are accounting for them as fair value hedges. These transactions are characterized
as  fair  value  hedges  for  financial  accounting  purposes  because  they  protect  us  against  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  certain  of  our  fixed  rate
borrowings due to benchmark interest rate movements. Changes in the fair values of these interest rate swap agreements are recognized in other
assets or other liabilities with a corresponding increase or decrease in long-term debt. Each quarter we pay interest based on LIBOR plus a spread
to the counterparty and on a semi-annual basis receive interest from the counterparty per the fixed rate of these senior notes. The net amount is
recognized as interest expense in interest and other, net. The ineffective portion of the unrealized gains and losses on these contracts, if any, is
recorded  immediately  in  earnings.  We  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  our  contracts  on  a  quarterly  basis.  We  do  not  use  any  interest  rate  swap
agreements for trading purposes.
For our derivative instruments designated as fair value hedges, the amounts recognized in earnings related to the ineffective portion were not
material in each of the periods presented, and we did not exclude any component of the changes in fair value of the derivative instruments from the
assessment of hedge effectiveness.
F-23

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Fair Value of Derivative Contracts
The fair values of our outstanding derivative instruments as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 were as follows (in millions):
 
Balance Sheet Location
December 31, 
2016
December 31, 
2015
Derivative Assets:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Assets
$
67
$
42
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other Current Assets
64
14
Interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges
Other Assets
23
41
Total derivative assets
$
154
$
97
Derivative Liabilities:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Liabilities
$
3
$
1
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other Current Liabilities
45
24
Total derivative liabilities
$
48
$
25
Total fair value of derivative instruments
$
106
$
72
Under the master netting agreements with the respective counterparties to our derivative contracts, subject to applicable requirements, we are
allowed to net settle transactions of the same type with a single net amount payable by one party to the other. However, we have elected to present
the derivative assets and derivative liabilities on a gross basis on our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2016 , the potential effect of
rights of set-off associated with the foreign exchange contracts would be an offset to both assets and liabilities by $48 million , resulting in net
derivative assets  and net derivative liabilities of $83 million and $1 million ,  respectively.  We  are not  required  to pledge,  nor  are we  entitled  to
receive, collateral related to our foreign exchange derivative transactions. As of December 31, 2016 , we had neither pledged nor received collateral
related to our interest rate derivative transactions.
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables present the activity of derivative contracts that qualify for hedge accounting as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , and the
impact of these derivative contracts on accumulated other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2015
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive 
Income
(Effective Portion)  
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
to Earnings
(Effective Portion) (1)
December 31, 2016
Foreign exchange contracts
designated as cash flow hedges
$
36
126
108
$
54
 
December 31, 2014
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive 
Income
(Effective Portion)  
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
to Earnings
(Effective Portion) (1)
December 31, 2015
Foreign exchange contracts
designated as cash flow hedges
$
41
66
71
$
36
(1)
In 2016, we reclassified $16 million in gains into earnings as a result of the discontinuance of certain cash flow hedges because it was probable the forecasted transaction
would not occur by the end of the originally specified time period. There were no reclassifications as a result of the discontinuance of cash flow hedges in 2015.
F-24

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Consolidated Statement of Income
The  following  table  provides  the  location  in  our  financial  statements  of  the  recognized  gains  or  losses  related  to  our  foreign  exchange
derivative instruments (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in cost of net
revenues and operating expenses
$
7
$
71
$
—
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in interest and other,
net
101
—
—
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments recognized in interest
and other, net
11
(1)
10
Total gain (loss) recognized from foreign exchange derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
119
$
70
$
10
The following table provides the location in our financial statements of the recognized gains or losses related to our interest rate derivative
instruments (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
Gain (loss) from interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges recognized in interest
and other, net
$
(18)
$
19
$
22
Gain (loss) from hedged items attributable to hedged risk recognized in interest and other, net
18
(19)
(22)
Total gain (loss) recognized from interest rate derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
—
$
—
$
—
Notional Amounts of Derivative Contracts
Derivative transactions are measured in terms of the notional amount, but this amount is not recorded on the balance sheet and is not, when
viewed in isolation, a meaningful measure of the risk profile of the instruments. The notional amount is generally not exchanged, but is used only as
the  basis  on  which  the  value  of  foreign  exchange  payments  under  these  contracts  are  determined.  The  following  table  provides  the  notional
amounts of our outstanding derivatives as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 (in millions):
December 31,
2016
2015
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
$
1,200
$
1,315
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
2,993
1,317
Interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges
2,400
2,400
Total
$
6,593
$
5,032
F-25

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 10 – Balance Sheet Components
Other Current Assets
Customer accounts and funds receivable was $590 million and $523 million as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Property and Equipment, Net
 
December 31,
2016
 
2015
(In millions)
Computer equipment and software
$
4,214
 $
3,894
Land and buildings, including building improvements
619
 
591
Leasehold improvements
334
 
305
Furniture and fixtures
157
 
157
Construction in progress and other
160
 
131
Property and equipment, gross
5,484
 
5,078
Accumulated depreciation
(3,968)  
(3,524)
Property and equipment, net
$
1,516
 $
1,554
Total depreciation expense on our property and equipment for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014 totaled $605 million ,
$614 million and $559 million , respectively.
Accrued Expenses and Other Current Liabilities
Total compensation and related benefits included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities was $430 million and $448 million as of
December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Total advertising accruals included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities was $184 million and $135 million as of December 31,
2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Customer accounts and funds payable was $524 million and $472 million as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
F-26

Note 11 – Debt
The following table summarizes the carrying value of our outstanding debt (in millions, except percentages):
Coupon
As of
Effective
As of
Effective
 Rate
December 31, 2016
 Interest Rate
December 31, 2015
 Interest Rate
Long-Term Debt
Floating Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2017
LIBOR plus 0.20%
$
450
1.223%
$
450
0.586%
Senior notes due 2019
LIBOR plus 0.48%
400
1.460%
400
0.825%
Fixed Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2017
1.350%
1,000
1.456%
1,000
1.456%
Senior notes due 2018
2.500%
750
2.775%
—
—%
Senior notes due 2019
2.200%
1,150
2.346%
1,150
2.346%
Senior notes due 2020
3.250%
500
3.389%
500
3.389%
Senior notes due 2021
2.875%
750
2.993%
750
2.993%
Senior notes due 2022
3.800%
750
3.989%
—
—%
Senior notes due 2022
2.600%
1,000
2.678%
1,000
2.678%
Senior notes due 2024
3.450%
750
3.531%
750
3.531%
Senior notes due 2042
4.000%
750
4.114%
750
4.114%
Senior notes due 2056
6.000%
750
6.547%
—
—%
Total senior notes
9,000
6,750
Hedge accounting fair value adjustments
23
41
Unamortized discount and debt issuance
costs
(64)
(42)
Less: Current portion of long-term debt
(1,450)
Total long-term debt
7,509
6,749
Short-Term Debt
Current portion of long-term debt
1,450
—
Unamortized discount and debt issuance
costs
(1)
—
Other indebtedness
2
—
Total short-term debt
1,451
—
Total Debt
$
8,960
$
6,749
Senior Notes
In 2016, we issued senior unsecured notes, or senior notes, in an aggregate principal amount of  $2.25 billion . The issuance consisted of 
$750 million  aggregate principal amount of  2.500%  fixed rate notes due 2018,  $750 million  aggregate principal amount of  3.800%  fixed rate
notes due 2022 and  $750 million  aggregate principal amount of  6.000%  fixed rate notes due 2056.
Our floating rate notes are not redeemable prior to maturity. On and after March 1, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the 6.000% fixed rate
notes due 2056 at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to
be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. We may redeem some or all of the other fixed rate notes of each series at any time and from time to
time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price, plus accrued and unpaid interest. If a change of control triggering event
occurs with respect to the 2.500% fixed rate notes due 2018, the 3.800% fixed rate notes due 2022 or the 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056, we
must, subject to certain exceptions, offer to repurchase all of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount, plus
accrued and unpaid interest.
To help achieve our interest rate risk management objectives, in connection with the previous issuance of certain senior notes, we entered
into interest rate swap agreements that effectively converted $2.4 billion of our fixed rate
F-27

notes to floating rate debt based on LIBOR plus a spread. These swaps were designated as fair value hedges against changes in the fair value of
certain fixed rate senior notes resulting from changes in interest rates. The gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of interest rate
swaps substantially offset changes in the fair value of the hedged portion of the underlying debt that are attributable to changes in market interest
rates.
The effective interest rates for our senior notes include the interest payable, the amortization of debt issuance costs and the amortization of
any  original  issue  discount  on  these  senior  notes.  Interest  on  these  senior  notes  is  payable  either  quarterly  or  semiannually.  Interest  expense
associated  with  these  senior  notes,  including  amortization  of  debt  issuance  costs,  during  the  years  ended December  31,  2016 and 2015 was
approximately $254  million and $178  million ,  respectively.  As  of December  31,  2016 ,  the  estimated  fair  value  of  these  senior  notes  was
approximately $8.9 billion .
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default.
Other Indebtedness
Our other indebtedness is comprised of overdraft facilities. We have formal overdraft facilities in India bearing interest on drawn balances at
approximately a 9.1% rate per annum.
Commercial Paper
We have an up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes with maturities of up to 397
days  from  the  date  of  issue  in  an  aggregate  principal  amount  at  maturity  of  up  to $1.5  billion outstanding  at  any  time  outstanding.  As  of
December 31, 2016 , there were no commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In November 2015, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five -year revolving credit facility. We may
also, subject to the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase the commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to an aggregate amount
of $1 billion . Funds borrowed under the credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general
corporate purposes.
As of December 31, 2016 , no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and therefore maintain $1.5 billion of available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order
to repay commercial paper borrowings in the event we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due. As a result,
$500 million of borrowing capacity was available as of December 31, 2016 for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement.  
Loans under the credit agreement bear interest at either (i) the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a margin (based on our public
debt credit ratings) ranging from 0.875 percent to 1.5 percent or (ii) a formula based on the agent bank’s prime rate, the federal funds effective rate
plus 0.5 percent or LIBOR plus 1.0 percent, plus a margin (based on our public debt credit ratings) ranging from zero percent to 0.5 percent. The
credit agreement will terminate and all amounts owing thereunder will be due and payable on November 9, 2020, unless (a) the commitments are
terminated earlier, either at our request or, if an event of default occurs, by the lenders (or automatically in the case of certain bankruptcy-related
events of default), or (b) the maturity date is extended upon our request, subject to the agreement of the lenders. The credit agreement includes
customary  representations,  warranties,  affirmative  and  negative  covenants,  including  financial  covenants,  events  of  default  and  indemnification
provisions in favor of the banks. The negative covenants include restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and subsidiary indebtedness, in each
case, subject to certain exceptions. The financial covenants require us to meet a quarterly financial test with respect to a minimum consolidated
interest coverage ratio and a maximum consolidated leverage ratio. The events of default include the occurrence of a change of control (as defined
in the credit agreement) with respect to us.
We were in compliance with all covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2016 .
F-28

Future Maturities
Expected future principal maturities as of December 31, 2016 are as follows (in millions):
Fiscal Years:
2017
$
1,450
2018
750
2019
1,550
2020
500
2021
750
Thereafter
4,000
Total future maturities
$
9,000
Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies
Commitments
Lease Arrangements
We  have  lease  obligations  under  certain  non-cancelable  operating  leases.  Future  minimum  rental  payments  under  our  non-cancelable
operating leases as of December 31, 2016 are as follows (in millions):  
Leases
2017
$
64
2018
46
2019
42
2020
35
2021
23
Thereafter
21
Total minimum lease payments
$
231
Rent expense in the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014 totaled $84 million , $79 million and $85 million , respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2016 , we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or  income  under  the  arrangement.  As  of December  31,  2016 ,  we  had  a  total  of $1.6  billion in  cash  withdrawals  offsetting  our $1.6  billion in
Aggregate Cash Deposits held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
F-29

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Litigation and Other Legal Matters
 
Overview
We are involved in legal and regulatory proceedings on an ongoing basis. Many of these proceedings are in early stages and may seek an
indeterminate amount of damages. If we believe that a loss arising from such matters is probable and can be reasonably estimated, we accrue the
estimated liability in our financial statements. If only a range of estimated losses can be determined, we accrue an amount within the range that, in
our judgment, reflects the most likely outcome; if none of the estimates within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the
low  end  of  the  range.  For  those  proceedings  in  which  an  unfavorable  outcome  is  reasonably  possible  but  not  probable,  we  have  disclosed  an
estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses or we have concluded that an estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range arising
directly  from  the  proceeding  (i.e.,  monetary  damages  or  amounts  paid  in  judgment  or  settlement)  are  not  material.  If  we  cannot  estimate  the
probable or reasonably possible loss or range of losses arising from a proceeding, we have disclosed that fact. In assessing the materiality of a
proceeding, we evaluate, among other factors, the amount of monetary damages claimed, as well as the potential impact of non-monetary remedies
sought by plaintiffs (e.g., injunctive relief) that may require us to change our business practices in a manner that could have a material adverse
impact on our business. With respect to the matters disclosed in this Note 12, we are unable to estimate the possible loss or range of losses that
could potentially result from the application of such non-monetary remedies.
Amounts accrued for legal and regulatory proceedings for which we believe a loss is probable were not material for the twelve months ended
December 31, 2016 . Except as otherwise noted for the proceedings described in this Note 12, we have concluded, based on currently available
information,  that  reasonably  possible  losses  arising  directly  from  the  proceedings  (i.e.,  monetary  damages  or  amounts  paid  in  judgment  or
settlement) in excess of our recorded accruals are also not material. However, legal and regulatory proceedings are inherently unpredictable and
subject to significant uncertainties. If one or more matters were resolved against us in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s
expectations, the impact on our operating results or financial condition for that reporting period could be material.
Litigation
In March  2015,  StubHub  filed suit  against Ticketmaster  and the Golden  State  Warriors,  alleging antitrust  and various  state  law violations
arising out of the defendants’ restrictive ticketing practices, which include prohibiting the resale of Warriors tickets on StubHub or any other non-
Ticketmaster secondary exchange (StubHub, Inc. v. Golden State Warriors, LLC et al, N.D. Cal. No. 3:15-cv-01436). StubHub filed a First Amended
Complaint on June 30, 2015. The defendants filed a Motion to Dismiss the Amended Complaint which was granted in November 2015. StubHub will
no longer pursue appealing this decision.
  
Regulatory Proceedings
In May 2014, we publicly announced that criminals were able to penetrate our network and steal certain data, including user names, encrypted
user passwords and other non-financial user data. Upon making this announcement, we required all buyers and sellers on our platform to reset their
passwords in order to login to their account. In addition to making this public announcement, we proactively approached a number of regulatory and
governmental bodies, including those with the most direct supervisory authority over our data privacy and data security programs, to specifically
inform them of the incident and our actions to protect our customers in response. Certain of those regulatory agencies have requested us to provide
further, more detailed information regarding the incident, and we believe that we have fully cooperated in all of those requests. To date, we have not
been informed by any regulatory authority of an intention to bring any enforcement action arising from this incident; however, in the future we may
be subject to fines or other regulatory action.  In addition, in July 2014, a putative class action lawsuit was filed against us for alleged violations and
harm resulting from the incident. The lawsuit was dismissed with leave to amend.
General Matters
Other third parties have from time to time claimed, and others may claim in the future, that we have infringed their intellectual property rights.
We are subject to patent disputes, and expect that we will increasingly be subject to additional patent infringement claims involving various aspects
of our business as our products and services continue to expand in scope and complexity. Such claims may be brought directly or indirectly against
our companies and/or
F-30

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
against our customers (who may be entitled to contractual indemnification under their contracts with us), and we are subject to increased exposure
to such claims as a result of our acquisitions and divestitures and in cases where we are entering new lines of business. We have in the past been
forced to litigate such claims. We may also become more vulnerable to third-party claims as laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, the
Lanham Act and the Communications Decency Act are interpreted by the courts, and as we expand the scope of our business (both in terms of the
range of products and services that we offer and our geographical operations) and become subject to laws in jurisdictions where the underlying laws
with respect to the potential liability of online intermediaries like ourselves are either unclear or less favorable. We believe that additional lawsuits
alleging that we have violated patent, copyright or trademark laws will be filed against us. Intellectual property claims, whether meritorious or not, are
time consuming and costly to defend and resolve, could require expensive changes in our methods of doing business or could require us to enter
into costly royalty or licensing agreements on unfavorable terms.
From time to time, we are involved in other disputes or regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business, including suits by our
users (individually or as class actions) alleging, among other things, improper disclosure of our prices, rules or policies, that our practices, prices,
rules, policies or customer/user agreements violate applicable law or that we have acted unfairly and/or not acted in conformity with such prices,
rules, policies or agreements. Further, the number and significance of these disputes and inquiries are increasing as we have grown larger, our
businesses have expanded in scope (both in terms of the range of products and services that we offer and our geographical operations) and our
products  and  services  have  increased  in  complexity.  Any  claims  or  regulatory  actions  against  us,  whether  meritorious  or  not,  could  be  time
consuming, result in costly litigation, damage awards (including statutory damages for certain causes of action in certain jurisdictions), injunctive
relief or increased costs of doing business through adverse judgment or settlement, require us to change our business practices in expensive ways,
require significant amounts of management time, result in the diversion of significant operational resources or otherwise harm our business.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies going forward. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us
and PayPal, which may be significant.  In addition,  the indemnity rights  we have against PayPal under the agreements  may not be sufficient  to
protect us and our indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application-programming-interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, losses recorded
in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  in  connection  with  our  indemnification  provisions  have  not  been  significant,  either  individually  or
collectively. 
F-31

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 13 – Stockholders’ Equity
Preferred Stock
We are authorized, subject to limitations prescribed by Delaware law, to issue preferred stock in one or more series; to establish the number
of shares included within each series; to fix the rights, preferences and privileges of the shares of each wholly unissued series and any related
qualifications, limitations or restrictions; and to increase or decrease the number of shares of any series (but not below the number of shares of a
series then outstanding) without any further vote or action by our stockholders. As of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , there were 10 million shares of
$0.001  par value preferred stock authorized for issuance, and no shares issued or outstanding.
Common Stock
Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation authorizes us to issue 3.6 billion shares of common stock.
Stock Repurchase Program
In January 2015, our Board authorized a stock repurchase program that provided for the repurchase of up to  $2 billion  of our common stock.
In June 2015, our Board authorized an additional  $1 billion  stock repurchase program and in July 2016, our Board authorized an additional  $2.5
billion stock repurchase program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and,
subject to market conditions and other factors, to make opportunistic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding share count. Any
share  repurchases  under  our  stock  repurchase  programs  may  be  made  through  open  market  transactions,  block  trades,  privately  negotiated
transactions  (including  accelerated  share  repurchase  transactions)  or  other  means  at  times  and  in  such  amounts  as  management  deems
appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives. Our stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated
at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and
regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash.  
Stock repurchase activity under our stock repurchase programs during 2016 was as follows (in millions, except per share amounts):
Shares
Repurchased (1)
Average Price per
Share (2)
Value of Shares
Repurchased
Remaining Amount
Authorized
Balance as of January 1, 2016
$
1,836
Authorization of additional plan in July 2016
2,500
Repurchase of shares of common stock
114
$
26.28
3,000
(3,000)
Balance as of December 31, 2016
$
1,336
(1)
These repurchased shares of common stock were recorded as treasury stock and were accounted for under the cost method. No repurchased shares of common stock
have been retired.
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
F-32

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 14 – Employee Benefit Plans
Equity Incentive Plans
 
We  have  equity  incentive  plans  under  which  we  grant  equity  awards,  including  stock  options,  restricted  stock  units,  performance-based
restricted stock units, stock payment awards and performance share units, to our directors, officers and employees. As of December 31, 2016 , 755
million shares were authorized under our equity incentive plans and 93 million shares were available for future grant.
All stock options granted under these plans generally vest 12.5% six months from the date of grant (or 25% one year from the date of grant for
grants to new employees) with the remainder vesting at a rate of 2.08%  per month thereafter, and generally expire seven to ten  years from the
date of grant. The cost of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model on the date of grant.
Restricted stock units (“RSUs”) are granted to eligible employees under our equity incentive plans. In general, RSU awards vest in annual or
quarterly installments over a period of three to five years, are subject to the employees’ continuing service to us and do not have an expiration date.
The cost of RSUs is determined using the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
In 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , certain executives were eligible to receive performance based RSUs ("PBRSUs"). PBRSU awards are subject to
performance and time-based vesting requirements. The target number of shares subject to the PBRSU award are adjusted based on our business
performance  measured  against  the  performance  goals  approved  by  the  Compensation  Committee  at  the  beginning  of  the  performance  period.
Generally, if the performance criteria is satisfied, one-half of the award vests in March following the end of the performance period and the other half
of the award vests in March of the following year.
Deferred Stock Units
Prior  to  December  31, 2016, we  granted  deferred  stock  units  to  each non-employee  director  (other  than  Mr.  Omidyar)  at  the  time  of  our
annual meeting of stockholders and to new non-employee directors upon their election to the Board. Each deferred stock unit award granted to a
new non-employee director upon election to the Board vests 25% one year from the date of grant, and at a rate of 2.08%  per month thereafter. In
addition, directors were permitted to elect to receive, in lieu of annual retainer and committee chair fees and at the time these fees would otherwise
be payable, fully vested deferred stock units with an initial value equal to the amount based on the fair market value of common stock at the date of
grant. Following termination of a non-employee director’s service on the Board of Directors, deferred stock units granted prior to August 1, 2013 are
payable  in  stock  or  cash  (at  our  election),  while  deferred  stock  units  granted  on  or  after  August  1,  2013  are  payable  solely  in  stock.  As  of
December 31, 2016 , there were approximately 259,632 deferred stock units outstanding, which are included in our restricted stock unit activity
below. As of December 31, 2016 , we no longer grant deferred stock units.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
We  have  an  Employee  Stock  Purchase  Plan  (“ESPP”)  for  all  eligible  employees.  Under  the  plan,  shares  of  our  common  stock  may  be
purchased  over  an  offering  period  with  a  maximum  duration  of two years  at 85% of  the  lower  of  the  fair  market  value  on  the  first  day  of  the
applicable offering period or on the last day of the six-month purchase period. Employees may purchase shares having a value not exceeding 10%
of their eligible compensation during an offering period. During the years ended 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 , employees purchased approximately 4
million , 4 million and 4 million shares under this plan at average prices of $18.97 , $30.83 and $42.06 per share, respectively. As of December 31,
2016 , approximately 20 million shares of common stock were reserved for future issuance.
F-33

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Stock Option Activity
The  following  table  presents  stock  option  activity  under  our  equity  incentive  plans  as  of  and  for  the  year  ended December  31,  2016 (in
millions, except per share amounts and years):
 
Shares
 
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Term
(Years)
Aggregate Intrinsic
Value
Outstanding as of January 1, 2016
7
$
20.05
Granted
—
$
24.39
Exercised
(1)
$
17.47
Forfeited/expired/canceled
(1)
$
22.79
Outstanding as of December 31, 2016
5
$
20.78
4.03
$
43
Expected to vest
2
$
23.41
5.08
$
11
Options exercisable
3
$
19.04
3.33
$
31
The aggregate intrinsic value of options was calculated as the difference between the exercise price of the underlying awards and the quoted
price of our common stock. As of December 31, 2016 , options to purchase 5 million shares of our common stock were in-the-money.
The  weighted  average  grant-date  fair  value  of  options  granted  during  the  years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 was $5.40 , $6.84 and $13.59 ,
respectively. During the years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , the aggregate intrinsic value of options exercised under our equity incentive plans was $16
million , $130 million and $159 million , respectively, determined as of the date of option exercise.
Restricted Stock Unit Activity
The following table presents RSU activity (including performance-based RSUs that have been earned) under our equity incentive plans as of
and for the year ended December 31, 2016 (in millions except per share amounts):
 
 
Units  
Weighted Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value
(per share)
Outstanding as of January 1, 2016
36
$
22.50
Awarded and assumed
30
$
24.41
Vested
(16)
$
22.15
Forfeited
(6)
$
23.09
Outstanding as of December 31, 2016
44
$
24.00
Expected to vest as of December 31, 2016
38
During the years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , the aggregate intrinsic value of RSUs vested under our equity incentive plans was $418 million ,
$697 million and $759 million , respectively.
F-34

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The following table presents stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014 (in millions):  
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
2015
2014
Cost of net revenues
$
34
$
38
$
33
Sales and marketing
95
94
93
Product development
158
108
116
General and administrative
129
139
102
Total stock-based compensation expense
$
416
$
379
$
344
Capitalized in product development
$
13
$
13
$
12
As of December 31, 2016 , there was approximately $749 million of unearned stock-based compensation that will be expensed from 2017
through 2020. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or
cancel all or a portion of the remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense. Future unearned stock-based compensation will increase to
the extent we grant additional equity awards, change the mix of grants between stock options and restricted stock units or assume unvested equity
awards in connection with acquisitions.
Stock Option Valuation Assumptions
We calculated the fair value of each stock option award on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Our computation of
expected  volatility  is  based  on  a  combination  of  historical  and  market-based  implied  volatility  from  traded  options  on  our  common  stock.  Our
computation of expected life is based on historical experience of similar awards, giving consideration to the contractual terms of the stock-based
awards, vesting schedules and expectations of future employee behavior. The interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the award is
based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. An immaterial amount of stock options were granted in 2016. The following
weighted average assumptions were used for options granted in 2015 and 2014 :
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2015
2014
Risk-free interest rate
1.4%
1.2%
Expected life (in years)
4.1
4.1
Dividend yield
—%
—%
Expected volatility
27%
29%
Modifications of Stock-Based Awards
During 2015, in connection with the Distribution, restricted and deferred stock awards and employee stock option awards were modified and
converted into new equity awards using conversion ratios designed to preserve the value of these awards to the holders immediately prior to the
Distribution.  On  July  17,  2015,  employees  holding  stock  options,  restricted  stock  awards  or  units,  deferred  stock  awards,  and  ESPP  awards
denominated  in  pre-Distribution  eBay  stock  received  a  number  of  otherwise-similar  awards  in  post-Distribution  eBay  stock  and/or  PayPal  stock
based on the conversion ratios outlined for each group of employees in the Employee Matters Agreement that we entered into in connection with the
Distribution.  Adjustments  to  our  outstanding  stock  based  compensation  awards,  including  ESPP  awards,  resulted  in  additional  compensation
expense of approximately  $68 million  to be recognized over the remaining vesting life of the underlying awards.
In December 2014, the terms of various stock-based awards held by the Company’s CEO, CFO, General Counsel, SVP of Human Resources
and  SVP  of  Corporate  Communications  (the  “Departing  Executives”)  were  modified  in  anticipation  of  and  contingent  upon  termination  of
employment at the time of the Distribution. The modifications for the Departing Executives, each of whom had his or her employment terminated at
the  time  of  the  Distribution,  provided  for  the  full  acceleration  of  certain  awards  and  extended  the  exercise  periods  of  certain  awards.  These
modifications resulted
F-35

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
in additional compensation expense of approximately $37 million recognized from the modification date in December 2014 through the Distribution
on July 17, 2015.
Employee Savings Plan
We have a defined contribution plan, which is qualified under Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Participating employees may
contribute up to 50% of their eligible compensation, but not more than statutory limits. In 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , we contributed one dollar for each
dollar a participant contributed, with a maximum contribution of 4% of each employee’s eligible compensation, subject to a maximum employer
contribution of $10,600 , $10,600 and $10,400 per employee for each period, respectively. Our non-U.S. employees are covered by various other
savings plans. Our total expense for these savings plans was $49 million , $51 million and $43 million in 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively.
Note 15 – Income Taxes
The components of pretax income for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014 are as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
  
2015
  
2014
United States
$
1,529
  $
396
  $
510
International
2,122
  
2,010
  
2,005
$
3,651
$
2,406
$
2,515
The provision for income taxes is comprised of the following (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Current:
 
 
Federal
$
689
 $
363
 $
489
State and local
55
 
22
 
20
Foreign
178
 
106
 
127
$
922
 $
491
 $
636
Deferred:
 
 
Federal
$
77
 $
(53)  $
2,091
State and local
—
 
(2)  
21
Foreign
(4,633)  
23
 
632
(4,556)  
(32)  
2,744
$
(3,634)  $
459
 $
3,380
F-36

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following is a reconciliation of the difference between the actual provision for income taxes and the provision computed by applying the
federal statutory rate of 35% for 2016 , 2015 and 2014 to income before income taxes (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Provision at statutory rate
$
1,278
 $
843
 $
881
Prior year foreign earnings no longer considered indefinitely reinvested
—
 
—
 
2,991
Foreign income taxed at different rates
(346)  
(399)  
(432)
Change in valuation allowance
—
 
1
 
(142)
Stock-based compensation
24
 
23
 
22
State taxes, net of federal benefit
55
 
20
 
42
Research and other tax credits
(16)  
(27)  
(14)
Tax basis step-up resulting from realignment
(4,621)
—
—
Other
(8)  
(2)  
32
$
(3,634)
$
459
$
3,380
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of differences between the carrying amounts of assets and
liabilities  and  their  respective  tax  bases  using  enacted  tax  rates  in  effect  for  the  year  in  which  the  differences  are  expected  to  be  reversed.
Significant deferred tax assets and liabilities consist of the following (in millions):
 
As of December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
Deferred tax assets:
 
Net operating loss, capital loss and credits
$
78
 $
206
Accruals and allowances
222
 
209
Stock-based compensation
65
 
65
Amortizable tax basis in intangibles
4,621
—
Net unrealized losses
—
 
8
Net deferred tax assets
4,986
 
488
Valuation allowance
(37)  
(41)
$
4,949
 $
447
Deferred tax liabilities:
 
Unremitted foreign earnings
$
(1,578)
$
(1,656)
Acquisition-related intangibles
(29)  
(19)
Depreciation and amortization
(158)  
(190)
Available-for-sale securities
(29)  
(251)
Other
—
 
—
(1,794)  
(2,116)
$
3,155
 $
(1,669)
As of December 31, 2016 , our federal, state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards for income tax purposes were approximately $22
million , $74 million and $135 million , respectively. The federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are subject to various limitations under
Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and applicable state tax laws. If not utilized, the federal and state net operating loss carryforwards will
both begin to expire in 2018. The carryforward periods on our foreign net operating loss carryforwards are as follows: $37 million do not expire, $79
million are subject to valuation allowance and begin to expire in 2023, and $20 million are not subject to valuation allowance but will begin to expire
in 2019. As of December 31, 2016 , state tax credit carryforwards for income tax purposes were approximately $69 million . Most of the state tax
credits carry forward indefinitely.
F-37

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
As of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , our federal capital loss carryover amounted to zero and $336 million , respectively. The decrease in the
capital  loss  carryover  of $336  million is  due  to  utilization  of  the  loss  carryover  against  gains  primarily  from  the  sale  of  our  equity  holdings  of
MercadoLibre, Inc., in 2016.
As of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , we maintained a valuation allowance with respect to certain of our deferred tax assets relating primarily
to operating losses in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions that we believe are not likely to be realized.
During the fourth quarter of 2016, we began the process of realigning our legal structure, subsequent to the distribution of PayPal Holdings,
Inc., to better reflect how we manage and operate our platforms. We consider many factors in effecting this realignment, including foreign exchange
exposures, long-term cash flows and cash needs of our platforms, capital allocation considerations and the associated tax effects. As a result of the
initial stages of this realignment and the associated tax agreements, we have achieved a substantial step-up in the tax basis of the intangible assets
in our foreign eBay platforms. We recognized a tax benefit of $4.6 billion , which represents the income tax effect of the step-up in tax basis.
During the first quarter of 2014, we altered our capital allocation strategy. As a result, we provided for U.S. income and applicable foreign
withholding taxes on $9.0 billion of undistributed foreign earnings for 2013 and prior years, and recorded a deferred tax liability of approximately $3.0
billion .  This  deferred  tax  liability  included  PayPal  related  balances  presented  in  discontinued  operations  as  of  December  31,  2014.  Based  on
December 31, 2014 foreign exchange rates and excluding PayPal balances, the deferred tax liability for unremitted foreign earnings amounted to
$2.1 billion and was included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2014. The
deferred tax liability for unremitted foreign earnings was $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2016 and was included in deferred and other tax liabilities.
We  have  not  provided  for  U.S.  federal  or  foreign  income  taxes,  including  withholding  taxes  on $7.4  billion of  our  non-U.S.  subsidiaries’
undistributed  earnings  as  of December  31,  2016 .  We  intend  to  indefinitely  reinvest  the $7.4  billion of  our  non-U.S.  subsidiaries’  undistributed
earnings in our international operations. Accordingly, we currently have no plans to repatriate those funds. As such, we do not know the time or
manner in which we would repatriate those funds. Because the time or manner of repatriation is uncertain, we cannot determine the impact of local
taxes, withholding taxes and foreign tax credits associated with the future repatriation of such earnings and therefore cannot quantify the tax liability.
In cases where we intend to repatriate a portion of our foreign subsidiaries’ undistributed earnings, we provide U.S. and applicable foreign taxes on
such earnings and such taxes are included in our deferred taxes or tax payable liabilities depending upon the planned timing and manner of such
repatriation.
On a regular basis, we develop cash forecasts to estimate our cash needs internationally and domestically. We consider projected cash needs
for,  among  other  things,  investments  in  our  existing  businesses,  potential  acquisitions  and  capital  transactions,  including  repurchases  of  our
common  stock  and  debt  repayments.  We  estimate  the  amount  of  cash  available  or  needed  in  the  jurisdictions  where  these  investments  are
expected, as well as our ability to generate cash in those jurisdictions and our access to capital markets. This analysis enables us to conclude
whether or not we will indefinitely reinvest the current period’s foreign earnings.
We benefit from tax rulings concluded in several different jurisdictions, most significantly Switzerland and Luxembourg. These rulings resulted
in a cash tax savings of $307 million and $319 million in 2016 and 2015 , respectively. The ongoing realignment of our legal structure has and will
result in the termination, amendment or replacement of certain tax rulings.
 
F-38

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table reflects changes in unrecognized tax benefits for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014 (in millions):
2016
2015
2014
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the beginning of the period
$
440
$
367
$
304
Increases related to prior period tax positions
24
36
35
Decreases related to prior period tax positions
(20)
(8)
(18)
Increases related to current period tax positions
47
51
59
Settlements
(33)
(6)
(13)
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the end of the period
$
458
$
440
$
367
Included within our gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits of $458 million as of December 31, 2016 is $107 million of unrecognized tax
benefits indemnified by PayPal. If the remaining balance of unrecognized tax benefits were realized in a future period, it would result in a tax benefit
of $385 million . Of this amount, approximately $98 million of unrecognized tax benefit is indemnified by PayPal and a corresponding receivable
would  be  reduced  upon  a  future  realization.  As  of December  31,  2016 ,  our  liabilities  for  unrecognized  tax  benefits  were  included  in  accrued
expenses and other current liabilities and deferred and other tax liabilities, net.
We recognize interest  and/or  penalties related to uncertain  tax positions in income tax expense. In 2016 , $6 million was included in tax
expense for interest and penalties. The amount of interest and penalties accrued as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 was approximately $54 million
and $61 million , respectively.
 
We are subject to both direct  and indirect  taxation  in the U.S.  and various  states  and foreign  jurisdictions.  We are under examination  by
certain  tax  authorities  for  the  2003  to  2013  tax  years.  We  believe  that  adequate  amounts  have  been  reserved  for  any  adjustments  that  may
ultimately result from these or other examinations. The material jurisdictions where we are subject to potential examination by tax authorities for tax
years after 2002 include, among others, the U.S. (Federal and California), Germany, Korea, Israel, Switzerland, United Kingdom and Canada.
 
Although  the  timing  of  the  resolution  and/or  closure  of  audits  is  highly  uncertain,  it  is  reasonably  possible  that  the  balance  of  gross
unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change in the next 12 months. However, given the number of years remaining subject to examination
and the number of matters being examined, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized
tax benefits.
 
On July 27, 2015, in Altera Corp. v. Commissioner , the U.S. Tax Court issued an opinion invalidating the regulations relating to the treatment
of stock-based compensation expense in an intercompany cost-sharing arrangement. A final decision was issued by the Tax Court in December
2015. The IRS is appealing the decision and filed its arguments opposing the Tax Court decision in June 2016. Due to the uncertainty surrounding
the status of the current regulations, questions related to the scope of potential benefits or obligations, and the risk of the Tax Court’s decision being
overturned upon appeal, we have not recorded any benefit or expense as of December 31, 2016. We will continue to monitor ongoing developments
and potential impacts to our consolidated financial statements.
Note 16 – Interest and Other, Net
The components of interest and other, net for the years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015 and 2014 are as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
  
2015
  
2014
Interest income
$
125
  $
97
  $
125
Interest expense
(225)
(144)
(109)
Gains on investments (1)
1,343
268
33
Other
83
  
(12)   
(10)
Total interest and other, net
$
1,326
  $
209
  $
39
(1)
Includes $1.3 billion of pre-tax gains recognized from the sale of our equity holdings of MercadoLibre, Inc.
F-39

Note 17 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables summarize the changes in accumulated balances of other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31,
2016 and 2015 (in millions):
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized
Gains on
Investments
Foreign
Currency
Translation
Estimated tax
(expense) benefit
Total
December 31, 2015
$
36
$
845
$
(45)
$
(310)
$
526
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
126
505
(185)
(170)
276
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from accumulated
other comprehensive income
108
1,299
—
(481)
926
Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
18
(794)
(185)
311
(650)
December 31, 2016
$
54
$
51
$
(230)
$
1
$
(124)
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized
Gains on
Investments
Foreign
Currency
Translation
Estimated tax
(expense) benefit
Total
December 31, 2014
$
168
$
1,029
$
334
$
(360)
$
1,171
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications
139
(186)
(431)
50
(428)
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from accumulated
other comprehensive income
204
1
—
—
205
Net current period other comprehensive income
(65)
(187)
(431)
50
(633)
Distribution of PayPal
(67)
3
52
—
(12)
December 31, 2015
$
36
$
845
$
(45)
$
(310)
$
526
F-40

The following table presents reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31, 2016 and
2015 (in millions):
Details about Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income Components
 
Affected Line Item in the Statement of
Income
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified from
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
2016
2015
Gains (losses) on cash flow hedges - foreign exchange contracts
Cost of net revenues
$
4
$
24
Sales and marketing
—
5
Product development
2
34
General and administrative
1
8
Interest and other, net
101
—
Total, from continuing operations before
income taxes
108
71
Provision for income taxes
—
—
Total, from continuing operations net of
income taxes
108
71
Total, from discontinued operations net
of income taxes
—
133
Total, net of income taxes
108
204
Gains (losses) on investments
Interest and other, net
1,299
1
Total, before income taxes
1,299
1
Provision for income taxes
(481)
—
Total, net of income taxes
818
1
Total reclassifications for the period
Total, net of income taxes
$
926
$
205
Note 18 — Restructuring
There was no restructuring reserve balance as of December 31, 2016 and a restructuring reserve of $2 million as of December 31, 2015.
Restructuring costs in 2016 were not material.
In January 2015, at a regular meeting of our Board,  our Board approved a plan to implement  a strategic  reduction  of our existing  global
workforce. As a result, we reduced our workforce globally, completing the reduction in the first half of 2015. These restructuring costs were included
in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of income. $62 million of restructuring costs were recognized and $60 million
of payments were made during the year ended December 31, 2015.
F-41

Supplementary Data — Quarterly Financial Data — Unaudited
The following tables present certain unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information for each of the eight quarters ended December 31,
2016 . This quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as the Consolidated Financial Statements and includes all adjustments
necessary to state fairly the information for the periods presented.
Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited, in millions, except per share amounts)
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2016
Net revenues
$
2,137
$
2,230
$
2,217
$
2,395
Gross profit
$
1,660
$
1,737
$
1,719
$
1,856
Income from continuing operations
$
482
$
437
$
418
$
5,948
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
—
(2)
(5)
(12)
Net income
$
482
$
435
$
413
$
5,936
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.42
$
0.38
$
0.37
$
5.38
Discontinued operations
—
—
—
(0.01)
Net income per share - basic
$
0.42
$
0.38
$
0.37
$
5.37
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.41
$
0.38
$
0.36
$
5.31
Discontinued operations
—
—
—
(0.01)
Net income per share - diluted
$
0.41
$
0.38
$
0.36
$
5.30
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
1,159
1,144
1,126
1,106
Diluted
1,170
1,149
1,139
1,119
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2015
Net revenues
$
2,061
$
2,110
$
2,099
$
2,322
Gross profit
$
1,650
$
1,676
$
1,666
$
1,829
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
449
$
430
$
545
$
523
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
177
(347)
(6)
(46)
Net income (loss)
$
626
$
83
$
539
$
477
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.37
$
0.35
$
0.45
$
0.44
Discontinued operations
0.14
(0.28)
—
(0.04)
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
0.51
$
0.07
$
0.45
$
0.40
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.37
$
0.35
$
0.45
$
0.43
Discontinued operations
0.14
(0.28)
—
(0.04)
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
0.51
$
0.07
$
0.45
$
0.39
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
1,216
1,217
1,210
1,191
Diluted
1,229
1,225
1,223
1,204
F-42

eBay Inc.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
The Financial Statement Schedule II — VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS is filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Charged/Credited to
Net Income
Charged to Other
Account
Charges
Utilized/Write-offs
Balance at End of
Period
(In millions)
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts and
Authorized Credits
Year Ended December 31, 2014
$
88
$
77
$
—
$
(79)
$
86
Year Ended December 31, 2015
86
66
—
(68)
84
Year Ended December 31, 2016
$
84
$
68
$
—
$
(71)
$
81
Allowance for Transaction Losses
Year Ended December 31, 2014
$
23
$
185
$
—
$
(181)
$
27
Year Ended December 31, 2015
27
205
—
(198)
34
Year Ended December 31, 2016
$
34
$
162
$
—
$
(173)
$
23
Tax Valuation Allowance
Year Ended December 31, 2014
$
164
$
(138)
$
(1)
$
—
$
25
Year Ended December 31, 2015
25
19
(3)
—
41
Year Ended December 31, 2016
$
41
$
(6)
$
2
$
—
$
37
F-43

SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of San Jose, State of California, on the 6th day of February, 2017.
eBay Inc.
By:
/s/ Devin N. Wenig
Devin N. Wenig
President and Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Devin N. Wenig, Scott F.
Schenkel, Brian J. Doerger and Marie Oh Huber and each or any one of them, each with the power of substitution, his or her attorney-in-fact, to sign any
amendments to this report, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying
and confirming all that each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf
of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on February 6, 2017 .
Principal Executive Officer:
Principal Financial Officer:
By:
/s/ Devin N. Wenig
By:
/s/ Scott F. Schenkel
Devin N. Wenig
Scott F. Schenkel
President and Chief Executive Officer
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer
Principal Accounting Officer:
By:
/s/ Brian J. Doerger
Brian J. Doerger
Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
F-44

Additional Directors
By:
/s/ Pierre M. Omidyar
By:
/s/ Thomas J. Tierney
Pierre M. Omidyar
Thomas J. Tierney
Founder and Director
Chairman of the Board and Director
By:
/s/ Fred D. Anderson
By:
/s/ Edward W. Barnholt
Fred D. Anderson
Edward W. Barnholt
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Anthony J. Bates
By:
/s/ Logan D. Green
Anthony J. Bates
Logan D. Green
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Bonnie S. Hammer
By:
/s/ Kathleen C. Mitic
Bonnie S. Hammer
Kathleen C. Mitic
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Paul S. Pressler
By:
/s/ Robert H. Swan
Paul S. Pressler
Robert H. Swan
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Perry M. Traquina
Perry M. Traquina
Director
F-45

INDEX TO EXHIBITS
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
2.01
Separation and Distribution Agreement by and between Registrant and
PayPal Holdings, Inc. dated as of June 26, 2015.
8-K
000-24821
6/30/2015
3.01
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
 
 
8-K
 
000-24821  
4/27/2012
3.02
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Bylaws.
 
 
8-K
 
001-37713  
3/18/2016
4.01
  Form of Specimen Certificate for Registrant’s Common Stock.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097  
8/19/1998
4.02
Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between Registrant and Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.03
Supplemental Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between Registrant
and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.04
Form of 3.250% Note due 2020.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.05
Forms of 1.350% Note due 2017, 2.600% Note due 2022 and 4.000% Note
due 2042.
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.06
Indenture dated as of July 2, 2007 between GSI Commerce, Inc. and The
Bank of New York, as trustee.
10-Q
000-24821
7/22/2011
4.07
First Supplemental Indenture dated as of June 17, 2011 to the Indenture
dated as of July 2, 2007 between GSI Commerce, Inc. and The Bank of
New York Mellon, as trustee.
10-Q
000-24821
7/22/2011
4.08
Forms of Floating Rate Note due 2017, Floating Rate Note due 2019,
2.200% Note due 2019, 2.875% Note due 2021 and 3.450% Note due 2024.
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.09
Form of 6.00% Note due 2056.
8-K
000-24821
2/29/2016
4.10
Forms of 2.500% Note due 2018 and 3.800% Note due 2022.
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
10.01+
  Form of Indemnity Agreement entered into by Registrant with each of its
directors and executive officers.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097  
7/15/1998
10.02+
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated 1998 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/27/2007
10.03+
  Registrant’s 1999 Global Equity Incentive Plan, as amended.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/27/2007
10.04+
  Form of Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 1999 Global Equity
Incentive Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
10/27/2004
10.05+
  Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement under Registrant’s 1999 Global
Equity Incentive Plan.
 
 
10-K
 
000-24821  
2/28/2007
10.06+
  Registrant’s 2001 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended.
 
 
10-K
 
000-24821  
2/28/2007
10.07+
  
Form of Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2001 Equity Incentive
Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
10/27/2004
10.08+
  Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan, as amended.
 
 
10-K
 
000-24821  
2/28/2007
10.09+
Amendment to Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan, effective April 2,
2012.
10-Q
 
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.10+
Form of Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock
Unit Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.11+
  
Form of Electing Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
F-46

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.12+
  
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003 Deferred
Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.13+
  
Form of 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan Restricted Stock Unit Grant Notice
and Agreement.
 
 
10-Q/A
 
000-24821  
4/24/2008
10.14+
  Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan, as amended and restated.
 
 
8-K
 
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.15+
  
Amendment to the Registrant’s 2001 Equity Incentive Plan and Registrant’s
1999 Global Equity Incentive Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/29/2009
10.16+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (and Performance-Based
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock
Unit Plan, Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan and GSI
Commerce, Inc. 2010 Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.17+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (with Modified Vesting)
under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.18+
Form of Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive
Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.19+
Form of Stock Option Agreement (with Modified Vesting) under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.20+
Form of Performance Share Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.21+
Form of Director Deferred Stock Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.22+
  
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (and Performance-Based
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive
Award Plan.
 
 
8-K
 
000-24821  
6/25/2008
10.23+
  Amended and Restated eBay Incentive Plan.
 
 
8-K
 
000-24821  
5/5/2015
10.24+
  Amendment to eBay Incentive Plan, effective April 2, 2012.
 
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.25+
  eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan.
 
 
8-K
 
000-24821  
12/20/2007
10.26+
  
Employment Letter Agreement dated March 31, 2008, between John
Donahoe and Registrant.
 
 
10-Q/A
 
000-24821  
4/24/2008
10.27+
  
Letter Agreement dated September 30, 2008 between Robert Swan and
Registrant.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
10/23/2008
10.28+
GSI Commerce, Inc. 2010 Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/22/2011
10.29+
Amendment to GSI Commerce, Inc. 2010 Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/22/2011
10.30+
Amendment to GSI Commerce, Inc. 2010 Equity Incentive Plan, effective
April 2, 2012.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.31+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under GSI Commerce, Inc.
2012 Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.32+
GSI Commerce, Inc. Leadership Team Incentive Plan (Filed as Appendix B
to GSI Commerce, Inc.’s Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed
with the Commission on April 25, 2008 and incorporated herein by
reference).
10.33+
Amendment to GSI Commerce, Inc. Leadership Team Incentive Plan,
effective April 2, 2012.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.34+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (and Performance-Based
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under GSI Commerce, Inc. 2010 Equity
Incentive Plan, as amended.
10-Q
000-24821
7/22/2011
F-47


No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.35+
eBay Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
DEF 14A
000-24821
3/19/2012
10.36+
Offer Letter dated August 30, 2011 and executed on September 2, 2011
between Registrant and Devin Wenig.
8-K
000-24821
9/6/2011
10.37
Credit Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2015, by and among
Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, and the
other parties thereto.
8-K
000-24821
11/12/2015
10.38+
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.39+
Form of Director Annual Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.40+
Form of Electing Director Quarterly Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.41+
Form of Performance Share Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.42+
Form of Global Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.43+
Form of Global Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (and Performance-Based
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive
Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.44+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant's 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.45+
Form of Stock Payment Award Agreement under Registrant's 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.46+
Form of Director Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under Registrant's
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.47+
Offer Letter dated September 29, 2014 between Registrant and Daniel
Schulman.
10-Q
000-24821
10/16/2014
10.48+
Letter Agreement dated September 29, 2014 between Registrant and Devin
Wenig.
10-Q
000-24821
10/16/2014
10.49+
Written Description of Transaction Success and Retention Program.
10-K
000-24821
2/6/2015
10.50+
Amendment dated December 31, 2014 to Offer Letter between Registrant
and Daniel Schulman.
10-K
000-24821
2/6/2015
10.51+
Nomination and Standstill Agreement, dated as of January 21, 2015, by and
among the persons and entities listed on Schedule A thereto and
Registrant.
8-K
000-24821
1/23/2015
10.52+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. Change in Control Severance Plan for
Key Employees, effective January 1, 2016.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.53+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. SVP and Above Standard Severance
Plan, effective January 1, 2016.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.54
Operating Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015,  by and among Registrant,
eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal, Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd.
and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.55
Amendment dated June 30, 2016, to the Operating Agreement by and
among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal,
Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
F-48

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.56
Transition Services Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and between
Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.57
Tax Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and between
Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.58+
Employee Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and between
Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.59
Intellectual Property Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal,
Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.60+
Letter dated September 30, 2014 from Registrant to Scott Schenkel.
10-Q
000-24821
7/21/2015
10.61+
Letter dated July 17, 2015 from Registrant to John Donahoe.
10-Q
000-24821
10/28/2015
10.62+
Letter dated July 17, 2015 from Registrant to Robert Swan.
10-Q
000-24821
10/28/2015
10.63+
Letter dated July 17, 2015 from Registrant to Michael Jacobson.
10-Q
000-24821
10/28/2015
10.64+
Offer Letter dated September 2, 2014 between Registrant and Steve Fisher.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.65+
Offer Letter dated April 2, 2015 between Registrant and Marie Oh Huber.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.66+
Offer Letter dated April 3, 2015 between Registrant and Harry Lawton.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
12.01
  Statement regarding computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
 
X
 
 
 
21.01
  List of Subsidiaries.
 
X
 
 
 
23.01
  PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP consent.
 
X
 
 
 
24.01
  Power of Attorney (see signature page).
 
X
 
 
 
31.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by Section
302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
31.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by Section
302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by Section
906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by Section
906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
101.INS
  XBRL Instance Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.SCH
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.CAL
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.DEF
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.LAB
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.PRE
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
+
Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
F-49

Exhibit 12.01
eBay Inc.
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
(In millions, except ratio data)
Year Ended December 31,
2016
2015
2014
2013
2012
Income from Continuing Operations
Before Income Taxes, Noncontrolling
Interest and Income/Loss of Equity
Method Investees
$
3,672
$
2,400
$
2,539
$
2,561
$
2,344
Add: Fixed Charges (1)
253
170
148
123
86
Earnings  (2)
$
3,925
$
2,570
$
2,687
$
2,684
$
2,430
Fixed Charges (1)
$
253
$
170
$
148
$
123
$
86
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
15.5
x
15.1
x
18.2
x
21.8
x
28.3
x
(1)
Fixed Charges consist of interest expense and our estimate of an appropriate portion of rentals representative of the interest factor. The estimate of
interest within rental expense is estimated to be one-third of rental expense.
(2)
Earnings consist of income from continuing operations before income taxes, noncontrolling interest and income/loss of equity method investees plus Fixed
Charges.

 Exhibit 21.01
 
LIST OF SUBSIDIARIES
The following is a list of our subsidiaries as of December 31, 2016 that are required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K .
DOMESTIC SUBSIDIARIES
Name
StubHub, Inc., a Delaware corporation
INTERNATIONAL SUBSIDIARIES
 
 
Jurisdiction of
 
Percent Ownership
Name
 
Incorporation
 
If Less Than 100%
eBay Classifieds Denmark ApS
Denmark
eBay International AG
Switzerland
eBay International Treasury Center Sarl
Luxembourg
eBay International Treasury Center 2 Sarl
Luxembourg
eBay Israel Holding Ltd.
Israel
eBay Korea Co., Ltd.
Korea
99.9%
eBay KTA (UK) Limited
United Kingdom
Marktplaats B.V.
The Netherlands
mobile.de GmbH
Germany

Exhibit 23.01
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-3 (Nos. 333-154449, 333-175733, 333-197522),
Form S-4 (No. 333-97727 and No. 333-117914), and Form S-8 (Nos. 333-64179, 333-87593, 333-41944, 333-58046, 333-97729, 333-100426, 333-
107832, 333-117913, 333-127971, 333-129072, 333-136118, 333-140942, 333-143880, 333-149131, 333-149132, 333-151851, 333-155314, 333-
159778, 333-165438, 333-168295, 333-171154, 333-174242, 333-175416, 333-175417, 333-176477, 333-176663, 333-178369, 333-181535, 333-
181539,  333-192514,  333-193299,  333-195987,  333-203546,  333-213340)  of  eBay  Inc.  of  our  report  dated February  6,  2017 relating  to  the
consolidated financial statements, financial statement schedule and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in
this Form 10‑K .
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
February 6, 2017

Exhibit 31.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Devin N. Wenig, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f)
and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about
the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's
internal control over financial reporting.
 
/s/  Devin N. Wenig
Devin N. Wenig
President and Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: February 6, 2017

Exhibit 31.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Scott F. Schenkel, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f)
and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about
the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial
reporting, to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's
internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ Scott F. Schenkel
Scott F. Schenkel
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: February 6, 2017

Exhibit 32.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Devin N. Wenig, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
 
/s/  Devin N. Wenig
Devin N. Wenig
President and Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: February 6, 2017
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.

Exhibit 32.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Scott F. Schenkel, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
 
/s/  Scott F. Schenkel
Scott F. Schenkel
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: February 6, 2017
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.
