UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 10-K
 
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
OR
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Transition Period from             to             .
Commission file number 001-37713
 
eBay Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Delaware
77-0430924
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer 
Identification No.)
2025 Hamilton Avenue
San Jose , California
95125
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(408) 376-7008
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading symbol
Name of exchange on which registered
Common stock
EBAY
The Nasdaq Global Select Market
6.00% Notes due 2056
EBAYL
The Nasdaq Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.     Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    Yes ☐  No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).  Yes ☒  No ☐

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large
accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant
to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).   Yes  ☐  No  ☒
As of June 30, 2020, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $35,169,294,304 based on the closing sale price as reported on The Nasdaq Global
Select Market.
680,445,767 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of February 1, 2021.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference from the definitive proxy statement for the registrant’s 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders.

eBay Inc.
Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
Item 1.
Business
4
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
11
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
29
Item 2.
Properties
29
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
29
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
29
Part II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
30
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
32
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
34
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
53
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
55
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
55
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
55
Item 9B.
Other Information
56
Part III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
57
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
57
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
57
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
57
Item 14.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
57
Part IV
Item 15.
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule
58
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
58
3

PART I
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future  business,  future  results  of  operations  or  financial  condition,  including  with  respect  to  the  ongoing  effects  of  COVID-19,  new  or  planned
features or services, or management strategies including our strategic review). You can identify these forward-looking statements by words such as
“may,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan” and other similar expressions. These forward-
looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in our
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on
Form 10-K, as well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our
other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-
looking  statements  after  the  date  of  this  report  to  reflect  actual  results  or  future  events  or  circumstances.  Given  these  risks  and  uncertainties,
readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
ITEM 1: BUSINESS
Overview
eBay  Inc.  was  formed  as  a  sole  proprietorship  in  September  1995  and  was  incorporated  in  California  in  May  1996.  In  April  1998,  we
reincorporated in Delaware, and in September 1998, we completed the initial public offering of our common stock. Our principal executive offices are
located at 2025 Hamilton Avenue, San Jose, California, 95125, and our telephone number is (408) 376-7008. Unless otherwise expressly stated or
the  context  otherwise  requires,  when  we  refer  to  “we,”  “our,”  “us,”  or  “eBay”  in  this  annual  report  on  Form  10-K,  we  mean  eBay  Inc.  and  its
consolidated subsidiaries. Notably, on February 13, 2020, we completed the sale of StubHub to viagogo for $4.05 billion in cash, subject to certain
adjustments, and on July 20, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to transfer our Classifieds business to Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”). We
believe that the transaction with Adevinta will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021, subject to receipt of certain regulatory approvals and other
customary closing conditions.
eBay Inc. is a global commerce leader through our Marketplace platforms which connect millions of buyers and sellers in more than 190
markets  around  the  world.  The  platforms  include  our  online  marketplace  located  at  www.ebay.com  and  its  localized  counterparts,  including  off-
platform businesses in South Korea, Japan, and Turkey, as well as eBay’s suite of mobile apps. Our platforms are accessible through an online
experience (e.g. desktop and laptop computers), iOS and Android mobile devices (e.g. smartphones and tablets) and our application programming
interfaces (“APIs,” platform access for third party software developers).
Agreement to Transfer eBay Classifieds Group
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to transfer our Classifieds business to Adevinta for $2.5 billion in cash, subject to
certain adjustments, and approximately 540 million shares in Adevinta. Together, the total consideration payable under the definitive agreement is
valued at approximately $9.2 billion, based on the closing trading price of Adevinta’s outstanding shares on the Oslo Stock Exchange on July 17,
2020. We believe that the transaction will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021, subject to receipt of certain regulatory approvals and other
customary closing conditions. Please see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “The closing of the proposed transfer of our
Classifieds business is subject to various risks and uncertainties,  may not be completed in accordance with expected plans or on the currently
contemplated terms or timeline, or at all, and may not generate the anticipated returns to eBay, and the pending transfer may be disruptive to our
Classifieds business.”
4

Our Strategy
As a global commerce leader and third-party marketplace, our technologies and services are designed to provide buyers choice and a breadth
of relevant inventory from around the globe, and to enable sellers’ access to eBay’s 185 million buyers worldwide. Our business model and pricing
are designed so that our business is successful when our sellers are successful. We earn revenue primarily through fees collected on successfully
closed sales and our growth drivers of managed payments and first-party advertising.
eBay’s strategy is to leverage technology to enhance the marketplace experience for our customers, to drive growth in Gross Merchandise
Volume (as discussed below, “GMV”), while increasing the rate of revenue growth through our managed payments and advertising initiatives, and
delivering  healthy  operating  margins.  Following  the  announcement  of  the  StubHub  and  Classifieds  transactions,  we  stated  our  intention  as  an
enterprise  focused  on  our  Marketplace  platforms  to  embark  on  a  multi-year  journey  to  build  more  compelling  experiences  for  our  consumers,
become the partner of choice for sellers and strengthen trust in relationships with buyers.
eBay’s managed payments has continued to expand and scale globally following the expiration of the PayPal Operating Agreement in July
2020,  delivering  buyers  and  sellers  a  simplified  end-to-end  payments  experience.  Starting  with  five  of  our  largest  markets  —  the  U.S.,  U.K.,
Germany, Australia and Canada — we have focused on transitioning business sellers to the new payments platform, and we launched managed
payments  for  consumer  sellers  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2020.  As  a  result,  as  of  December  31,  2020  there  were  over  1  million  sellers  active  in
managed payments. We also announced the first quarter of 2021 expansion plans to France, Italy, and Spain, along with enablement for eBay for
Charity sellers in the U.S. and U.K. to leverage the experience. Through managed payments, we’re able to provide a simpler experience for current
and next-generation customers, consistent with today’s retail standards. We can offer buyers more flexibility and choice in how they’d like to pay and
offer sellers a more streamlined way to run their businesses. We continue to be on track to intermediate payments for the majority of our sellers in
2021 and to complete the full roll-out for payments by 2022.
Our advertising business remains focused on growing our Promoted Listings (a first-party advertising offering) while reducing non-strategic,
third-party  advertising.  We are providing sellers with data-driven  recommendations  to optimize their conversion,  while testing and building more
technology features to drive growth, position eBay as the seller’s platform of choice, and surface relevant inventory to buyers.
Our Customer Offerings
We provide a number of features for our buyers and sellers that align with our approach to becoming the partner of choice for sellers and
driving trusted buyer relationships. These offerings are designed to build trust and confidence on our platform, and drive GMV.
In order to further strengthen our buyers’ confidence and trust in our services, we offer “eBay Money Back Guarantee,” which allows buyers to
receive their money back if the item they ordered does not arrive, is faulty or damaged, or does not match the listing. eBay Money Back Guarantee
covers most items purchased on the eBay platform in the U.S., the U.K., Germany, and Australia, through a qualifying payment method. eBay also
provides  buyers  with  a  “Best  Price  Guarantee,”  which  offers  buyers  in  the  U.S.  110%  of  the  price  difference  if  they  find  an  item  for  less  on  a
competitor’s website within 48 hours of making a purchase. In Australia, Best Price Guarantee beats deals from approved retailers by 5%, and in the
U.K., offers price matching. In 2020, eBay launched "Authenticity Guarantee," our new independent authentication service on all watches sold over
$2,000  in  the  U.S.,  and  expanded  the  service  to  the  collectible  sneakers  category,  authenticating  select  sneaker  styles  and  brands  on  the
marketplace. Additionally, to meet consumer demand for top products, eBay launched a new destination to feature officially “Certified Refurbished”
products from top brands.
On the eBay Marketplace platforms, the majority of transactions in the U.S., the U.K., and Germany include free shipping for buyers, and we
encourage sellers to offer free returns. We also work to create confidence in our ability to meet buyers’ delivery and tracking expectations. In the
U.K. and Australia, we launched eBay Virtual Tracking Number to substantially increase package tracking and provide buyers and sellers with ease
and confidence.
5

To  become  the  partner  of  choice  for  sellers,  eBay  continuously  invests  in  resources  and  programs  to  grow  and  enhance  the  seller  tools
ecosystem. Seller initiated offers allows sellers to send custom deals directly to buyers, and we launched several new features in this offering and
drove $1.25 billion in GMV in 2020. Additionally, a new collaboration with UPS launched in the U.S., helps provide sellers with more options to
support  their  shipping needs and access  to discounted  rates,  saving  them  time  and money.  We  supported  seller  profitability  during the  holiday
season by working with the carriers on our platform to eliminate peak season shipping surcharges on eBay. For sellers, eBay also launched new
features like “Image Clean-Up,” using computer vision to enable sellers to create cleaner images in their listing and optimize for Google Shopping
and “Time Away,” which allows sellers to update their listings and protect their on-time delivery record while they are on vacation and provides
buyers with more accurate shipping estimates. Seller Hub capabilities continue to grow with the launch of several new features such as expanded
“Multi-User Account Access” authentication capabilities, real-time competitive pricing, and traffic data and enhancement of our competitive pricing
analytics to include the search of item specifics in addition to Terapeak.
During  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  we  put  specific  seller  protections  in  place  to  support  our  sellers’  businesses  during  carrier  delays,  not
penalizing sellers for delayed shipping or canceled orders to protect their seller performance standards. To accommodate for United States Postal
Service (USPS) delays, we protected sellers to ensure they were covered for any shipping defects and delays beyond their control by automatically
extending estimated delivery dates as necessary to give buyers more reasonable expectations of when their items will arrive. We also waited to
evaluate any “item not received” cases until after the extended, estimated delivery date.
To  help  sellers  keep  positive  momentum  in  their  business  during  the  pandemic,  we  increased  the  number  of  monthly,  zero  insertion  fee
listings that we provide to most sellers. We also allowed all eBay Store subscribers to list additional, fixed price listings for free in order to test new
inventory that buyers may be searching for in the COVID-19 environment, and we offered monthly, zero insertion fee listings in select categories for
sellers enrolled in managed payments.
In 2020, eBay launched new features like Dark Mode to ease the shopping experience and create more accessibility for our customers; “Great
Price  Signal”  to  highlight  competitively  priced  items  from  trusted  sellers;  and  “Secure  Local  PickUp”  to  help  connect  local  buyers  and  sellers,
allowing them to receive items quicker and more secure through the use of a QR code. More than 1,000,000 QR codes have been scanned since
Secure Local Pickup’s launch in July. eBay’s Developer Program launched new APIs for managed payments, Offers to Buyers, eBay for Charity,
and more, for developers to help their businesses thrive with eBay.
Our Impact and Responsibility
eBay’s purpose is to empower people and create economic opportunity for all through our technology for our global community of users.
Every day, people build businesses on our platforms. With low cost of entry for sellers, we offer a highly accessible way for all types of users to
interact in a global marketplace that’s inclusive and connects people of all backgrounds. Accordingly, we prioritize our corporate responsibility efforts
to impact the areas of economic empowerment and sustainable commerce. Key economic programs include eBay for Charity, the eBay Foundation,
and our small business enablement efforts, such as our Up & Running program.
eBay for Charity empowers buyers and sellers to support charities around the world. In 2020, eBay for Charity matched donations made to
Feeding America, Direct Relief, and Opportunity Fund, and offered U.S. shoppers the opportunity to buy Gifts That Give Back to support COVID-19
relief efforts. In 2020, nearly $123 million was raised by buyers and sellers to support charities via eBay for Charity.
The eBay Foundation helps to build economically vibrant and thriving communities. In 2020, the eBay Foundation granted over $16 million to
support small businesses, untapped communities, and COVID-19 relief efforts, and offered an additional $2,500 per employee in matching gifts for a
total of up to $5,000 per employee. To date, the eBay Foundation has awarded more than $65 million to more than 1,800 nonprofits.
We  are  champions  of  inclusive  commerce  and  in  2020,  born  out  of  the  pandemic  and  an  extension  of  our  Retail  Revival  program,  we
launched the Up & Running initiative to help more small businesses start and grow online. Through the program, new eBay sellers received fee
discounts and resources to run their business on eBay. The Up & Running program saw global adaptations in over 25 markets around the world,
and expanded efforts with the Up & Running Grants program, which will reward a number of eBay U.S. small business sellers a grant package worth
$10,000.
6

eBay continued its work to reach its goal of 100% renewable energy by 2025. We joined the U.S. EPA’s Green Power Program. Additionally,
we strive to integrate best practices in our offices and data center operations and to continually reduce our environmental footprint. This year, eBay
was also recognized for its commitment to sustainability and responsible business on the DJSI World and North American Indices, and ranked on
the CDP A list.
Financial Information
We measure our footprint in our addressable market according to GMV. GMV consists of the total value of all successfully closed transactions
between users on our platforms during the applicable period, regardless of whether the buyer and seller actually completed the transaction. In 2020,
we generated $100 billion in GMV, of which approximately  62 percent was generated outside the U.S. We believe that GMV provides a useful
measure of the overall volume of closed transactions that flow through our platforms in a given period, notwithstanding the inclusion in GMV of
closed transactions that are not ultimately consummated.
At the end of 2020, eBay had 185 million active buyers and over 19 million sellers. In 2020, we had approximately 1.6 billion live listings
globally. The term “active buyer” means, as of any date, all buyer accounts that successfully closed a transaction on Marketplace platforms within
the previous 12-month period. Buyers may register more than once and, as a result, may have more than one account. “Sellers” include consumer-
to-consumer (“C2C”) and business-to-consumer (“B2C”) businesses and individual sellers on the platform.
We generate revenue primarily from the transactions we successfully enable and through marketing services, and our growth initiatives of
payments and advertising. The majority of our revenue comes from a take rate on the GMV of transactions closed on our platforms. We define “take
rate” as net transaction revenues divided by GMV.
Our platforms are designed to enable our buyers and sellers to leverage our economies of scale and capital investments, such as in sales and
marketing, mobile, customer acquisition, technology innovation and customer service.
Notable Business Transactions in 2020
We  regularly  review  and  manage  our  investments  to  ensure  that  they  support  eBay’s  strategic  direction  and  complement  our  disciplined
approach to value creation, profitability and capital allocation. In the first quarter of 2020, eBay completed the sale of StubHub to viagogo for $4.05
billion in cash, subject to certain adjustments. In the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to transfer eBay Classifieds Group
to Adevinta; see “Agreement to Transfer eBay Classifieds Group” above for more details.
Competition
We encounter vigorous competition in our business from numerous sources. Our users can list, sell, buy, and pay for similar items through a
variety of competing online, mobile and offline channels. These include, but are not limited to, retailers, distributors, liquidators, import and export
companies,  auctioneers,  catalog  and  mail-order  companies,  classifieds,  directories,  search  engines,  commerce  participants  (consumer-to-
consumer, business-to-consumer and business-to-business), shopping channels and networks. As our product offerings continue to broaden into
new categories of items and new commerce formats, we expect to face additional competition from other online, mobile and offline channels for
those new offerings. We compete on the basis of price, product selection and services, and global scale.
For more information regarding competitive factors impacting our business, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the captions
“Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business” and “We are subject to regulatory activity and
antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business.”
7

Government Regulation
Government regulation impacts key aspects of our business. In particular, we are subject to laws and regulations that affect the ecommerce
industry in many countries where we operate. With nine additional states adopting Internet sales tax laws in 2020, some buyers across the U.S.
encounter sales tax for the first time on eBay. To date, more than 40 states have implemented Internet sales tax and digital service tax legislation.
Additionally, a digital service tax (DST) was implemented in Italy, India and Turkey in 2020, and we are complying with the legislation. In the U.K. the
government also approved the law to introduce a 2% DST. Tax collection responsibility and the additional costs associated with complex sales and
use tax collection, remittance and audit requirements could create additional burdens for buyers and sellers on our websites and mobile platforms.
For more information regarding regulatory risks, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “Our business is subject to
extensive government regulation and oversight” and “Our business and its users are subject to Internet sales tax and sales reporting and record-
keeping obligations.”
Seasonality
We expect transaction activity patterns on our platforms to mirror general consumer buying patterns. Please see the additional information in
“Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under the caption “Seasonality.”
Technology
The eBay Marketplace uses a combination of proprietary technologies and services as well as technologies and services provided by others.
We have developed intuitive user interfaces, buyer, seller and developer tools and transaction processing, database and network applications that
help  enable  our  users  to  reliably  and  securely  complete  transactions  on  our  sites.  Our  technology  infrastructure  simplifies  the  storage  and
processing of large amounts of data, eases the deployment and operation of large-scale global products and services and automates much of the
administration  of  large-scale  clusters  of  computers.  Our  infrastructure  has  been  designed  around  industry-standard  architectures  to  reduce
downtime in the event of outages or catastrophic occurrences.
In support of our commitment  to innovation and a better customer experience, we have been on a multi-year evolution to modernize our
marketplace.  Through  technologies  like  artificial  intelligence,  we  are  anticipating  the  needs  of  buyers,  sellers  and  developers,  empowering
entrepreneurs  looking to grow their business, and making the platform more accessible to everyone. We aim to create highly personalized and
inspiring shopping experiences powered by advanced technologies.
For information regarding technology-related  risks, see the information in “Item  1A: Risk Factors”  under the captions “Systems failures or
cyberattacks and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or services
could harm our business” and “Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.”
Intellectual Property
We  regard  the  protection  of  our  intellectual  property,  including  our  trademarks  (particularly  those  covering  the  eBay  name),  patents,
copyrights, domain names, trade dress and trade secrets as critical to our success. We aggressively protect our intellectual property rights by relying
on federal, state and common law rights in the U.S. and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual
restrictions to protect our proprietary rights in products and services. We routinely enter into confidentiality and invention assignment agreements
with our employees and contractors and nondisclosure agreements with parties with whom we conduct business to limit access to and disclosure of
our proprietary information.
We pursue the registration of our domain names, trademarks and service marks in the U.S. and internationally. Additionally, we have filed
U.S.  and international  patent applications  covering  certain  aspects  of our proprietary  technology.  Effective  trademark,  copyright,  patent,  domain
name, trade dress and trade secret protection is typically expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We must protect our intellectual property
rights  and  other  proprietary  rights  in  an  increasing  number  of  jurisdictions,  a  process  that  is  expensive  and  time  consuming  and  may  not  be
successful.
8

We have registered our core brands as trademarks and domain names in the U.S. and a large number of other jurisdictions and have in place
an active program to continue to secure trademarks and domain names that correspond to our brands in markets of interest. If we are unable to
register or protect our trademarks or domain names, we could be adversely affected in any jurisdiction in which our trademarks or domain names
are  not  registered  or  protected.  We  have  licensed  in  the  past,  and  expect  to  license  in  the  future,  certain  of  our  proprietary  rights,  such  as
trademarks or copyrighted material, to others.
From time to time, third parties have claimed - and others will likely claim in the future - that we have infringed their intellectual property rights.
We are typically involved in a number of such legal proceedings at any time. Please see the information in “Item 3: Legal Proceedings” and in “Item
1A: Risk Factors” under the captions “The listing or sale by our users of items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners,
including pirated or counterfeit items, may harm our business,” and “We may be unable to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property
rights and face ongoing risk from patent litigation and allegations by third parties that we are infringing their intellectual property rights.”
Human Capital Management
As of December 31, 2020, we employed approximately 12,700 people globally. Approximately 6,000 of our employees were located in the
U.S. eBay has robust people-focused programs to support and retain our employees globally and to attract our future employees. Our recruitment,
development, compensation and benefits and wellness programs are designed to reflect our cultural values and our goal to make eBay competitive
in the market for talent and a place that is welcoming and inclusive. eBay’s management is focused on delivering programs that develop and support
our people and connect them with our customers, our community, and each other.
Culture
In 2020, after engaging with our workforce, customers, and investors, CEO Jamie Iannone introduced “Our DNA”, a framework to link all
employees to our purpose, our role in people’s lives, our strategic vision, and our beliefs.
Our Purpose: We empower people and create economic opportunity for all
Our Role in People’s Lives: A marketplace that brings people together to spark unexpected joy
Our Strategic Vision: Become the best global marketplace for buyers and sellers through a tech-led re-imagination of eBay
Our Beliefs: These beliefs reflect our culture at its best and our shared desire to be part of a company with a wonderful, productive, fun way
of working where we deliver the best we can for ourselves as employees and for our customers.
•
Empower our community
•
Innovate boldly
•
Deliver with impact
•
Be for everyone
•
Act with integrity
Pandemic Response
Adapting to working during the COVID-19 pandemic has been a major focus of our people programs. When companies were required to close
their  workplaces,  eBay  quickly  moved  to  facilitate  our  people  working  from  home.  eBay  provided  equipment,  systems,  and  resources  for  home
connection, including for our customer experience team members who all shifted to working from home. In 2020, eBay made two payments to all
employees  to  allow  them  to  cover  individual  needs  and  well-being.  We  also  increased  work  flexibility  to  balance  personal  and  professional
responsibilities and provided back-up in-home child and adult care in the U.S., U.K., Canada, Germany and Ireland. eBay has continually engaged
with our people to support physical and mental health for them and their families through online wellness resources, webinars, telehealth access and
expansion of company-paid mental health support as well as additional training for managers. In recognition of the extraordinary circumstances
affecting the team, we also provided an additional paid day off globally for all employees and contractors.
9

Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
eBay’s Diversity, Equity and Inclusion program is focused on three strategic areas – workforce, workplace and marketplace. Equity is at the
forefront of all we do to hire, grow, and keep top talent, enhance corporate performance, and foster a welcoming and inclusive place to work, learn
and  grow.  Starting  with  a  comprehensive  diversity  recruiting  strategy,  we  review  and  enhance  processes,  including  deepening  data  insights,
updating learning and development practices and a new governance model to ensure that a diverse set of candidates are connected to eBay and
can see themselves as being successful here. Our Communities of Inclusion welcome and connect eBay employees all over the world to help us
build and nurture employees, allies and external communities. They host events and forums to connect employees to groups organized around age,
disability  status,  ethnicity,  gender,  religion,  military  status,  parental  status  and  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  and  expression.  We  are
currently preparing our fifth Global Diversity & Inclusion report for publication later this year that shares stories and workforce data.
Acting with Integrity
We reaffirmed and expanded our commitment to ethics and acting with integrity in 2020. We took big and small actions to ensure that we are
open,  honest,  ethical  and  authentic  with  a  company-wide  webinar  meeting  and  a  series  of  leadership  trainings  with  an  outside  ethics  expert,
quarterly “tone from the top” engagements between leaders with their employees, and daily ethics contests during Ethics and Compliance Week.
Parental Leave
In addition to competitive pay and benefits, eBay offers additional parental time off beyond what’s required by law in the U.S. and in most
countries where we operate. This benefit is offered for parents welcoming a new child into the family whether by giving birth, adopting or welcoming
a child through surrogacy. This is an important demonstration of our commitment to working parents and their families.
Employee Voice & Values
In addition to multiple channels for sharing feedback, we also regularly survey our employees on trust and engagement, their experience with
diversity,  equity  and  inclusion  as  well  as  ethics  and  integrity.  Our  employees  highly  value  eBay’s  approach  to  Impact  and  Responsibility  and
Diversity, Equity & Inclusion discussed earlier in the report. These commitments are core to our business and they positively impact recruitment,
engagement and retention.
Available Information
Our Internet address is www.ebay.com. Our investor relations website is located at investors.ebayinc.com. We make available free of charge
on our investor relations website under the heading “Financial Information - SEC Filings” our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on
Form  10-Q,  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  and  amendments  to  those  reports  as  soon  as  reasonably  practicable  after  such  materials  are
electronically filed with (or furnished to) the SEC at www.sec.gov.
We  webcast  our  earnings  calls  and  certain  events  we  participate  in  or  host  with  members  of  the  investment  community  on  our  investor
relations  website.  Additionally,  we  provide  notifications  of  news  or  announcements  regarding  our  financial  performance,  including  SEC  filings,
investor  events,  press  and  earnings  releases,  and  blogs  on  our  investor  relations  website.  Company  sustainability  information  for  investors  is
available  on  our  investor  relations  website  under  the  heading  “ESG  Investors.”  Corporate  governance  information,  including  our  governance
guidelines for our Board of Directors (“Board”), Board committee charters and code of conduct, is also available on our investor relations website
under the heading “Corporate Governance.”
The contents of our websites and webcasts and information that can be accessed through our websites and webcasts are not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or in any other report or document we file with (or furnish to) the SEC, and any references to our
websites and webcasts are intended to be inactive textual references only.
10

Item 1A: RISK FACTORS
Risk Factors Summary:
The summary of risks below provides an overview of the principal risks we are exposed to in the normal course of our business activities:
•
Our operating and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows, as well as the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
•
Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business.
•
The global COVID-19 pandemic could harm our business and results of operations.
•
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates could negatively impact our financial results.
•
Our international operations and engagement in cross-border trade are subject to risks, which could harm our business.
•
Our business may be adversely affected by geopolitical events, natural disasters, seasonal factors and similar factors.
•
Our success depends to a large degree on our ability to successfully address the rapidly evolving market for transactions on mobile devices.
•
If we cannot keep pace with rapid technological developments or continue to innovate and create new initiatives to provide new programs,
products and services, the use of our products and our revenues could decline.
•
Changes to our programs to protect buyers and sellers could increase our costs and loss rate.
•
Development  of  our  payments  system  requires  ongoing  investment,  is  subject  to  evolving  laws,  regulations,  rules,  and  standards,  and
involves risk, including risks related to our dependence on third-party providers.
•
We  may  be  unable  to  adequately  protect  or  enforce  our  intellectual  property  rights  and  face  ongoing  risks  from  patent  litigation  and
allegations by third parties that we are infringing their intellectual property rights.
•
Failure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our platforms would increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely
diminish merchant and consumer confidence in and use of our services.
•
Our business is subject to online security risks, including security breaches and cyberattacks.
•
Systems failures and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or
services could harm our business.
•
We  may  not  be  able  to  attract,  retain,  and  develop  the  highly  skilled  employees  and  senior  management  that  we  need  to  support  our
business.
•
Problems with or price increases by third parties who provide services to us or to our sellers could harm our business.
•
Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight.
•
Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.
•
We are regularly subject to general litigation, regulatory disputes, and government inquiries.
•
We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business
•
The listing or sale by our users of items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners, including pirated or counterfeit
items, may harm our business.
•
We are subject to risks associated with information disseminated through our services.
•
Fluctuations in interest rates could adversely impact our financial results.
•
We have substantial indebtedness, and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, and we may not generate sufficient
cash flow from our business to service our indebtedness.
•
Our business may be subject to sales and other taxes and we may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities.
•
Our business and its users are subject to Internet sales tax and sales reporting and record-keeping obligations.
•
The  closing  of  the  proposed  transfer  of  our  Classifieds  business  may  not  be  completed  in  accordance  with  expected  plans  or  on  the
currently contemplated terms or timeline, or at all, and may not generate the anticipated returns to eBay.
•
Acquisitions,  dispositions,  joint  ventures,  strategic  partnerships  and  strategic  investments  could  result  in  operating  difficulties  and  could
harm our business.
•
We could incur significant liability if the Distribution of PayPal is determined to be a taxable transaction.
•
We may be exposed to claims and liabilities as a result of the Distribution of PayPal.
11

Risk Factors:
You should carefully review the following discussion of the risks that may affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, as
well  as  our  consolidated  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  and  the  other  information  appearing  in  this  report,  for  important  information
regarding risks that affect us. Current global economic events and conditions may amplify many of these risks. These risks are not the only risks that
may affect us. Additional risks that we are not aware of or do not believe are material at the time of this filing may also become important factors that
adversely affect our business.
Business, Economic, Market and Operating Risks
Our operating and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows, as well as the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
Our operating and financial results have varied on a quarterly basis during our operating history and may continue to fluctuate significantly as a
result of a variety of factors, including as a result of the risks set forth in this “Risk Factors” section. In view of the rapidly evolving nature of our
business, period-to-period comparisons of our operating results may not be meaningful, and you should not rely upon them as an indication of future
performance. It is difficult for us to forecast the level or source of our revenues or earnings (loss) accurately, particularly given that substantially all of
our net revenues each quarter come from transactions involving sales during that quarter. Due to the inherent difficulty in forecasting revenues, it is
also difficult to forecast expenses as a percentage of net revenues. Quarterly and annual expenses as a percentage of net revenues reflected in our
consolidated financial statements may be significantly different from historical or projected percentages.
Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business.
The businesses and markets in which we operate are intensely competitive. We currently and potentially compete with a wide variety of online
and  offline  companies  providing  goods  and  services  to  consumers  and  merchants,  a  number  of  which  have  significant  resources,  large  user
communities and well-established brands. The Internet and mobile networks provide new, rapidly evolving and intensely competitive channels for
the  sale  of  all  types  of  goods  and  services.  We  compete  in  two-sided  markets,  and  must  attract  both  buyers  and  sellers  to  use  our  platforms.
Consumers who purchase or sell goods and services through us have more and more alternatives, and merchants have more channels to reach
consumers. We expect competition to continue to intensify. The barriers to entry into these channels can be low, and businesses easily can launch
online sites or mobile platforms and applications at nominal cost by using commercially available software or partnering with any of a number of
successful ecommerce companies. As we respond to changes in the competitive environment, we may, from time to time, make pricing, service or
marketing decisions or acquisitions that may be controversial with and lead to dissatisfaction  among sellers, which could reduce activity on our
platform and harm our profitability.
We face  increased competitive  pressure  online and offline.  In  particular,  the  competitive  norm  for,  and the  expected  level of  service  from,
ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce  has  significantly  increased  due  to,  among  other  factors,  improved  user  experience,  greater  ease  of  buying
goods,  lower  (or  no)  shipping  costs,  faster  shipping  times  and  more  favorable  return  policies.  In  addition,  certain  platform  businesses,  such  as
Alibaba, Amazon,  Apple, Facebook  and Google,  many  of  whom  are  larger  than  us or have greater  capitalization,  have a dominant  and secure
position in other industries or certain significant markets, and offer other goods and services to consumers and merchants that we do not offer. If we
are  unable  to  change  our  products,  offerings  and  services  in  ways  that  reflect  the  changing  demands  of  ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce
marketplaces, particularly the higher growth of sales of fixed-price items and higher expected service levels (some of which depend on services
provided by sellers on our platforms), or compete effectively with and adapt to changes in larger platform businesses, our business will suffer.
Competitors with other revenue sources may also be able to devote more resources to marketing and promotional campaigns, adopt more
aggressive pricing policies and devote more resources to website, mobile platforms and applications and systems development than we can. Other
competitors  may offer  or continue to offer faster  and/or free shipping, delivery on Sunday, same-day delivery, favorable return  policies or other
transaction-related services which improve the user experience on their sites and which could be impractical or inefficient for our sellers to match.
Competitors  may  be  able  to  innovate  faster  and  more  efficiently,  and  new  technologies  may  increase  the  competitive  pressures  by  enabling
competitors to offer more efficient or lower-cost services.
12

Some of our  competitors  control  other  products  and services  that  are  important  to our  success,  including credit  card interchange,  Internet
search, and mobile operating systems. Such competitors could manipulate pricing, availability, terms or operation of service related to their products
and services in a manner that impacts our competitive offerings. For example, Google, which operates a shopping platform service, has from time to
time made changes to its search algorithms that reduced the amount of search traffic directed to us from searches on Google. If we are unable to
use or adapt to operational changes in such services, we may face higher costs for such services, face integration or technological barriers or lose
customers, which could cause our business to suffer.
Consumers who might use our sites to buy goods have a wide variety of alternatives, including traditional department, warehouse, boutique,
discount and general merchandise stores (as well as the online and mobile operations of these traditional retailers), online retailers and their related
mobile offerings, online and offline aggregation and classified services, social media platforms and other shopping channels, such as offline and
online home shopping networks. In the United States, these include, but are not limited to, Amazon, Facebook, Google, Walmart, Target, Macy’s,
Etsy, StockX, Shopify, Wayfair, TheRealReal, Overstock.com and Rakuten, among others. In addition, consumers have a large number of online
and offline channels focused on one or more of the categories of products offered on our site.
Consumers also can turn to many companies that offer a variety of services that provide other channels for buyers to find and buy items from
sellers of all sizes, including social media, online aggregation and classifieds platforms, such as websites operated by Adevinta or Naspers Limited
and others such as craigslist, Oodle.com and Facebook. Consumers also can turn to shopping-comparison  sites, such as Google Shopping. In
certain  markets,  our  fixed-price  listing  and  traditional  auction-style  listing  formats  increasingly  are  being  challenged  by  other  formats,  such  as
classifieds.
We use product search engines and paid search advertising to help users find our sites, but these services also have the potential to divert
users  to  other  online  shopping  destinations.  Consumers  may  choose  to  search  for  products  and  services  with  a  horizontal  search  engine  or
shopping  comparison  website,  and  such  sites  may  also  send  users  to  other  shopping  destinations.  In  addition,  sellers  are  increasingly  utilizing
multiple sales channels, including the acquisition of new customers by paying for search-related advertisements on horizontal search engine sites,
such as Google, Naver and Baidu.
Consumers and merchants who might use our sites to sell goods also have many alternatives, including general ecommerce sites, such as
Amazon, Alibaba, Zalando and Coupang, and more specialized sites, such as Etsy. Our international sites also compete for sellers with general and
specialized ecommerce sites. Sellers may also choose to sell their goods through other channels, such as classifieds platforms. Consumers and
merchants also can create and sell through their own sites, and may choose to purchase online advertising instead of using our services. In some
countries, there are online sites that have larger customer  bases and greater brand recognition,  as well as competitors  that may have a better
understanding  of  local  culture  and  commerce.  We  may  increasingly  compete  with  local  competitors  in  developing  countries  that  have  unique
advantages, such as a greater ability to operate under local regulatory authorities.
In addition, certain manufacturers may limit or cease distribution of their products through online channels, such as our sites. Manufacturers
may attempt to use contractual obligations or existing or future government regulation to prohibit or limit ecommerce in certain categories of goods
or services. Manufacturers may also attempt to enforce minimum resale price maintenance or minimum advertised price arrangements to prevent
distributors from selling on our platforms or on the Internet generally, or drive distributors to sell at prices that would make us less attractive relative
to other alternatives. The adoption by those or other policies could adversely affect our results of operations and result in loss of market share and
diminished value of our brands.
The principal competitive factors for us include the following:
    
•
ability to attract, retain and engage buyers and sellers;
•
volume of transactions and price and selection of goods;
•
trust in the seller and the transaction;
•
customer service;
•
brand recognition;    
13

•
community cohesion, interaction and size;
•
website, mobile platform and application ease-of-use and accessibility;
•
system reliability and security;
•
reliability of delivery and payment, including customer preference for fast delivery and free shipping and returns;
•
level of service fees; and
•
quality of search tools.
We  may  be  unable  to  compete  successfully  against  current  and  future  competitors.  Some  current  and  potential  competitors  have  longer
operating histories, larger customer bases and greater brand recognition in other business and Internet sectors than we do.
The global COVID-19 pandemic could harm our business and results of operations.
The global spread of COVID-19 and related measures to contain its spread (such as government mandated business closures and shelter in-
place guidelines) have created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our
business,  results  of  operations,  financial  condition  and  liquidity  in  the  future  will  depend  on  numerous  evolving  factors  that  we  cannot  predict,
including  the  duration  and  scope  of  the  pandemic;  any  resurgence  of  the  pandemic;  the  availability  and  distribution  of  effective  treatments  and
vaccines; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; the impact of the
pandemic  on  national  and  global  economic  activity,  unemployment  levels  and  financial  markets,  including  the  possibility  of  a  national  or  global
recession; the potential for shipping difficulties, including slowed deliveries from sellers to their customers; and the ability of consumers to pay for
products. The COVID-19 pandemic has generally resulted in a decrease in consumer spending, which could have an adverse impact on our sellers
through reduced consumer demand for their products and availability of inventory, which could in turn negatively impact the demand for use of our
platforms. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to require employees to work remotely for an extended period of time, which could
negatively impact our business and harm productivity and collaboration. If there is a prolonged impact of COVID-19, it could adversely affect our
business,  results  of  operations,  financial  condition  and  liquidity,  perhaps  materially.  The  future  impact  of  COVID-19  and  these  containment
measures cannot be predicted with certainty and may increase our borrowing costs and other costs of capital and otherwise adversely affect our
business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and we cannot assure that we will have access to external financing at times and on
terms we consider acceptable, or at all, or that we will not experience other liquidity issues going forward.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the related measures to contain its spread have not adversely affected our consolidated results of operations to
date.  Additionally,  to  date,  our  Marketplace  platforms  experienced  improved  traffic  and  buyer  acquisition  due  to  the  ongoing  impact  of  mobility
restrictions taken globally to contain the spread of COVID-19 and changes in consumer behaviors that have resulted in more online shopping. The
impacts seen may continue to create volatility in our results and a wider range of outcomes as consumer behaviors and mobility restrictions continue
to evolve.
We are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, which could negatively impact our financial results.
Because we generate the majority of our revenues outside the United States but report our financial results in U.S. dollars, our financial results
are impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, or foreign exchange rates. The results of operations of many of our internationally
focused platforms are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations as the financial results of the applicable subsidiaries are translated from the
local currency into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes.
While from time to time we enter into transactions to hedge portions of our foreign currency translation exposure, it is impossible to predict or
eliminate  the  effects  of  this  exposure.  Fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  could  significantly  impact  our  financial  results,  which  may  have  a
significant impact on the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
14

Our international operations and engagement in cross-border trade are subject to risks, which could harm our business.
Our international businesses, especially in the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia and South Korea, and cross-border business from greater
China, have generated a majority of our net revenues in recent years. In addition to uncertainty about our ability to generate revenues from our
foreign operations and expand into international markets, there are risks inherent in doing business internationally, including:
•
uncertainties and instability in economic and market conditions resulting from Brexit;
•
expenses  associated  with  localizing  our  products  and  services  and  customer  data,  including  offering  customers  the  ability  to  transact
business in the local currency and adapting our products and services to local preferences (e.g., payment methods) with which we may
have limited or no experience;
•
trade barriers and changes in trade regulations;
•
difficulties  in  developing,  staffing,  and  simultaneously  managing  a  large  number  of  varying  foreign  operations  as  a  result  of  distance,
language, and cultural differences;
•
stringent local labor laws and regulations;
•
credit risk and higher levels of payment fraud;
•
profit  repatriation  restrictions,  foreign  currency  exchange  restrictions  or  extreme  fluctuations  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates  for  a
particular currency;
•
global or regional economic conditions that impact companies and customers with which we do business;
•
political or social unrest, economic instability, repression, or human rights issues;
•
geopolitical events, including natural disasters, public health issues (such as the coronavirus), acts of war, and terrorism;
•
import or export regulations;
•
compliance with U.S. laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and foreign laws prohibiting corrupt payments to government officials,
as well as U.S. and foreign laws designed to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities;
•
antitrust and competition regulations;
•
potentially adverse tax developments and consequences;
•
economic uncertainties relating to sovereign and other debt;
•
different, uncertain, or more stringent user protection, data protection, privacy, and other laws;
•
risks related to other government regulation or required compliance with local laws;
•
national or regional differences in macroeconomic growth rates;
•
payment intermediation regulations;
•
local licensing and reporting obligations; and
•
increased difficulties in collecting accounts receivable.
 
Violations of the complex foreign and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international operations may result in fines, criminal actions,
or sanctions against us, our officers, or our employees; prohibitions on the conduct of our business; and damage to our reputation. Although we
have  implemented  policies  and  procedures  designed  to  promote  compliance  with  these  laws,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  our  employees,
contractors, or agents will not violate our policies. These risks inherent in our international operations and expansion increase our costs of doing
business internationally and could harm our business.
Cross-border  trade  is  an  important  source  of  both  revenue  and  profits  for  us.  Cross-border  trade  also  represents  our  primary  (or  in some
cases,  only)  presence  in  certain  important  markets,  such  as  Brazil/Latin  America,  China,  and  various  other  countries.  The  interpretation  and/or
application of laws, such as those related to intellectual property rights of authentic products, selective distribution networks, and sellers in other
countries listing items on the Internet, could impose restrictions on, or increase the costs of, purchasing, selling, shipping, or returning goods across
national borders. The shipping of goods across national borders is often more expensive and complicated than domestic shipping. Any factors that
increase the costs of cross-border trade or restrict, delay, or make cross-border trade more difficult or impractical would lower our revenues and
profits and could harm our business.
15

Our business may be adversely affected by geopolitical events, natural disasters, seasonal factors and other factors that cause our users to
spend less time on our websites or mobile platforms and applications, including increased usage of other websites.
Our  users  may  spend  less  time  on  our  websites  and  our  applications  for  mobile  devices  as  a  result  of  a  variety  of  diversions,  including:
geopolitical events, such as war, the threat of war, or terrorist activity; natural disasters or the effects of climate change (such as drought, flooding,
wildfires,  increased  storm  severity,  and  sea  level  rise);  power  shortages  or  outages,  major  public  health  issues,  including  pandemics  (such  as
COVID-19);  social  networking  or  other  entertainment  websites  or  mobile  applications;  significant  local,  national  or  global  events  capturing  the
attention of a large part of the population; and seasonal fluctuations due to a variety of factors. If any of these, or any other factors, divert our users
from using our websites or mobile applications, our business could be materially adversely affected.
Our success depends to a large degree on our ability to successfully address the rapidly evolving market for transactions on mobile devices.
Mobile devices are increasingly used for ecommerce transactions. A significant and growing portion of our users access our platforms through
mobile devices. We may lose users if we are not able to continue to meet our users’ mobile and multi-screen experience expectations. The variety of
technical  and  other  configurations  across  different  mobile  devices  and  platforms  increases  the  challenges  associated  with  this  environment.  In
addition,  a  number  of  other  companies  with  significant  resources  and  a  number  of  innovative  startups  have  introduced  products  and  services
focusing on mobile markets.
Our  ability  to  successfully  address  the  challenges  posed  by  the  rapidly  evolving  market  for  mobile  transactions  is  crucial  to  our  continued
success, and any failure to continuously increase the volume of mobile transactions effected through our platforms could harm our business.
If we cannot keep pace with rapid technological developments or continue to innovate and create new initiatives to provide new programs,
products and services, the use of our products and our revenues could decline.
Rapid,  significant  technological  changes  continue  to  confront  the  industries  in  which  we  operate  and  we  cannot  predict  the  effect  of
technological changes on our business. We also continuously strive to create new initiatives and innovations that offer growth opportunities, such as
our new payments and advertising offerings. In addition to our own initiatives and innovations, we rely in part on third parties, including some of our
competitors, for the development of and access to new technologies. We expect that new services and technologies applicable to the industries in
which  we  operate  will  continue  to  emerge.  These  new  services  and  technologies  may  be  superior  to,  or  render  obsolete,  the  technologies  we
currently use in our products and services. Incorporating new technologies into our products and services may require substantial expenditures and
take considerable time, and ultimately may not be successful. In addition, our ability to adopt new services and develop new technologies may be
inhibited  by  industry-wide  standards,  new  laws  and  regulations,  resistance  to  change  from  our  users,  clients  or  merchants,  or  third  parties’
intellectual property rights. Our success will depend on our ability to develop new technologies and adapt to technological changes and evolving
industry standards.
Changes to our programs to protect buyers and sellers could increase our costs and loss rate.
Our eBay Money Back Guarantee program represents the means by which we compensate users who believe that they have been defrauded,
have not received the item that they purchased  or have received  an item  different  from what was described.  We expect  to continue to receive
communications  from  users  requesting  reimbursement  or  threatening  or commencing  legal action  against us if no reimbursement  is made. Our
liability for these sorts of claims is slowly beginning to be clarified in some jurisdictions and may be higher in some non-U.S. jurisdictions than it is in
the  United  States.  Litigation  involving  liability  for  any  such  third-party  actions  could  be  costly  and  time  consuming  for  us,  divert  management
attention, result in increased costs of doing business, lead to adverse judgments or settlements or otherwise harm our business. In addition, affected
users will likely complain to regulatory agencies that could take action against us, including imposing fines or seeking injunctions.
16

Development of our payments system requires ongoing investment, is subject to evolving laws, regulations, rules, and standards, and involves
risk, including risks related to our dependence on third-party providers.
We have invested and plan to continue to invest internal resources into our payments tools in order to maintain existing availability, expand into
additional markets and offer new payment methods and tools to our buyers and sellers. If we fail to invest adequate resources into payments on our
platform, or if our investment efforts are unsuccessful, unreliable or result in system failure, our payments services may not function properly or keep
pace with competitive offerings, which could negatively impact their usage and our Marketplace. Future errors, failures or outages could cause our
buyers and sellers to lose confidence in our payments system and could cause them to cease using our marketplace.
Our ability to expand our payments services into additional countries is dependent upon the third-party providers we use to support this service.
If  we  transition  to  new  third-party  payment  service  providers  for  any  reason,  we  may  be  required  to  invest  significant  financial  and  personnel
resources  to  support  such  transition  or  could  be  unable  to  find  a  suitable  replacement  service  provider.  As  we  expand  the  availability  of  our
payments services to additional markets or offer new payment methods to our sellers and buyers in the future, we may become subject to additional
regulations and compliance requirements, and exposed to heightened fraud risk, which could lead to an increase in our operating expenses.
We rely on third-party service providers to perform services related to compliance, credit card processing, payment disbursements, currency
exchange, identity verification, sanctions screening, and fraud analysis and detection. As a result, we are subject to a number of risks related to our
dependence on third-party service providers. If any or some of these service providers fail to perform adequately or if any such service provider
were to terminate or modify its relationship with us unexpectedly, our sellers’ ability to use our platform to receive orders or payments could be
adversely affected, which would increase costs, drive sellers away from our marketplaces, result in potential legal liability, and harm our business. In
addition, we and our third-party service providers may experience service outages from time to time that could adversely impact payments made on
our  platform.  Additionally,  any  unexpected  termination  or  modification  of  those  third-party  services  could  lead  to  a  lapse  in  the  effectiveness  of
certain fraud prevention and detection tools.
Our third-party service providers may increase the fees they charge us in the future, which would increase our operating expenses. This could,
in turn, require us to increase the fees we charge to sellers and cause some sellers to reduce listings on our marketplaces or to leave our platform
altogether by closing their accounts.
Payments  are  governed  by  complex  and  continuously  evolving  laws  and  regulations  that  are  subject  to  change  and  vary  across  different
jurisdictions in the United States and globally. As a result, we are required to spend significant time and effort to determine whether various licensing
and registration laws relating to payments apply to us and to comply with applicable laws and licensing and registration regulations. In addition, there
can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or retain any necessary licenses or registrations. Any failure or claim of failure on the part of the
Company  or  its  third-party  service  providers  to  comply  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  payments  could  require  us  to  expend
significant  resources,  result  in  liabilities,  limit  or  preclude  our  ability  to  enter  certain  markets  and  harm  our  reputation.  In  addition,  changes  in
payment regulations, including changes to the credit or debit card interchange rates in the United States or other markets, could adversely affect
payments on our platform and make our payments systems less profitable.
Further, we are indirectly subject to payment card association operating rules and certification requirements pursuant to agreements with our
third-party payment processors. These rules and requirements, including the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard and rules governing
electronic funds transfers, are subject to change or reinterpretation, making it difficult for us to comply. Any failure to comply with these rules and
certification  requirements  could  impact  our  ability  to  meet  our  contractual  obligations  to  our  third-party  payment  processors  and  could  result  in
potential fines. In addition, changes in these rules and requirements, including any change in our designation by major payment card providers,
could require a change in our business operations and could result in limitations on or loss of our ability to accept payment cards, any of which could
negatively impact our business. Such changes could also increase our costs of compliance, which could lead to increased fees for us or our sellers
and adversely affect payments on our platform or usage of our payments services and Marketplace.
17

Our payments system is susceptible to illegal uses, including money laundering, terrorist financing, fraud and payments to sanctioned parties. If
our compliance program and internal controls to limit such illegal activity are ineffective, government authorities could bring legal action against us or
otherwise suspend our ability to offer payment services in one or more markets.
We may be unable to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights and face ongoing risks from patent litigation and allegations
by third parties that we are infringing their intellectual property rights.
We believe the protection of our intellectual property, including our trademarks, patents, copyrights, domain names, trade dress, and trade
secrets, is critical to our success. We seek to protect our intellectual property rights by relying on applicable laws and regulations in the United
States and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual restrictions to protect our proprietary rights
when offering or procuring products and services, including confidentiality and invention assignment agreements entered into with our employees
and contractors and confidentiality agreements with parties with whom we conduct business.
However, effective intellectual property protection may not be available in every country in which our products and services are made available,
and contractual arrangements and other steps we have taken to protect our intellectual property may not prevent third parties from infringing or
misappropriating  our  intellectual  property  or  deter  independent  development  of  equivalent  or  superior  intellectual  property  rights  by  others.
Trademark, copyright, patent, domain name, trade dress and trade secret protection is very expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We
must protect our intellectual property rights and other proprietary rights in an increasing number of jurisdictions, a process that is expensive and time
consuming and may not be successful in every jurisdiction. Also, we may not be able to discover or determine the extent of any unauthorized use of
our proprietary rights. We have licensed in the past, and expect to license in the future, certain of our proprietary rights, such as trademarks or
copyrighted material, to others. These licensees may take actions that diminish the value of our proprietary rights or harm our reputation. Any failure
to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights, or significant costs incurred in doing so, could materially harm our business.
Additionally, we have repeatedly been sued for allegedly infringing other parties’ patents. We are a defendant in a number of patent suits and
have been notified of several other potential patent disputes.
As the number of patent owners and products in the software industry increases and the functionality of these products further overlap, and as
we acquire technology through acquisitions or licenses, litigation may be necessary to determine the validity and scope of the intellectual property
rights  of  others  and  we  may  become  increasingly  subject  to  patent  suits  and  other  infringement  claims,  including  copyright,  and  trademark
infringement claims. Such claims may be brought directly against us and/or against our customers whom we may indemnify either because we are
contractually obligated to do so or we choose to do so as a business matter. Patent claims, whether meritorious or not, are time-consuming and
costly  to  defend  and  resolve,  and  could  require  us  to  make  expensive  changes  in  our  methods  of  doing  business,  enter  into  costly  royalty  or
licensing  agreements,  make  substantial  payments  to  satisfy  adverse  judgments  or  settle  claims  or  proceedings,  or  cease  conducting  certain
operations, which would harm our business.
Failure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our platforms would increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely
diminish merchant and consumer confidence in and use of our services.
We face risks with respect to fraudulent activities on our platforms and periodically receive complaints from buyers and sellers who may not
have received the goods that they had contracted to purchase or payment for the goods that a buyer had contracted to purchase. In some European
and Asian jurisdictions, buyers may also have the right to withdraw from a sale made by a professional seller within a specified time period. While
we can, in some cases, suspend the accounts of users who fail to fulfill their payment or delivery obligations to other users, we do not have the
ability to require users to make payment or deliver goods, or otherwise make users whole other than through our buyer protection program, which in
the United States we refer to as the eBay Money Back Guarantee, or as we roll out our new payments capabilities, by compensating our sellers for
fraudulent payments. Although we have implemented measures to detect and reduce the occurrence  of fraudulent activities,  combat bad buyer
experiences and increase buyer satisfaction, including evaluating sellers on the basis of their transaction history and restricting or suspending their
activity,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  these  measures  will  be  effective  in  combating  fraudulent  transactions  or  improving  overall  satisfaction
among sellers, buyers, and other participants. Additional measures to address fraud could negatively affect the attractiveness of our services to
buyers or sellers, resulting in
18

a reduction in the ability to attract new users or retain current users, damage to our reputation, or a diminution in the value of our brand names.
Our business is subject to online security risks, including security breaches and cyberattacks.
Our businesses involve the storage and transmission of users’ personal financial information. In addition, a significant number of our users
authorize us to bill their payment card accounts directly for all transaction and other fees charged by us or, in certain cases, third-party service
providers utilized in our payment services. An increasing number of websites, including those owned by several other large Internet and offline
companies, have disclosed breaches of their security, some of which have involved sophisticated and highly targeted attacks on portions of their
websites or infrastructure. Our information technology and infrastructure may be vulnerable to cyberattacks or security incidents and third parties
may be able to access our users’ proprietary information and payment card data that are stored on or accessible through our systems. Any security
breach at a company providing services to us or our users could have similar effects.
We may also need to expend significant additional resources to protect against security breaches or to redress problems caused by breaches.
Additionally, our insurance policies carry low coverage limits, which may not be adequate to reimburse us for losses caused by security breaches
and we may not be able to fully collect, if at all, under these insurance policies.
Systems failures and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or
services could harm our business.
Our systems may experience service interruptions or degradation due to hardware and software defects or malfunctions, computer denial-of-
service  and  other  cyberattacks,  human  error,  earthquakes,  hurricanes,  floods,  fires,  natural  disasters,  power  losses,  disruptions  in
telecommunications services, fraud, military or political conflicts, terrorist attacks, computer viruses, or other events. Our systems are also subject to
break-ins,  sabotage  and  intentional  acts  of  vandalism.  Some  of  our  systems  are  not  fully  redundant  and  our  disaster  recovery  planning  is  not
sufficient for all eventualities.
We have experienced and will likely continue to experience system failures, denial-of-service attacks and other events or conditions from time
to time that interrupt the availability or reduce the speed or functionality of our websites and mobile applications, including our payments services.
These events have resulted and likely will result in loss of revenue. A prolonged interruption in the availability or reduction in the speed or other
functionality of our websites and mobile applications or payments services could materially harm our business. Frequent or persistent interruptions
in our services could cause current or potential users to believe that our systems are unreliable, leading them to switch to our competitors or to avoid
our sites, and could permanently harm our reputation and brands. Moreover, to the extent that any system failure or similar event results in damages
to  our  customers  or  their  businesses,  these  customers  could  seek  significant  compensation  from  us  for  their  losses  and  those  claims,  even  if
unsuccessful, would likely be time-consuming and costly for us to address. We also rely on facilities, components and services supplied by third
parties and our business may be materially adversely affected to the extent these components or services do not meet our expectations or these
third parties cease to provide the services or facilities. In particular, a decision by any of our third party hosting providers to close a facility that we
use could cause system interruptions and delays, result in loss of critical data and cause lengthy interruptions in our services. We do not carry
business interruption insurance sufficient to compensate us for losses that may result from interruptions in our service as a result of systems failures
and similar events.
Our success largely depends on key employees. Because competition for our key employees is intense, we may not be able to attract, retain,
and develop the highly skilled employees we need to support our business. The loss of senior management or other key employees could harm our
business.
Our future performance depends substantially on the continued services of our senior management and other key employees, including highly
skilled engineers and product developers, and our ability to attract, retain, and motivate them. Competition for highly skilled individuals is intense,
especially in the Silicon Valley where our corporate headquarters are located, and we may be unable to successfully attract, integrate or retain
sufficiently  qualified  employees.  In  making  employment  decisions,  particularly  in  the  Internet  and  high-technology  industries,  employees  often
consider the value of their total compensation, including share-based awards such as restricted stock units, that they could receive in connection
with their employment. In addition, our employee hiring and retention also depend on our ability to build and maintain a diverse, welcoming and
inclusive workplace. If our
19

share-based or other compensation programs cease to be viewed as competitive, including due to fluctuations in our stock price, or our workplace is
not viewed as welcoming and inclusive, our ability to attract, retain, and motivate employees would be weakened, which could harm our business.
We do not have long-term employment agreements with any of our key employees and do not maintain any “key person” life insurance policies. The
loss of the services of any of our senior management or other key employees, or our inability to attract highly qualified senior management and other
key employees, could harm our business.
Problems with or price increases by third parties who provide services to us or to our sellers could harm our business.
A  number  of  third  parties  provide  services  to  us  or  to  our  sellers.  Such  services  include  seller  tools  that  automate  and  manage  listings,
merchant  tools  that  manage  listings  and interface  with  inventory  management  software,  storefronts  that  help  our  sellers  list  items  and shipping
providers that deliver goods sold on our platform, managed payments intermediation, among others. Financial or regulatory issues, labor issues
(e.g., strikes, lockouts, or work stoppages), or other problems that prevent these companies from providing services to us or our sellers could harm
our business.
Price increases by, or service terminations, disruptions or interruptions at, companies that provide services to us and our sellers and clients
could also reduce the number of listings on our platforms or make it more difficult for our sellers to complete transactions, thereby harming our
business. While we continue to work with global carriers to offer our sellers a variety of shipping options and to enhance their shipping experience,
postal rate increases may reduce the competitiveness of certain sellers’ offerings, and postal service changes could require certain sellers to utilize
alternatives which could be more expensive or inconvenient, which could in turn decrease the number of transactions on our sites, thereby harming
our business.
We have outsourced certain functions to third-party providers, including some customer support, managed payments and product development
functions, which are critical to our operations. If our service providers do not perform satisfactorily, our operations could be disrupted, which could
result in user dissatisfaction and could harm our business.
There can be no assurance that third parties who provide services directly to us or our sellers will continue to do so on acceptable terms, or at
all. If any third parties were to stop providing services to us or our sellers on acceptable terms, including as a result of bankruptcy, we may be
unable to procure alternatives from other third parties in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at all.
Regulatory and Legal Risks
Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight.
We  are  subject  to  laws  and  regulations  affecting  our  domestic  and  international  operations  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  consumer
protection, data privacy requirements, intellectual property ownership and infringement, prohibited items and stolen goods, tax, antitrust and anti-
competition, export requirements, anti-corruption, labor, advertising, digital content, real estate, billing, ecommerce, promotions, quality of services,
telecommunications, mobile communications and media, environmental, and health and safety regulations, as well as laws and regulations intended
to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities. In addition, we are, or may become, subject to further regulation in some of the
above-mentioned areas or new areas as a result of the continued development and expansion of our payments capabilities.
Compliance with these laws, regulations, and similar requirements may be onerous and expensive, and variances and inconsistencies from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction may further increase the cost of compliance and doing business. Any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of
changes in these laws and regulations or in their interpretation, could individually or in the aggregate make our products and services less attractive
to our customers, delay the introduction of new products or services in one or more regions, or cause us to change or limit our business practices.
We have implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance
that our employees, contractors, or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or our policies and procedures. 
20

Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.
We are subject to laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security, and transfer of personally identifiable information about our users
around  the  world.  Much  of  the  personal  information  that  we  collect,  especially  financial  information,  is  regulated  by  multiple  laws.  User  data
protection  laws  may  be  interpreted  and  applied  inconsistently  from  country  to  country.  In  many  cases,  these  laws  apply  not  only  to  third-party
transactions, but also to transfers of information between or among ourselves, our subsidiaries, and other parties with which we have commercial
relations. These laws continue to develop in ways we cannot predict and that may harm our business.
Regulatory scrutiny of privacy, user data protection, use of data and data collection is increasing on a global basis. We are subject to a number
of privacy and similar laws and regulations in the countries in which we operate and these laws and regulations will likely continue to evolve over
time, both through regulatory and legislative action and judicial decisions. In addition, compliance with these laws may restrict our ability to provide
services to our customers that they may find to be valuable. For example, the General Data Protection Regulation (“GDPR”) became effective in
May 2018. The GDPR, which applies to all of our activities conducted from an establishment in the European Union or related to products and
services  offered  in  the  European  Union,  imposes  a  range  of  new  compliance  obligations  regarding  the  handling  of  personal  data.  The  GDPR
imposes significant new obligations and compliance with these obligations depends in part on how particular regulators interpret and apply them. If
we fail to comply with the GDPR, or if regulators assert we have failed to comply with the GDPR, it may lead to regulatory enforcement actions,
which  can  result  in  monetary  penalties  of  up  to  4%  of  worldwide  revenue,  private  lawsuits,  or  reputational  damage.  In  the  U.S.,  California  has
adopted the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (“CCPA”), which became effective January 1, 2020 and which provides a new private right of
action for data breaches and requires companies that process information on California residents to make new disclosures to consumers about their
data collection, use and sharing practices and allow consumers to opt out of certain data sharing with third parties. In addition to the CCPA, several
other  U.S.  states  have adopted or are considering  adopting  laws and regulations  imposing obligations  regarding  the  handling of personal  data.
Compliance with the GDPR, the CCPA, and other current and future applicable international and U.S. privacy, cybersecurity and related laws can be
costly  and  time-consuming.  Complying  with  these  varying  national  and  international  requirements  could  cause  us  to  incur  substantial  costs  or
require us to change our business practices in a manner adverse to our business and violations of privacy-related laws can result in significant
penalties.
A determination that there have been violations of laws relating to our practices under communications-based laws could also expose us to
significant damage awards, fines and other penalties that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business. In particular, because
of the enormous number of texts, emails and other communications we send to our users, communications laws that provide a specified monetary
damage award or fine for each violation (such as those described below) could result in particularly large awards or fines.
For example, the Federal Communications Commission amended certain of its regulations under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, or
TCPA, in 2012 and 2013 in a manner that could increase our exposure to liability for certain types of telephonic communication with customers,
including but not limited to text messages to mobile phones. Under the TCPA, plaintiffs may seek actual monetary loss or statutory damages of $500
per violation, whichever is greater, and courts may treble the damage award for willful or knowing violations. We are regularly subject to class-action
lawsuits, as well as individual lawsuits, containing allegations that our businesses violated the TCPA. These lawsuits, and other private lawsuits not
currently alleged as class actions, seek damages (including statutory damages) and injunctive relief, among other remedies. Given the enormous
number of communications we send to our users, a determination that there have been violations of the TCPA or other communications-based
statutes could expose us to significant damage awards that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business.
We post on our websites our privacy policies and practices concerning the collection, use and disclosure of user data. Any failure, or perceived
failure, by us to comply with our posted privacy policies or with any regulatory requirements or orders or other federal, state or international privacy
or  consumer  protection-related  laws  and  regulations,  including  the  GDPR  and  the  CCPA,  could  result  in  proceedings  or  actions  against  us  by
governmental entities or others (e.g., class action privacy litigation), subject us to significant penalties and negative publicity, require us to change
our business practices, increase our costs and adversely affect our business. Data collection, privacy and security have become the subject of
increasing public concern. If Internet and mobile users were to reduce their use of our websites, mobile platforms, products, and services as a result
of these concerns, our
21

business could be harmed. We also have experienced security breaches and likely will in the future, which themselves may result in a violation of
these laws.
Other laws and regulations could harm our business.
It  is  not  always  clear  how  laws  and  regulations  governing  matters  relevant  to  our  business,  such  as  property  ownership,  copyrights,
trademarks, and other intellectual property issues, parallel imports and distribution controls, taxation, libel and defamation, and obscenity apply to
our businesses. Many of these laws were adopted prior to the advent of the Internet, mobile, and related technologies and, as a result, do not
contemplate or address the unique issues of the Internet and related technologies. Many of these laws, including some of those that do reference
the Internet are subject to interpretation by the courts on an ongoing basis and the resulting uncertainty in the scope and application of these laws
and  regulations  increases  the  risk  that  we  will  be  subject  to  private  claims  and  governmental  actions  alleging  violations  of  those  laws  and
regulations.
As our activities, the products and services we offer, our investment in other companies, and our geographical scope continue to expand,
regulatory agencies or courts may claim or hold that we or our users are subject to additional requirements (including licensure) or prohibited from
conducting our business in their jurisdiction, either generally or with respect to certain actions. For example, we have or will have investments in
other companies (such as Adevinta and Adyen) that raise the potential for us to be deemed an investment company as defined by the Investment
Company Act of 1940 (the “Investment Company Act”). While we intend to conduct our operations such that we will not be deemed an investment
company,  such  a  determination  would  require  us  to  initiate  burdensome  compliance  requirements  and  comply  with  restrictions  imposed  by  the
Investment Company Act that would limit our activities, including limitations on our capital structure and our ability to transact with affiliates, which
would have an adverse effect on our financial condition. Further, financial and political events have increased the level of regulatory scrutiny on
large companies, and regulatory agencies may view matters or interpret laws and regulations differently than they have in the past and in a manner
adverse to our businesses.
Numerous U.S. states and foreign jurisdictions, including the State of California, have regulations regarding “auctions” and the handling of
property by “secondhand dealers” or “pawnbrokers.” Several states and some foreign jurisdictions have attempted to impose such regulations upon
us or our users, and others may attempt to do so in the future. Attempted enforcement of these laws against some of our users appears to be
increasing and we could be required to change the way we or our users do business in ways that increase costs or reduce revenues, such as
forcing us to prohibit listings of certain items or restrict certain listing formats in some locations. We could also be subject to fines or other penalties,
and any of these outcomes could harm our business.
As we expand and localize our international activities,  we are increasingly  becoming obligated to comply with the laws of the countries or
markets in which we operate. In addition, because our services are accessible worldwide and we facilitate sales of goods and provide services to
users worldwide, one or more jurisdictions may claim that we or our users are required to comply with their laws based on the location of our servers
or one or more of our users, or the location of the product or service being sold or provided in an ecommerce transaction. Laws regulating Internet,
mobile and ecommerce technologies outside of the United States are generally less favorable to us than those in the United States. Compliance
may be more costly or may require us to change our business practices or restrict our service offerings, and the imposition of any regulations on us
or our users may harm our business. In addition, we may be subject to multiple overlapping legal or regulatory regimes that impose conflicting
requirements on us (e.g., in cross-border trade). Our alleged failure to comply with foreign laws could subject us to penalties ranging from criminal
prosecution to significant fines to bans on our services, in addition to the significant costs we may incur in defending against such actions.
We are regularly subject to general litigation, regulatory disputes, and government inquiries.
We are regularly subject to claims, lawsuits (including class actions and individual lawsuits), government investigations, and other proceedings
involving competition and antitrust, intellectual property, privacy, consumer protection, accessibility claims, securities, tax, labor and employment,
commercial disputes, content generated by our users, services and other matters. The number and significance of these disputes and inquiries have
increased as our Company has grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope and geographic reach, and our products and services have
increased in complexity. As the global regulatory and legal landscape evolves, we may also become subject to product liability claims when products
sold by third parties using our platforms result in personal injury, or illness, or death or injury to property.
22

The  outcome  and  impact  of  such  claims,  lawsuits,  government  investigations,  and  other  proceedings  cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty.
Regardless  of  the  outcome,  such  investigations  and  proceedings  can  have  an  adverse  impact  on  us  because  of  legal  costs,  diversion  of
management  resources,  and  other  factors.  Determining  reserves  for  our  pending  litigation  and  other  proceedings  is  a  complex,  fact-intensive
process that is subject to judgment calls. It is possible that a resolution of one or more such proceedings could require us to make substantial
payments to satisfy judgments, fines or penalties or to settle claims or proceedings, any of which could harm our business. These proceedings could
also result in reputational harm, criminal sanctions, consent decrees, or orders preventing us from offering certain products, or services, or requiring
a change in our business practices in costly ways, or requiring development of non-infringing or otherwise altered products or technologies. Any of
these consequences could harm our business.
We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business.
We are subject to scrutiny by various government agencies under U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including antitrust and competition
laws.  Some  jurisdictions  also  provide  private  rights  of  action  for  competitors  or  consumers  to  assert  claims  of  anti-competitive  conduct.  Other
companies and government agencies have in the past and may in the future allege that our actions violate the antitrust or competition laws of the
United  States,  individual  states,  the  European  Union  or  other  countries,  or  otherwise  constitute  unfair  competition.  An  increasing  number  of
governments are regulating competition law activities, including increased scrutiny in large markets such as China. Our business partnerships or
agreements  or  arrangements  with  customers  or  other  companies  could  give  rise  to  regulatory  action  or  antitrust  litigation.  Some  regulators,
particularly those outside of the United States, may perceive our business to be used so broadly that otherwise uncontroversial business practices
could be deemed anticompetitive. Certain competition authorities have conducted market studies of our industries. Such claims and investigations,
even if without foundation, may be very expensive to defend, involve negative publicity and substantial diversion of management time and effort and
could result in significant judgments against us or require us to change our business practices.
The listing or sale by our users of items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners, including pirated or counterfeit
items, may harm our business.
The listing or sale by our users of unlawful, counterfeit or stolen goods or unlawful services, or sale of goods or services in an unlawful manner,
has resulted and may continue to result in allegations of civil or criminal liability for  unlawful activities  against us (including the employees  and
directors of our various entities) involving activities carried out by users through our services. In a number of circumstances, third parties, including
government regulators and law enforcement officials, have alleged that our services aid and abet violations of certain laws, including laws regarding
the sale of counterfeit items, laws restricting or prohibiting the transferability (and by extension, the resale) of digital goods (e.g., books, music and
software), the fencing of stolen goods, selective distribution channel laws, customs laws, distance selling laws, and the sale of items outside of the
United States that are regulated by U.S. export controls.
In addition, allegations of infringement of intellectual property rights, including but not limited to counterfeit items, have resulted in threatened
and actual litigation from time to time by rights owners. These and similar suits may also force us to modify our business practices in a manner that
increases costs, lowers revenue, makes our websites and mobile platforms  less convenient to customers,  and requires us to spend substantial
resources to take additional protective measures or discontinue certain service offerings in order to combat these practices. In addition, we have
received significant media attention relating to the listing or sale of illegal or counterfeit goods, which could damage our reputation, diminish the
value of our brand names, and make users reluctant to use our products and services.
23

We are subject to risks associated with information disseminated through our services.
Online  services  companies  may  be  subject  to  claims  relating  to  information  disseminated  through  their  services,  including  claims  alleging
defamation, libel, breach of contract, invasion of privacy, negligence, copyright or trademark infringement, among other things. The laws relating to
the liability of online services companies for information disseminated through their services are subject to frequent challenges both in the United
States and foreign jurisdictions. Any liabilities incurred as a result of these matters could require us to incur additional costs and harm our reputation
and our business.
Our potential liability to third parties for the user-provided content on our sites, particularly in jurisdictions outside the United States where laws
governing Internet transactions are unsettled, may increase. If we become liable for information provided by our users and carried on our service in
any jurisdiction in which we operate, we could be directly harmed and we may be forced to implement new measures to reduce our exposure to this
liability, including expending substantial resources or discontinuing certain service offerings, which could harm our business.
Interest Rate and Indebtedness Risks
Fluctuations in interest rates, and changes in regulatory guidance related to such interest rates, could adversely impact our financial results.
Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of
our  fixed-rate  investment  securities  may  be  adversely  impacted  due  to  a  rise  in  interest  rates.  In  addition,  relatively  low  interest  rates  limit  our
investment income.
We have substantial indebtedness, and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, and we may not generate sufficient
cash flow from our business to service our indebtedness. Failure to comply with the terms of our indebtedness could result in the acceleration of our
indebtedness, which could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and liquidity.
We have a substantial amount of outstanding indebtedness and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, including under
our commercial paper program and revolving credit facility or through public or private offerings of debt securities. Our outstanding indebtedness
and any additional indebtedness we incur may have significant consequences, including, without limitation, any of the following:
    
•
requiring us to use a significant portion of our cash flow from operations and other available cash to service our indebtedness, thereby
reducing the amount of cash available for other purposes, including capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, and acquisitions;
•
our  indebtedness  and  leverage  may  increase  our  vulnerability  to  downturns  in  our  business,  to  competitive  pressures,  and  to  adverse
changes in general economic and industry conditions;
•
adverse changes in the ratings assigned to our debt securities by credit rating agencies will likely increase our borrowing costs;
•
our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, share repurchases, dividends or other general
corporate and other purposes may be limited; and
•
our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and our industry may be limited.
Tax Risks
Our business may be subject to sales and other taxes.
The application of indirect taxes such as sales and use tax, value-added tax (“VAT”), goods and services tax (“GST”) (including the “digital
services tax”), business tax and gross receipt tax to ecommerce businesses is a complex and evolving issue. Many of the fundamental statutes and
regulations that impose these taxes were established before the adoption and growth of the Internet and ecommerce. In many cases, it is not clear
how existing statutes apply to ecommerce services. In addition, many state and foreign governments are looking for ways to increase revenues,
which has resulted in legislative action,  including new taxes  on services  and gross  revenues and through  other indirect  taxes. There are many
transactions that occur during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
24

From time to time, some taxing authorities in the United States have notified us that they believe we owe them certain taxes imposed on our
services. These notifications have not resulted in any significant tax liabilities to date, but there is a risk that some jurisdiction may be successful in
the future, which would harm our business.
Similar issues exist outside of the United States, where the application of VAT or other indirect taxes on ecommerce providers is complex and
evolving. While we attempt to comply in those jurisdictions where it is clear that a tax is due, some of our subsidiaries have, from time to time,
received claims relating to the applicability of indirect taxes to our fees. Additionally, we pay input VAT on applicable taxable purchases within the
various countries in which we operate. In most cases, we are entitled to reclaim this input VAT from the various countries. However, because of our
unique business model, the application of the laws and rules that allow such reclamation is sometimes uncertain. A successful assertion by one or
more countries that we are not entitled to reclaim VAT could harm our business.
We may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities.
The determination of our worldwide provision for income taxes and other tax liabilities requires estimation and significant judgment, and there
can be from time to time transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Like many other multinational corporations,
we are subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign jurisdictions and have structured our operations to reduce our effective tax rate. Our determination
of our tax liability is always subject to audit and review by applicable domestic and foreign tax authorities, and we are currently undergoing a number
of  investigations,  audits  and  reviews  by  taxing  authorities  throughout  the  world,  including  with  respect  to  our  business  structure.  Any  adverse
outcome of any such audit or review could harm our business, and the ultimate tax outcome may differ from the amounts recorded in our financial
statements and may materially affect our financial results in the period or periods for which such determination is made. While we have established
reserves  based  on  assumptions  and  estimates  that  we  believe  are  reasonable  to  cover  such  eventualities,  these  reserves  may  prove  to  be
insufficient.
In addition, our future income taxes could be adversely affected by a shift in our jurisdictional earning mix, by changes in the valuation of our
deferred tax assets and liabilities, as a result of gains on our foreign exchange risk management program, or changes in tax laws, regulations, or
accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items.
Our business and its users are subject to Internet sales tax and sales reporting and record-keeping obligations.
The application of sales tax and other indirect taxes on cross border sales by remote sellers is continuing to change and evolve. On June 21,
2018, the U.S. Supreme Court decided South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc. et al., a case challenging the current law under which online retailers are not
required to collect sales and use tax unless they have a physical presence in the buyer’s state. This decision allows states to adopt new or enforce
existing  laws  requiring  sellers  to  collect  and  remit  sales  and  use  tax,  even  in  states  in  which  the  seller  has  no  presence.  The  adoption  or
enforcement of any such legislation could result in a sales and use tax collection responsibility for certain of our sellers. This collection responsibility
and the additional costs associated with complex sales and use tax collection, remittance and audit requirements could create additional burdens for
buyers and sellers on our websites and mobile platforms and could harm our business. Moreover, the application of such taxes on our commerce
platforms could cause a marketplace to be less attractive to current and prospective buyers, which could adversely impact our business, financial
performance, and growth. The majority of U.S. states have enacted laws or have pending legislation that require marketplace facilitators to collect
and remit sales tax for some or all sellers using these marketplaces.
Similar laws imposing tax collection responsibility on foreign sellers are being considered in other countries as well. We are now jointly liable for
U.K. VAT and German VAT for certain sellers who fail to fulfill their VAT obligations unless we suspend their eBay activity until the seller resolves
the matter with the corresponding VAT authority. Other jurisdictions are considering similar legislation.
Multiple jurisdictions have enacted laws which require marketplaces to report user activity or collect and remit taxes on certain items sold on
the marketplace. The U.K. and European Union have also adopted a VAT reform package which starting in 2021 requires marketplaces such as
eBay to collect and remit VAT on most imports from outside the European Union.
25

One  or  more  states,  the  U.S.  federal  government  or  foreign  countries  may  seek  to  impose  reporting  or  record-keeping  obligations  on
companies that engage in or facilitate ecommerce. Such an obligation could be imposed by legislation intended to improve tax compliance or if one
of our companies was ever deemed to be the legal agent of the users of our services by a jurisdiction in which it operates. Certain of our companies
are required to report to the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) and most states on customers subject to U.S. income tax if they reach certain
payment thresholds. As a result, we are required to request tax identification numbers from certain payees, track payments by tax identification
number and, under certain conditions, withhold a portion of payments and forward such withholding to the IRS. These obligations can increase
operational costs and change our user experience. Any failure by us to meet these requirements could result in substantial monetary penalties and
other sanctions and could harm our business. Imposition of an information reporting requirement could decrease seller or buyer activity on our sites
and would harm our business.
Transactional Risks
The  closing  of  the  proposed  transfer  of  our  Classifieds  business  is  subject  to  various  risks  and  uncertainties,  may  not  be  completed  in
accordance with expected plans or on the currently contemplated terms or timeline, or at all, and may not generate the anticipated returns to eBay,
and the pending transfer may be disruptive to our Classifieds business.
We believe the transaction will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021. However, the completion of the transaction is subject to receipt of
certain regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions. We cannot assure you that the conditions to the closing of the transaction will
be satisfied and, if those conditions are neither satisfied nor, where permissible, waived on a timely basis or at all, we may be unable to complete
the transfer of the Classifieds business, or such completion may be delayed or completed on terms that are less favorable, perhaps materially, to us
than the terms currently contemplated.
If the proposed transfer of the Classifieds business is delayed or not completed for any reason, including due to our or Adevinta’s inability to
satisfy the closing conditions set forth in the transaction agreement or industry or economic conditions outside of our control, including those related
to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, investor confidence could decline and we could face negative publicity and possible litigation. In addition, in the
event of a failed transaction, we will have expended significant management resources in an effort to complete the transaction and, although in
some  circumstances  Adevinta  may  be  obligated  to  pay  us  a  termination  fee  of  $92  million,  we  will  have  incurred  significant  transaction  costs.
Accordingly, if the proposed transaction of the Classifieds business is not completed on the timeline or terms currently contemplated, or at all, our
business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows and stock price may be adversely affected.
Upon closing of the transaction to transfer the Classifieds business, we will receive approximately 540 million Adevinta shares and, depending
on  how  we  ultimately  determine  to  account  for  our  ownership  interest  in  Adevinta,  fluctuations  in  Adevinta’s  share  price,  financial  results  and
fluctuations in exchange rates could result in material changes in our consolidated balance sheet and our consolidated statement of income. In
addition, our ability to sell our Adevinta shares in the future will be subject to market conditions and other factors which could impact the value we
are able to realize from any such sales.
Acquisitions, dispositions, joint ventures, strategic partnerships and strategic investments could result in operating difficulties and could harm
our business or impact our financial results.
We have acquired a significant number of businesses of varying size and scope, technologies, services, and products. We have also disposed
of significant businesses and recently announced a portfolio review of our Korea business. We expect to continue to evaluate and consider a wide
array of potential strategic transactions as part of our overall business strategy, including business combinations, acquisitions, and dispositions of
businesses, technologies, services, products, and other assets, as well as strategic investments and joint ventures.
26

These transactions may involve significant challenges and risks, including:
•
the  potential  loss  of  key  customers,  merchants,  vendors  and  other  key  business  partners  of  the  companies  we  acquire,  or  dispose  of,
following and continuing after announcement of our transaction plans;
•
declining employee morale and retention issues affecting employees of companies that we acquire or dispose of, which may result from
changes in compensation, or changes in management, reporting relationships, future prospects or the direction of the acquired or disposed
business;
•
difficulty making new and strategic hires of new employees;
•
diversion  of management  time  and a shift of focus  from operating  the businesses to the transaction,  and in the case of an acquisition,
integration and administration;
•
the need to provide transition services to a disposed of company, which may result in the diversion of resources and focus;
•
the need to integrate the operations, systems (including accounting, management, information, human resource and other administrative
systems), technologies, products and personnel of each acquired company, which is an inherently risky and potentially lengthy and costly
process;
•
the  inefficiencies  and  lack  of  control  that  may  result  if  such  integration  is  delayed  or  not  implemented,  and  unforeseen  difficulties  and
expenditures that may arise as a result;
•
the need to implement  or improve  controls,  procedures  and policies  appropriate  for  a larger  public company  at  companies that  prior  to
acquisition may have lacked such controls, procedures and policies or whose controls, procedures and policies did not meet applicable
legal and other standards;
•
risks associated with our expansion into new international markets;
•
derivative lawsuits resulting from the acquisition or disposition;
•
liability for activities of the acquired or disposed of company before the transaction, including intellectual property and other litigation claims
or disputes, violations of laws, rules and regulations, commercial disputes, tax liabilities and other known and unknown liabilities and, in the
case of dispositions, liabilities to the acquirors of those businesses under contractual provisions such as representations, warranties and
indemnities;
•
the potential loss of key employees following the transaction;
•
the acquisition of new customer and employee personal information by us or a third party acquiring assets or businesses from us, which in
and of itself may require regulatory approval and or additional controls, policies and procedures and subject us to additional exposure; and
•
our dependence on the acquired business’ accounting, financial reporting, operating metrics and similar systems, controls and processes
and the risk that errors or irregularities in those systems, controls and processes will lead to errors in our consolidated financial statements
or make it more difficult to manage the acquired business.
    
We have made certain investments, including through joint ventures, in which we have a minority equity interest and/or lack management and
operational control. The controlling joint venture partner in a joint venture may have business interests, strategies, or goals that are inconsistent with
ours, and business decisions or other actions or omissions of the controlling joint venture partner or the joint venture company may result in harm to
our reputation or adversely affect the value of our investment in the joint venture. Any circumstances, which may be out of our control, that adversely
affect the value of our investments, or cost resulting from regulatory action or lawsuits in connection with our investments, could harm our business
or negatively impact our financial results.
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that entitles us to acquire a fixed number of
shares of Adyen’s common stock subject to certain milestones being met. This warrant is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic
815, Derivatives and Hedging. Changes in Adyen’s common stock price and equity volatility has had, and may continue to have in the future, a
significant impact on the value of this warrant. We report this warrant on a quarterly basis at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets, and
changes in the fair value of this warrant are recognized in our consolidated statement of income. Fluctuations in Adyen’s common stock or other
changes in assumptions could result in material changes in the fair value that we report in our consolidated balance sheets and our consolidated
statement of income, which could have a material impact on our financial results.
27

We could incur significant liability if the Distribution is determined to be a taxable transaction.
We have received an opinion from outside tax counsel to the effect that our distribution of 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal to
our stockholders on July 17, 2015 (the “Distribution”) qualifies as a transaction that is described in Sections 355 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal
Revenue Code. The opinion relies on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from PayPal and us regarding the past and
future conduct of the companies’ respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are
incorrect or not satisfied, our stockholders and we may not be able to rely on the opinion of tax counsel and could be subject to significant tax
liabilities.  Notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  tax  counsel  we  have  received,  the  IRS  could  determine  on  audit  that  the  Distribution  is  taxable  if  it
determines that any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are not correct or have been violated or if it disagrees with the
conclusions in the opinion. If the Distribution is determined to be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes, our stockholders that are subject to
U.S. federal income tax and we could incur significant U.S. federal income tax liabilities.
We may be exposed to claims and liabilities as a result of the Distribution.
We  entered  into  a  separation  and  distribution  agreement  and  various  other  agreements  with  PayPal  to  govern  the  Distribution  and  the
relationship of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us
and PayPal. The indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us. In addition, our indemnity
obligations to PayPal may be significant and these risks could negatively affect our results of operations and financial condition.
28

ITEM 1B: UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not applicable.
ITEM 2: PROPERTIES    
We  own  and  lease  various  properties  in  the  U.S.  and  24  other  countries  around  the  world.  We  use  the  properties  for  executive  and
administrative offices, data centers, product development offices, fulfillment centers and customer service offices. Our headquarters are located in
San Jose, California and occupies approximately 0.5 million square feet. Our owned data centers are solely located in Utah. As of December 31,
2020, our owned and leased properties provided us with aggregate square footage for our continuing operations as follows (in millions):
United States
Other Countries
Total
Owned facilities
1.3 
— 
1.3 
Leased facilities
0.7 
3.4 
4.1 
Total facilities
2.0 
3.4 
5.4 
From time to time we consider various alternatives related to our long-term facilities needs. While we believe that our existing facilities are
adequate to meet our immediate needs, it may become necessary to develop and improve land that we own or lease or acquire additional or
alternative space to accommodate any future growth.
ITEM 3: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS    
This information  is set forth under “Note 13 – Commitments  and Contingencies – Litigation and Other Legal Matters”  to the consolidated
financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 4: MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
29

PART II
ITEM 5: MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES        
Common Stock
Our  common  stock  has  been  traded  on  The  Nasdaq  Global  Select  Market  under  the  symbol  “EBAY”  since  September  24,  1998.  As  of
February 1, 2021, there were approximately 3,411 holders of record of our common stock, although we believe that there are a significantly larger
number of beneficial owners of our common stock.
Dividend Policy
The company paid a total of $447 million and $473 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31,
2019, respectively. In February 2021, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.18 per share of common stock to be paid on March 19, 2021 to
stockholders of record as of March 1, 2021. The timing, declaration, amount and payment of any future cash dividends are at the discretion of the
Board of Directors and will depend on many factors, including our available cash, working capital, financial condition, results of operations, capital
requirements, covenants in our credit agreement, applicable law and other business considerations that our Board of Directors considers relevant.
Performance Measurement Comparison
The graph below shows the cumulative total stockholder return of an investment of $100 (and the reinvestment of any dividends thereafter) on
December 31, 2015 (the last trading day for the year ended December 31, 2015) in (i) our common stock, (ii) the Nasdaq Composite Index, (iii) the
S&P 500 Index and (iv) the S&P 500 Information Technology Index.
Our stock price performance shown in the graph below is not indicative of future stock price performance. The graph and related information
shall not be deemed “soliciting material” or be deemed to be “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be incorporated by reference into any
past or future filing with the SEC, except to the extent that such filing specifically states that such graph and related information are incorporated by
reference into such filing.
30

Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Stock repurchase activity during the three months ended December 31, 2020 was as follows:
Period Ended
Total Number of 
Shares 
Purchased
Average Price Paid
per Share 
Total Number of 
Shares Purchased 
as Part of Publicly 
Announced 
Programs
Maximum Dollar
Value that May Yet
be Purchased Under
the Programs 
October 31, 2020
250,675 
$
47.63 
250,675 
$
2,440,568,444 
November 30, 2020
4,216,131 
$
48.67 
4,216,131 
$
2,235,384,642 
December 31, 2020
4,014,404 
$
50.41 
4,014,404 
$
2,033,023,506 
8,481,210 
8,481,210 
(1)
In  January  2019  our  Board  authorized  a  $4.0  billion  stock  repurchase  program  and  in  January  2020  our  Board  authorized  an  additional  $5  billion  stock  repurchase
program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and, subject to market conditions
and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding share count. Any share repurchases under our
stock  repurchase  programs may be  made  through  open  market  transactions,  block  trades,  privately negotiated  transactions  (including accelerated  share  repurchase
transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
During  the  three  months  ended  December  31,  2020,  we  repurchased  approximately  $419  million  of  our  common  stock  under  our  stock  repurchase  program.  As  of
December 31, 2020, a total of approximately $2.0 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase program. During
February 2021, our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
We expect, subject to market conditions and other uncertainties, to continue making opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock. However, our
stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of
factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
(2)
(1)
31

ITEM 6: SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto
and  “Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of  Operations”  appearing  elsewhere  in  this  Annual  Report  on
Form  10-K. The consolidated statement  of income data for  the years  ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are derived from our audited
consolidated  financial  statements.  The  consolidated  statement  of  income  data  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2017  and  2016  have  been
adjusted  for  discontinued  operations.  The  consolidated  balance  sheet  data  as  of  December  31,  2020  and  2019  are  derived  from  our  audited
consolidated  financial  statements.  The  consolidated  balance  sheet  data  as  of  December  31,  2018,  2017  and  2016  have  been  adjusted  for
discontinued operations. The consolidated balance sheet data as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 has been adjusted for the adoption of the ASC
606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606).
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018 
2017 
2016 
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Consolidated Statement of Income Data: 
Net revenues
$
10,271 
$
8,636 
$
8,650 
$
8,009 
$
7,568 
Gross profit
7,798 
6,500 
6,627 
6,156 
5,883 
Income from operations
2,711 
1,861 
1,752 
1,852 
1,960 
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
3,420 
1,749 
2,249 
1,864 
3,290 
Income (loss) from continuing operations
2,542 
1,516 
2,128 
(1,997)
7,056 
Income (loss) per share from continuing operations:
Basic
$
3.58 
$
1.79 
$
2.17 
$
(1.88)
$
6.23 
Diluted
$
3.54 
$
1.77 
$
2.15 
$
(1.88)
$
6.17 
Weighted average shares:
Basic
710 
849 
980 
1,064 
1,133 
Diluted
718 
856 
991 
1,064 
1,144 
(5)
(4)(6)
(4)(7)
(1)
32

 
As of December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018 
2017 
2016
 
(In millions)
Consolidated Balance Sheet Data: 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,428 
$
901 
$
2,067 
$
1,964 
$
1,775 
Short-term investments
2,398 
1,850 
2,713 
3,743 
5,333 
Long-term investments
833 
1,275 
3,747 
6,299 
3,945 
Working capital - continuing operations
2,452 
726 
2,683 
4,226 
5,152 
Working capital - held for sale
9 
32 
52 
43 
31 
Working capital - discontinued operations
— 
(118)
(63)
(84)
(173)
Working capital total 
2,461 
640 
2,672 
4,185 
5,010 
Total assets - continuing operations
18,122 
16,654 
21,086 
24,072 
22,941 
Total assets - held for sale
1,188 
1,073 
1,204 
1,372 
519 
Total assets - discontinued operations
— 
447 
529 
542 
391 
Total assets
19,310 
18,174 
22,819 
25,986 
23,851 
Short-term debt
18 
1,020 
1,546 
781 
1,451 
Long-term debt
7,745 
6,738 
7,685 
9,234 
7,509 
Total stockholders’ equity
3,561 
2,870 
6,281 
8,049 
10,526 
Dividends declared per share:
$
0.64 
$
0.56 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
(1)
Includes the impact of acquisitions and dispositions. For a summary of recent significant acquisitions and dispositions, please see “Note 3 - Business Combinations” and
“Note 4 - Discontinued Operations” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
(2)
Working capital is calculated as the difference between total current assets and total current liabilities.
(3)
Reflects the impact of the adoption of the new lease accounting standard in 2019 which was adopted prospectively.
(4)
Reflects the impact of the adoption of the new revenue recognition accounting standard in 2018.
(5)
The  consolidated  balance  sheet  data  as  of  December  31,  2018  includes  the  impact  of  a  $463  million  reduction  to  the  provisional  current  and  deferred  tax  liabilities
recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 and a $120 million reduction in 2018 to the deferred tax asset recognized in 2017 as a result of a tax rate change. The consolidated
statement of income data for the year ended December 31, 2018 includes a $463 million income tax benefit and $120 million tax expense associated with such current
and deferred tax liabilities and assets, respectively.
(6)
The consolidated balance sheet data as of December 31, 2017 includes the impact of a $695 million deferred tax asset recognized in 2017 as a result of our voluntary
domiciling  our  Classifieds  intangible  assets  into  a  new  jurisdiction.  The  consolidated  statement  of  income  data  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2017  includes  tax
expense  of  $376  million  caused  by  the  foreign  exchange  remeasurement  of  our  deferred  tax  assets  and  a  $3.1  billion  provisional  tax  expense  associated  with  the
enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
(7)
The consolidated balance sheet data for the year ended December 31, 2016 includes the impact of a $4.6 billion deferred tax asset recognized in 2016 as a result of our
election to terminate an existing tax ruling and finalize a new agreement with the foreign tax authority. The consolidated statement of income data for the year ended
December 31, 2016 includes a $4.6 billion income tax benefit associated with such deferred tax asset.
(5)
(4) (6)
 (4) (7)
(1)
(2)(3)
33

ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future  business,  future  results  of  operations  or  financial  condition,  including  with  respect  to  the  ongoing  effects  of  COVID-19,  new  or  planned
features or services, or management strategies including our strategic review). You can identify these forward-looking statements by words such as
“may,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan” and other similar expressions. These forward-
looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in our
forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on
Form 10-K, as well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our
other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-looking
statements after the date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are
cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. You should read the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report.
OVERVIEW
 
Business
eBay Inc., is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace platforms, that connects millions of buyers and sellers around the
world, empowering people and creating opportunity for all. Founded in 1995 in San Jose, California, eBay is one of the world’s largest and most
vibrant marketplaces for discovering great value and unique selection. Our technologies and services are designed to provide buyers choice and a
breadth of relevant inventory from around the globe and to enable sellers worldwide to organize and offer their inventory for sale, virtually anytime
and anywhere. In 2020, eBay enabled $100 billion of Gross Merchandise Volume.
On February 13, 2020, we closed the previously announced sale of our StubHub business to an affiliate of viagogo. Beginning in the first
quarter of 2020, StubHub’s financial results for periods prior to the sale have been reflected in our consolidated statement of income as discontinued
operations.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  the  discontinued  operations  in  the  prior  periods  are  classified  as
discontinued  operations  in  our  consolidated  balance  sheet.  See  “Note  4  –  Discontinued  Operations”  in  our  consolidated  financial  statements
included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, which continues to
spread throughout the world. While the disruption is currently  expected to be temporary,  there is uncertainty around its duration. As a result of
COVID-19 mobility restrictions globally, there have been changes in consumer behavior that have resulted in more online shopping. We expect
these changes in behavior to continue to evolve as the pandemic progresses. Our Marketplace platforms experienced improved traffic and buyer
acquisition due to the ongoing impact of measures taken globally to contain the spread of COVID-19. The Marketplace platforms also experienced
improved  acquisition  of  small  business  sellers.  While  the  impact  of  COVID-19  has  had  a  positive  impact  on  our  reported  results,  it’s  uncertain
whether  this  consumer  behavior  will  continue.  The  impacts  seen  to  date  may  continue  to  create  volatility  in  our  results  and  a  wider  range  of
outcomes as consumer behaviors and mobility restrictions continue to evolve. See “Results of Operations” below for impacts of COVID-19 on our
results for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. For additional information, see “– Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements” below and
“Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “The global COVID-19 pandemic could harm our business and results of operations” in Part II of this
report.
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to transfer our Classifieds business to Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”) for $2.5 billion in
cash,  subject  to  certain  adjustments,  and  approximately  540  million  shares  in  Adevinta.  These  shares  would  represent,  approximately  44%  of
Adevinta’s total outstanding shares and approximately 33% of Adevinta’s outstanding voting shares, based on the number of Adevinta’s outstanding
shares as of June 30, 2020. Together, the total consideration payable under the definitive agreement is valued at
34

approximately $9.2 billion, based on the closing trading price of Adevinta shares on the Oslo Stock Exchange on July 17, 2020. We believe the
transaction will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021. Completion of the transaction is subject to certain conditions, including receipt of certain
regulatory approvals and other risks and uncertainties. We have classified the results of our Classifieds business as discontinued operations in our
consolidated  statement  of  income  for  the  periods  presented.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  the  discontinued
operations are classified as held for sale in our consolidated balance sheet. See “Note 4 – Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial
statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Presentation
In addition to the corresponding measures under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), management uses non-GAAP measures
in reviewing our financial results. The foreign exchange neutral (“FX-Neutral”), or constant currency, net revenue amounts discussed below are non-
GAAP financial measures and are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Accordingly, the FX-
Neutral information appearing in the following discussion of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information provided
below  in  “Non-GAAP  Measures  of  Financial  Performance,”  which  includes  reconciliations  of  FX-Neutral  financial  measures  to  the  most  directly
comparable  GAAP  measures.  We  calculate  the  year-over-year  impact  of  foreign  currency  movements  using  prior  period  foreign  currency  rates
applied to current year transactional currency amounts.
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the British pound,
euro, Korean won and Australian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency risk which may impact our financial results. Because of this and the fact
that  we generate  a majority  of  our  net  revenues  internationally,  including  during  the  years  ended  December  31,  2020,  2019  and  2018,  we  are
subject to the risks related to doing business in foreign countries as discussed under “Item 1A: Risk Factors.”
The effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements during 2020 was primarily attributable to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against
the Korean won, partially offset by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the euro.
Fiscal Year Highlights
Net revenues increased 19% to $10.3 billion in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by improved traffic and buyer acquisition, which we
attribute primarily to global restrictions implemented to contain the spread of COVID-19 which resulted in more online shopping during 2020. FX-
Neutral net revenue (as defined above) increased 20% in 2020 compared to 2019. Operating margin increased to 26.4% in 2020 compared to
21.6% in 2019.
We generated cash flow from continuing operating activities of $3.1 billion in 2020 compared to $2.6 billion in 2019, ending the year with cash,
cash equivalents and non-equity investments for continuing operations of $4.1 billion.
During 2020, we issued senior unsecured notes of $1.8 billion, which consisted of $800 million of 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025 and $950
million of 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030. In addition, we repaid approximately $1.8 billion of debt comprising of $500 million of 2.150% senior
fixed rate notes due 2020, $500 million of 3.250% senior fixed rate notes due 2020 and $750 million related to 2.875% senior fixed rate notes due
2021. We also repurchased $5.1 billion of shares and paid $447 million in dividends during 2020.
Diluted  earnings  per  share  from  continuing  operations  was  $3.54  in  2020  compared  to  diluted  earnings  per  share  of  $1.77  in  2019.  In
February 2021, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.18 per share of common stock to be paid on March 19, 2021 to stockholders of record
as of March 1, 2021.
35

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Revenues
Seasonality
We  expect  transaction  activity  patterns  on  our  platforms  to  mirror  general  consumer  buying  patterns  and  expect  that  these  trends  will
continue.  As  we  introduce  new  products  and  platforms,  such  as  managed  payments,  we  expect  net  revenues  to  fluctuate.  In  addition,
macroeconomic conditions, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, may also contribute to fluctuations in revenues and margins. The following
table sets forth, for the periods presented, our total net revenues and the sequential quarterly movements of these net revenues (in millions, except
percentages):
 
Quarter Ended
 
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2018
Net revenues
$
2,104 
$
2,137 
$
2,107 
$
2,302 
Percent change from prior quarter
(2)%
2 %
(1) %
9 %
2019
Net revenues
$
2,161 
$
2,156 
$
2,083 
$
2,236 
Percent change from prior quarter
(6)%
— %
(3) %
7 %
2020
Net revenues
$
2,129 
$
2,668 
$
2,606 
$
2,868 
Percent change from prior quarter
(5)%
25 %
(2) %
10 %
Net Revenues by Geography
Revenues are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays
advertising, other service provider or customer, as the case may be, is located. The following table presents net revenues by geography for the
periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
% Change
2019
% Change
2018
U.S.
$
4,151 
  
26 %
3,303 
  
(2) %
$
3,382 
Percentage of net revenues
40 %
38 %
39 %
International
6,120 
15 %
5,333 
1 %
5,268 
Percentage of net revenues
60 %
62 %
61 %
Total net revenues
$
10,271 
19 %
$
8,636 
— %
$
8,650 
Net revenues included $15 million and $81 million of hedging gains and $8 million of hedging losses during the years ended December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact of $1 million, an unfavorable
impact of $153 million and a favorable impact of $139 million on net revenues for the years December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The
effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar
against  the  Korean  won,  partially  offset  by  the  weakening  of  the  U.S.  dollar  against  the  euro.  The  effect  of  foreign  currency  exchange  rate
movements in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily attributable to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the euro, British pound and Korean
won.
36

Net Revenues by Type
We generate two types of net revenues:
Net transaction revenues primarily include final value fees, feature fees, including fees to promote listings, and listing fees from
sellers on our platforms. Our net transaction revenues also include store subscription and other fees often from large enterprise
sellers.  Our  net  transaction  revenues  are  reduced  by  incentives,  including  discounts,  coupons  and  rewards,  provided  to  our
customers.
Marketing services and other ("MS&O") revenues consist of revenues principally from the sale of advertisements, revenue
sharing arrangements and first-party inventory programs.
The following table presents net revenues by type (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
% Change
2019
% Change
2018
Net transaction revenues
$
9,300 
23 %
$
7,578 
2 %
$
7,416 
Marketing services and other revenues
971 
(8) %
1,058 
(14) %
1,234 
Total net revenues
$
10,271 
19 %
$
8,636 
— %
$
8,650 
Net Transaction Revenues
Key Operating Metrics
Gross Merchandise Volume (“GMV”) and take rate are significant factors that we believe affect our net transaction revenues.
GMV consists  of  the  total  value  of  all  successfully  closed  transactions  between  users  on  our  platforms  during  the  applicable
period,  regardless  of  whether  the  buyer  and  seller  actually  consummated  the  transaction.  Despite  GMV’s  divergence  from
revenue, we still believe that GMV provides a useful measure of the overall volume of closed transactions that flow through our
platforms in a given period, notwithstanding the inclusion in GMV of closed transactions that are not ultimately consummated.
Take rate is defined as net transaction revenues divided by GMV.
The following table presents GMV and take rate for the periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
% Change
2019
% Change
2018
GMV
$
100,001 
17 %
$
85,510 
(5)%
$
89,829 
Transaction take rate
9.30 %
0.44 %
8.86 %
0.61 %
8.25 %
37

Net Transaction Revenues
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2020
2019
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2019
2018
As Reported
FX-Neutral
Net transaction revenues 
9,300 
7,578 
23 %
24 %
7,578 
7,416 
2 %
4 %
Supplemental data:
GMV
100,001 
85,510 
17 %
17 %
85,510 
89,829 
(5) %
(2) %
Take rate
9.30 %
8.86 %
0.44 %
8.86 %
8.25 %
0.61 %
(1)
Marketplace net transaction revenues were net of $15 million, $81 million and $8 million hedging activity during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
respectively.
Net  transaction  revenues  increased  in  2020  compared  to  2019  primarily  due  to  an  increase  in  GMV  due  to  improved  traffic  and  buyer
acquisition due to global restrictions implemented to contain the spread of COVID-19 which resulted in consumers engaging in more online shopping
during 2020 and higher take rate due to the expansion of managed payments and promoted listings. Transaction take rate was higher in 2020
compared to 2019, due to the expansion of managed payments and due to promoted listings, which along with final value fees are calculated as a
percentage of an item’s sale price and category mix.
Net  transaction  revenues  increased  in  2019  compared  to  2018  primarily  due  to  growth  in  promoted  listing  fees  and  a  higher  take  rate.
Transaction take rate was higher in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to growth in promoted listing fees, which along with final value fees are
calculated as a percentage of an item’s sale price, and category mix. The increase in net transaction revenues in 2019 compared to 2018 was due
to take rate considerations discussed above, despite declining GMV. We expect that the divergence between net transaction revenues and GMV will
continue. Despite GMV’s divergence from net transaction revenues during the year, we still believe the metric provides a useful measure of overall
volume of closed transactions that flow through the platform in a given period.
Marketing Services and Other Revenues
The following table presents MS&O revenues (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2020
2019
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2019
2018
As Reported
FX-Neutral
MS&O revenues
$
971 
$
1,058 
(8) %
(8) %
$
1,058 
$
1,234 
(14) %
(12)%
Percentage of net revenues
9 %
12 %
12 %
14 %
The decrease in MS&O revenues during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower advertising revenues that were driven by our
ongoing shift to promoted listing fees, which are recognized in net transaction revenues and the sale of brands4friends in the third quarter of 2019,
partially offset by an increase attributable to our first-party inventory program in Korea.
The decrease in MS&O revenues during 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to a decrease in advertising revenues that was driven by
our  ongoing  shift  to  promoted  listing  fees,  which  are  recognized  in  net  transaction  revenues  and  lower  revenues  resulting  from  the  sale  of
brands4friends. These decreases were partially offset by increases in first-party inventory program in Korea in 2019 compared to 2018.
(1)
38

Cost of Net Revenues
Cost  of  net  revenues  primarily  consists  of  costs  associated  with  customer  support,  site  operations,  costs  of  goods  sold  and  payment
processing. Significant components of these costs include employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs, depreciation of equipment and
amortization expense, first party inventory costs, bank transaction fees, credit card interchange and assessment fees and digital services tax. The
following table presents cost of net revenues (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
% Change
  
2019
% Change
  
2018
Cost of net revenues
$
2,473 
16 %   $
2,136 
6 %   $
2,023 
As a percentage of net revenues
24.1 %
24.7 %
23.4 %
The increase in cost of net revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in payment processing costs as we continue
to transition customers to our payments platform and an increase in cost of goods sold related to our first-party inventory program in Korea. The
increase in cost of net revenues was partially offset by lower cost of goods sold due to the sale of brands4friends in the third quarter of 2019.
The increase in cost of net revenues in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to an increase in site operation and payment processing
costs as we increased our investments in our business, and an increase in costs of goods sold driven by our first-party inventory program in Korea.
Cost of net revenues, net of immaterial hedging activities, was favorably impacted by $7 million attributable to foreign currency movements
relative to the U.S. dollar in 2020 compared to 2019. Cost of net revenues, net of immaterial hedging activities, was favorably impacted by $49
million attributable to foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2018.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
% Change
2019
% Change
2018
Sales and marketing
$
2,639 
11 %
$
2,368 
(8) %
$
2,576 
Percentage of net revenues
26 %
27 %
30 %
Product development
1,087 
11 %
976 
(7) %
1,051 
Percentage of net revenues
11 %
11 %
12 %
General and administrative
1,003 
— %
1,005 
3 %
979 
Percentage of net revenues
10 %
12 %
11 %
Provision for transaction losses
331 
26 %
262 
6 %
247 
Percentage of net revenues
3 %
3 %
3 %
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
27 
(4) %
28 
27 %
22 
Total operating expenses
$
5,087 
10 %
$
4,639 
(5) %
$
4,875 
Foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact of $8 million on operating expenses in 2020 compared to 2019.
Operating expenses were favorably impacted by $88 million attributable to foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2019 compared
to 2018. There was no hedging activity within operating expenses in 2020 and 2019.
39

Sales and Marketing
 
Sales  and  marketing  expenses  primarily  consist  of  advertising  and  marketing  program  costs  (both  online  and  offline),  employee
compensation,  certain  user  coupons  and  rewards,  contractor  costs,  facilities  costs  and  depreciation  on  equipment.  Online  marketing  expenses
represent traffic acquisition costs in various channels such as paid search, affiliates marketing and display advertising. Offline advertising primarily
includes brand campaigns and buyer/seller communications.
The increase in sales and marketing expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in online and offline advertising
expenses and employee-related costs.
The  decrease  in  sales  and marketing  expense  in  2019  compared  to  2018  was  primarily  due  to  a  favorable  impact  from  foreign  currency
movements relative to the U.S. dollar and decreases in offline advertising spend and employee-related costs. These costs were partially offset by
online marketing spend and user coupons and rewards largely driven by our Japan platform acquired in the second quarter of 2018.
Product Development
 
Product development expenses primarily consist of employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs and depreciation on equipment.
Product  development  expenses  are  net  of  required  capitalization  of  major  platform  and  other  product  development  efforts,  including  the
development and maintenance of our technology platform. Our top technology priorities include payment intermediation capabilities and improved
seller tools and buyer experiences built on a foundation of structured data.
Capitalized internal use and platform development costs were $129 million and $137 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are primarily
reflected as a cost of net revenues when amortized in future periods.
The increase in product development expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in employee-related costs.
The decrease in product development expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to decreases in employee-related costs, foreign
currency movement relative to the U.S. dollar and depreciation on equipment.
General and Administrative
 
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation, contractor costs, facilities costs, depreciation of equipment,
employer  payroll  taxes  on  stock-based  compensation,  legal  expenses,  restructuring,  insurance  premiums  and  professional  fees.  Our  legal
expenses, including those related to various ongoing legal proceedings, may fluctuate substantially from period to period.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to restructuring costs incurred in 2019
related to our global workforce reduction partially offset by charitable contributions and employee related costs.
The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to severance costs incurred in 2019 related
to our CEO transition.
Provision for Transaction Losses
Provision for transaction losses primarily consists of transaction loss expense associated with our buyer protection programs, losses from our
managed payments services, fraud and bad debt expense associated with our accounts receivable balance. We expect our provision for transaction
losses to fluctuate depending on many factors, including changes to our protection programs and the impact of regulatory changes.
The increase in provision for transaction losses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in customer protection program
costs as a result of increased volume and bad debt expense.
The increase in provision for transaction losses in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to an increase in bad debt expense.
40

Interest and Other, Net
 
Interest  and  other,  net  primarily  consists  of  interest  earned  on  cash,  cash  equivalents  and  investments,  as  well  as  foreign  exchange
transaction gains and losses, gains and losses due to changes in fair value of the warrant received from Adyen, our portion of operating results from
investments  accounted  for  under  the  equity  method  of  accounting,  investment  gain/loss  on  acquisitions  or  disposals  and  interest  expense,
consisting of interest charges on any amounts borrowed and commitment fees on unborrowed amounts under our credit agreement and interest
expense on our outstanding debt securities and commercial paper, if any. The following table presents interest and other, net (in millions, except
percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
% Change
  
2019
% Change
  
2018
Interest income
$
39 
(68) %   $
120 
(32) %   $
176 
Interest expense
(305)
(2) %
(311)
(5) %
(326)
Gains on investments and sale of business
1,007 
**
80 
**
663 
Other
(32)
**   
(1)
**   
(16)
Total interest and other, net
$
709 
**   $
(112)
**   $
497 
**    Not meaningful
The increase in interest  and other,  net in 2020 compared  to 2019 was primarily  attributable  to the change in the fair value of the Adyen
warrant, the change in fair value of our investment in Kakao Bank, the absence of a loss recorded in 2019 for the divestiture of brands4friends and a
gain recorded for the receipt of proceeds that were held in escrow related to a long-term investment that was sold in 2018. These increases were
partially offset by lower interest income, an impairment recorded on an investment and foreign exchange losses.
The  decrease  in  interest  and  other,  net  in  2019  compared  to  2018  was  primarily  attributable  to  the  gain  recognized  on  the  sale  of  our
investment in Flipkart of $313 million and the relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in Giosis of $266 million that did not occur in
2019, the loss recorded upon the divestiture of brands4friends of $52 million partially offset by the gain recognized due to the change in fair value of
the Adyen warrant of $133 million that occurred in 2019.
Income Tax Provision
The following table presents provision for income taxes (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
878 
$
233 
$
121 
Effective tax rate
25.7 %   
13.3 %   
5.4 %
The increase in our effective tax rate in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to tax rate changes enacted in the fourth quarter which
resulted in a net tax charge as our deferred tax assets were remeasured to the new rates. Additionally, our tax rate increased due to the effects of a
retroactive California law change which resulted in incremental tax on the gain on the sale of StubHub. These impacts were partially offset by a
reduction in the 2019 effective tax rate from the effective settlements of audits, and a benefit due to the enacted New York state legislation regarding
the taxability of foreign earnings.
The increase in our effective tax rate in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to the $463 million reduction in 2018 to the provisional tax
amounts recorded in 2017 related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the gain recognized from the relinquishment of our existing equity method
investment in Giosis that was not subject to U.S. federal income tax on a current basis that did not recur in 2019 and certain expenses in 2019.
These impacts were partially offset by a reduction in the 2019 by the effective tax rate from the effective settlements of audits and a benefit due to
the enacted New York state legislation regarding the taxability of foreign earnings.
41

We are regularly under examination by tax authorities both domestically and internationally. We believe that adequate amounts have been
reserved for any adjustments that may ultimately result from these examinations, although we cannot assure you that this will be the case given the
inherent uncertainties in these examinations. Due to the ongoing tax examinations, it is generally impractical to determine the amount and timing of
these adjustments. However, we expect several tax examinations to close within the next twelve months. See “Note 16 – Income Taxes” to the
consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on estimated settlements within the next twelve months.
Discontinued Operations
On November 24, 2019, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of viagogo to sell our StubHub business. The sale of our
StubHub business was completed on February 13, 2020. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, StubHub’s financial results for periods prior to the
sale  have  been  reflected  in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  as  discontinued  operations.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities
associated with the discontinued operations in the prior periods are classified as discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet. See
“Note 4 – Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement with Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”) to transfer our Classifieds business to Adevinta for
$2.5 billion in cash, subject to certain adjustments, and approximately 540 million shares in Adevinta. Together, the total consideration payable
under the definitive agreement is valued at approximately $9.2 billion, based on the closing trading price of Adevinta’s outstanding shares on the
Oslo Stock Exchange on July 17, 2020. We believe the transaction will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021. Completion of the transaction is
subject  to  certain  conditions,  including  receipt  of  certain  regulatory  approvals,  and  other  risks  and  uncertainties,  including  general  industry  and
economic conditions outside our control. As a result, we have classified the results of our Classifieds business as discontinued operations in our
consolidated  statement  of  income  for  the  periods  presented.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  the  discontinued
operations are classified as held for sale in our consolidated balance sheet. See “Note 4 – Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial
statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Non-GAAP Measures of Financial Performance
To supplement  our consolidated financial statements  presented  in accordance  with generally accepted  accounting  principles,  we use FX-
Neutral net revenues, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses the foregoing non-GAAP measures in reviewing our financial
results. We define FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the exchange rate effect. We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year
impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional currency amounts, excluding
hedging activity.
These  non-GAAP  measures  are  not  in  accordance  with,  or  an  alternative  to,  measures  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP  and  may  be
different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not based on any comprehensive set of
accounting rules or principles. Non-GAAP measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of
operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. These measures should only be used to evaluate our results of operations in conjunction with
the corresponding GAAP measures.
These non-GAAP measures are provided to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our current financial performance and its prospects
for the future. Specifically, we believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to both management and investors by excluding the
foreign currency exchange rate impact that may not be indicative of our core operating results and business outlook. In addition, because we have
historically reported certain non-GAAP results to investors, we believe that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures provide consistency in our
financial reporting.
42

The following tables set forth a reconciliation of FX-Neutral GMV and FX-Neutral net revenues (each as defined below) to our reported GMV
and net revenues for the periods presented (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Year Ended December 31,
2019
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate Effect
FX-Neutral 
As Reported
As Reported % Change
FX-Neutral % Change
GMV
$
100,001 
$
(237)
$
100,238 
$
85,510 
17 %
17 %
Net Revenues:
Net transaction revenues 
$
9,300 
$
5 
$
9,295 
$
7,578 
23 %
24 %
Marketing services and other revenues
971 
(4)
975 
1,058 
(8) %
(8) %
Total net revenues
$
10,271 
$
1 
$
10,270 
$
8,636 
19 %
20 %
 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Year Ended December 31,
2018
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate
Effect 
FX-Neutral 
As Reported
As Reported % Change
FX-Neutral % Change
GMV
$
85,510 
$
(2,745)
$
88,255 
$
89,829 
(5) %
(2) %
Net Revenues:
Net transaction revenues 
$
7,578 
$
(123)
$
7,701 
$
7,416 
2 %
4 %
Marketing services and other revenues
1,058 
(30)
1,088 
1,234 
(14) %
(12) %
Total net revenues
$
8,636 
$
(153)
$
8,789 
$
8,650 
— %
1 %
(1)
We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional
currency amounts, excluding hedging activity.
(2)
We define FX-Neutral GMV as GMV minus the exchange rate effect. We define the non-GAAP financial measures of FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the
exchange rate effect.
(3)
Net transaction revenues were net of $15 million, $81 million and $8 million of hedging activity in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.     
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(In millions)
Net cash provided by (used in):
 
 
Continuing operating activities
$
3,146 
$
2,583 
$
2,210 
Continuing investing activities
(219)
2,922 
2,922 
Continuing financing activities
(5,690)
(7,093)
(5,398)
Effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
77 
(33)
(75)
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash - discontinued operations
3,284 
398 
420 
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
$
598 
$
(1,223)
$
79 
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
43

Continuing Operating Activities
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $3.1 billion in 2020 was primarily attributable to net income of $5.7 billion with adjustments
for income from discontinued operations of $3.1 billion, $609 million in depreciation and amortization, $431 million in stock-based compensation,
$408 million for deferred income taxes and $331 million in provision for transaction losses, partially offset by a decrease of $168 million in changes
in assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects, and $770 million for changes in the fair value of the Adyen warrant.
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $2.6 billion in 2019 was primarily attributable to net income of $1.8 billion with adjustments
for income from discontinued operations of $270 million, $629 million in depreciation and amortization, $431 million in stock-based compensation,
$262 million in provision for transaction losses, $52 million loss on the sale of a business, partially offset by a decrease of $169 million in changes in
assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects, and $133 million for changes in the fair value of the Adyen warrant.
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $2.2 billion in 2018 was primarily attributable to net income of $2.5 billion with adjustments
for income from discontinued operations of $402 million, $635 million in depreciation and amortization, $465 million in stock-based compensation
and  $247  million  in  provision  for  transaction  losses,  partially  offset  by  a  decrease  of  $503  million  in  changes  in  assets  and  liabilities,  net  of
acquisition effects, and adjustments of $573 million for gain on investments, $104 million for deferred income taxes and $104 million for changes in
fair value of the Adyen warrant.
Cash paid for income taxes in 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $520 million, $270 million and $556 million, respectively. Cash paid for income taxes
in 2018 included tax payments related to our liability for deemed repatriation of foreign earnings under U.S. tax reform of $168 million, including a
prepayment of $72 million.
Continuing Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $219 million in 2020 was primarily attributable to cash paid for purchases of investments of $32.9 billion
and property and equipment of $494 million, partially offset by proceeds of $33.1 billion from the maturities and sales of investments.
Cash provided by investing activities of $2.9 billion in 2019 was primarily attributable to proceeds of $50.5 billion from the maturities and sales
of investments, partially offset by cash paid for purchases of investments of $47.0 billion, property and equipment of $523 million and an equity
investment in Paytm Mall of $160 million.
Cash provided by investing activities of $2.9 billion in 2018 was primarily attributable to proceeds of $30.9 billion from the maturities and sales
of investments and $1.0 billion from the sale of equity investment in Flipkart, partially offset by cash paid for purchases of investments of $28.1
billion, property and equipment of $623 million and acquisitions of $302 million.
The  largely  offsetting  effects  of  purchases  of  investments  and  maturities  and  sale  of  investments  results  from  the  management  of  our
investments. As our immediate cash needs change, purchase and sale activity will fluctuate.
Continuing Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities of $5.7 billion in 2020 was primarily used to repurchase $5.1 billion of common stock, repay outstanding debt
of $1.8 billion and pay $447 million of cash dividends, partially offset by proceeds from debt issuances of $1.8 billion.
Cash used in financing activities of $7.1 billion in 2019 was primarily used to repurchase $5.0 billion of common stock, repay outstanding debt
of $1.6 billion and pay $473 million of cash dividends.
Cash used in financing activities of $5.4 billion in 2018 was primarily used to repurchase $4.5 billion of common stock and repay $750 million
of our outstanding senior notes.
The positive effect of exchange rate movements on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar
against  other  currencies,  primarily  the  Korean  won  and  euro,  during  2020.  The  negative  effect  of  exchange  rate  movements  on  cash,  cash
equivalents and restricted cash was due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against other currencies, primarily the Korean won, euro and British
pound during
44

2019. The negative effect of exchange rate movements on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was due to the strengthening of the U.S.
dollar against other currencies, primarily the euro, Korean won and British pound, during 2018.
Stock Repurchases
In January 2019, our Board authorized a $4.0 billion stock repurchase program and in January 2020, our Board authorized an additional $5.0
billion stock repurchase program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
On  February  13,  2020,  we  entered  into  accelerated  share  repurchase  agreements  (the  “ASR  Agreements”)  with  each  three  financial
institutions (each, an “ASR Counterparty”), as part of our share repurchase program. Under the ASR Agreements, we paid an aggregate amount of
$3.0 billion to the ASR Counterparties and received an initial delivery of approximately 69 million shares of our common stock, which shares were
recorded as a $2.55 billion increase to treasury stock. The remaining $450 million was evaluated as an unsettled forward contract indexed to our
own  stock,  classified  within  stockholders’  equity.  In  July  2020,  the  ASR  Agreements  settled  and  resulted  in  approximately  74  million  shares
repurchased at an average price per share of $40.77 and the forward contract was settled and recorded as an increase to treasury stock.
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and,
subject to market conditions and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding
share count. Any share repurchases under our stock repurchase programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately
negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems
appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
During 2020, we repurchased approximately $5.1 billion of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. As of December 31,
2020, a total of approximately $2.0 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. In
February 2021, our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
We  expect,  subject  to  market  conditions  and  other  uncertainties,  to  continue  making  opportunistic  and  programmatic  repurchases  of  our
common  stock.  However,  our  stock  repurchase  programs  may  be  limited  or  terminated  at  any  time  without  prior  notice.  The  timing  and  actual
number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
Dividends
The company paid a total of $447 million and $473 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019,
respectively. No cash dividends were paid in 2018. In February 2021, we declared a cash dividend of $0.18 per share of common stock to be paid
on March 19, 2021 to stockholders of record as of March 1, 2021.
45

Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2020, we had floating- and fixed-rate senior notes outstanding for an aggregate principal amount of $7.8 billion. The net
proceeds from the issuances of these senior notes are used for general corporate purposes, including, among other things, capital expenditures,
share repurchases, repayment of indebtedness and possible acquisitions. The floating rate notes are not redeemable prior to maturity. On and after
March 1, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056 at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity, at a
redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. We may redeem some or all
of the other fixed rate notes of each series at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price plus
accrued and unpaid interest. If a change of control triggering event (as defined in the applicable senior notes) occurs with respect to the 3.800%
fixed rate notes due 2022, the floating rate notes due 2023, the 2.750% fixed rate notes due 2023, the 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025, the
3.600% fixed rate notes due 2027, the 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030 or the 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056, we must, subject to certain
exceptions, offer to repurchase all of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid
interest. For additional details related to our senior notes, please see “Note 11 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this
report.
On January 29, 2021, the company announced that it issued a notice of redemption for the $750 million aggregate principal amount of the
6.000% senior notes due 2056. The effective date of this redemption will be March 1, 2021.
To help achieve our interest rate risk management objectives, in connection with the previous issuance of certain senior notes, we entered
into interest rate swap agreements that effectively converted $2.4 billion of the fixed rate notes to floating rate debt based on the London Interbank
Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a spread. These swaps were designated as fair value hedges against changes in the fair value of certain fixed rate
senior notes resulting from changes in interest rates. As of December 31, 2019, we had no interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges
outstanding  as $1.15  billion related  to our  2.200%  senior  notes  of  the  $2.4  billion aggregate  notional amount  matured  in 2019 and  in 2019 we
terminated the interest rate swaps related to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due
July 2024. As a result of the early termination, hedge accounting was discontinued prospectively and the gain on termination was recorded as an
increase to the long-term debt balance and is being recognized over the remaining life of the underlying debt as a reduction to interest expense. The
gain recognized was immaterial during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. For additional details related to
the interest rate swap termination, please see, “Note 11 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
During 2020, we began to hedge the variability of the cash flows in interest payments associated with our floating-rate debt using interest rate
swaps. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert our LIBOR-based floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis, reducing the impact of
interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The total notional amount of these interest swaps was $400 million as of December 31, 2020 with
terms calling for us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest at a fixed rate. Our interest rate swap contracts have maturity dates in
2023.
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default with customary grace periods in certain circumstances, including
payment defaults and bankruptcy-related defaults.
Commercial Paper
We have a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes in an aggregate principal amount at maturity
of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time with maturities of up to 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2020, there were no
commercial paper notes outstanding.
46

Credit Agreement
In March 2020, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year credit facility. We may also, subject to
the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to $1 billion. Funds borrowed under the
credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes. The credit agreement
replaced our prior $2 billion unsecured revolving credit agreement dated November 2015, which was terminated effective March 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and are required to maintain available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order to repay
commercial paper borrowings in the event we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due, in an aggregate
amount of $1.5 billion. However, as of December 31, 2020, no borrowings were outstanding under our commercial paper program; therefore, $2
billion of borrowing capacity was available for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. The
credit agreement includes a covenant limiting our consolidated leverage ratio to no more than 4.0:1.0, subject to, upon the occurrence of a qualified
material acquisition, if so elected by us, a step-up to 4.5:1.0 for the four fiscal quarters completed following such qualified material acquisition. The
credit  agreement  includes  customary  events  of  default,  with  corresponding  grace  periods  in  certain  circumstances,  including  payment  defaults,
cross-defaults and bankruptcy-related defaults. In addition, the credit agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including
restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and subsidiary indebtedness, in each case, subject to customary exceptions. The credit agreement also
contains customary representations and warranties. 
We were in compliance with all financial covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2020.
Credit Ratings
As of December 31, 2020, we were rated investment grade by Standard and Poor’s Financial Services, LLC (long-term rated BBB+, short-
term  rated  A-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  Moody’s  Investor  Service  (long-term  rated  Baa1,  short-term  rated  P-2,  with  a  stable  outlook),  and  Fitch
Ratings, Inc. (long-term rated BBB, short-term rated F-2, with a stable outlook). We disclose these ratings to enhance the understanding of our
sources of liquidity and the effects of our ratings on our costs of funds. Our borrowing costs depend, in part, on our credit ratings and any actions
taken by these credit rating agencies to lower our credit ratings, as described above, will likely increase our borrowing costs. 
47

Commitments and Contingencies
We  have  certain  fixed  contractual  obligations  and  commitments  that  include  future  estimated  payments  for  general  operating  purposes.
Changes  in  our  business  needs,  contractual  cancellation  provisions,  fluctuating  interest  rates,  and  other  factors  may  result  in  actual  payments
differing from the estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of these payments. The following table summarizes our
fixed contractual obligations and commitments for our continuing operations (in millions):
Payments Due During the Year Ending December 31,
Debt
 Leases
Purchase Obligations   
Total
2021
$
974 
$
196 
$
66 
$
1,236 
2022
1,931 
170 
18 
2,119 
2023
1,280 
116 
15 
1,411 
2024
867 
45 
— 
912 
2025
889 
34 
— 
923 
Thereafter
3,197 
42 
— 
3,239 
$
9,138 
$
603 
$
99 
$
9,840 
The significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the above table are as follows:
•
Debt amounts include the principal and interest amounts of the respective debt instruments. For additional details related to our debt,
please see “Note 11 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements  included in this report. This table does not reflect any amounts
payable under our $2 billion revolving credit facility or $1.5 billion commercial paper program, for which no borrowings were outstanding
as of December 31, 2020.
•
Lease amounts include payments for our operating and finance leases for office space, data centers, as well as fulfillment centers and
other corporate assets that we utilize under lease arrangements. The amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are
not expected to differ significantly from actual results under our existing leases, unless a substantial change in our headcount needs
requires us to expand our occupied space or exit an office facility early.
•
Purchase  obligation  amounts  include  minimum  purchase  commitments  for  advertising,  capital  expenditures  (computer  equipment,
software  applications,  engineering  development  services,  construction  contracts)  and  other  goods  and  services  entered  into  in  the
ordinary course of business.
As we are unable to reasonably  predict the timing  of settlement  of liabilities related  to unrecognized tax benefits,  net, the table does not
include $295 million of such non-current liabilities included in other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. The timing
of the resolution and/or closure of audits is highly uncertain, it is reasonably possible that the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits could
significantly change in the next 12 months. However, given the number of years remaining subject to examination and the number of matters being
examined, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits. See “Note 16 –
Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on unrecognized tax benefits.
Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had assets classified as cash and cash equivalents, as well as short-term and long-
term non-equity investments from continuing operations, in an aggregate amount of $4.1 billion and $3.7 billion, respectively. As of December 31,
2020, this amount included assets held in certain of our foreign operations totaling approximately $3.1 billion. As we repatriate these funds to the
U.S., we will be required to pay income taxes in certain U.S. states and applicable foreign withholding taxes on those amounts during the period
when such repatriation occurs. We have accrued deferred taxes for the tax effect of repatriating the funds to the U.S.
We actively monitor all counterparties that hold our cash and cash equivalents and non-equity investments, focusing primarily on the safety of
principal and secondarily on improving yield on these assets. We diversify our
48

cash and cash equivalents and investments among various counterparties in order to reduce our exposure should any one of these counterparties
fail or encounter difficulties. To date, we have not experienced any material loss or lack of access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-
term investments; however, we can provide no assurances that access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments will not be
impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets, including, without limitation, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. At any
point in time we have funds in our operating accounts and customer accounts that are deposited and invested with third party financial institutions.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments, together with cash expected to be generated
from  operations,  borrowings  available  under  our  credit  agreement  and  commercial  paper  program,  and  our  access  to  capital  markets,  will  be
sufficient  to  fund  our  operating  activities,  anticipated  capital  expenditures,  repayment  of  debt  and  stock  repurchases  for  the  foreseeable  future.
However, COVID-19 and related measures to contain its impact have caused material disruptions in both national and global financial markets and
economies. The future impact of COVID-19 and these containment measures cannot be predicted with certainty and may increase our borrowing
costs and other costs of capital and otherwise adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and we cannot
assure that we will have access to external financing at times and on terms we consider acceptable, or at all, or that we will not experience other
liquidity issues going forward.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or income under the arrangement. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $5.2 billion in aggregate cash deposits, partially offset by $4.9 billion
in cash withdrawals, held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us and PayPal,
which may be significant. In addition, the indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us and our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application-programming-interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, losses recorded
in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant, either individually or collectively.
49

Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
General
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based
our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of
which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our
senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are
highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting
estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. We believe the following
critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The following  descriptions  of critical  accounting  policies,  judgments  and estimates  should be read  in conjunction  with our consolidated  financial
statements and related notes and other disclosures included in this report.
Revenue Recognition
We  may  enter  into  certain  revenue  contracts  that  include  promises  to  transfer  multiple  goods  or  services  including  discounts  on  future
services. We also may enter into arrangements to purchase services from certain customers. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is
sometimes  required  to  determine  the  appropriate  accounting  for  these  transactions  including:  (1)  whether  services  are  considered  distinct
performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price of each
distinct performance obligation; (3) whether revenue should be reported gross (as eBay is acting as a principal), or net (as eBay is acting as an
agent); (4) evaluating whether a promotion or incentive is a payment to a customer; and (5) whether the arrangement would be characterized as
revenue or reimbursement of costs incurred. Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or
amount of revenue recognition.
Income Taxes
Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in
which  we  operate.  Tax  laws  are  complex  and  subject  to  different  interpretations  by  the  taxpayer  and  respective  government  taxing  authorities.
Significant  judgment  is  required  in  determining  our  tax  expense  and  in  evaluating  our  tax  positions,  including  evaluating  uncertainties  and  the
complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Tax
positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. Our
income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of our intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. As a result of U.S. tax reform and the current U.S. taxation of
deemed repatriated earnings, management has no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries at the
balance sheet date.
Deferred  tax  assets  represent  amounts  available  to  reduce  income  taxes  payable  on  taxable  income  in  future  years.  Such  assets  arise
because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax
credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable
income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies.
These sources of income rely heavily on estimates that are based on a number of factors, including our historical experience and short-range and
long-range business forecasts. As of December 31, 2020, we had a valuation allowance on certain net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards
based on our assessment that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
50

We  recognize  and  measure  uncertain  tax  positions  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  the  U.S.,  or  GAAP,
pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from
such  positions  are  then  measured  based  on  the  largest  benefit  that  has  a  greater  than  50  percent  likelihood  of  being  realized  upon  ultimate
settlement. We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
GAAP further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in
the quarter in which such change occurs. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. A number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax
position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution
of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these reserves, as
well as the related interest, where appropriate in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position could require the
use of cash.
The following table illustrates our effective tax rates:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
 
2019
 
2018
(In millions, except percentages)
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
878 
 $
233 
 $
121 
Effective tax rate
25.7 %  
13.3 %  
5.4 %
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory
rates  and  higher  than  anticipated  in  countries  where  we  have  higher  statutory  rates,  by  changes  in  the  valuation  of  our  deferred  tax  assets  or
liabilities, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination
of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service, as well as various state and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of
adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
Based  on  our  results  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2020,  a  one-percentage  point  change  in  our  provision  for  income  taxes  as  a
percentage of income before taxes would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the provision of approximately $34 million, resulting in an
approximate $0.05 change in diluted earnings per share.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The purchase price of an acquired company is allocated between intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with
the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments
and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the
appropriate weighted average cost of capital.
As  of  December  31,  2020,  our  goodwill  totaled  $4.7  billion  and  our  identifiable  intangible  assets,  net  totaled  $12  million.  We  assess  the
impairment of goodwill of our reporting unit annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be
recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more
likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment,
then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market and discounted
cash flow approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The discounted cash flow
approach uses expected future operating results. The market approach uses comparable company information to determine revenue and earnings
multiples to value our reporting unit. Failure to achieve these expected results or market multiples may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the
reporting unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill as of August 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we determined that
no impairment of the carrying value of
51

goodwill for any reporting units was required. See “Note 5 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the consolidated financial statements included in this
report.
Legal Contingencies
In connection with certain pending litigation and other claims, we have estimated the range of probable loss, net of expected recoveries, and
provided for such losses through charges to our consolidated statement of income. These estimates have been based on our assessment of the
facts and circumstances at each balance sheet date and are subject to change based upon new information and future events.
From time to time, we are involved in disputes and regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business. We are currently involved
in  legal  proceedings,  some  of  which  are  discussed  in  “Item  1A:  Risk  Factors,”  “Item  3:  Legal  Proceedings”  and  “Note  13  –  Commitments  and
Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report. We believe that we have meritorious defenses to the claims against
us, and we intend to defend ourselves vigorously. However, even if successful, our defense against certain actions will be costly and could require
significant amounts of management’s time and result in the diversion of significant operational resources. If the plaintiffs were to prevail on certain
claims, we might be forced to pay significant damages and licensing fees, modify our business practices or even be prohibited from conducting a
significant part of our business. Any such results could materially harm our business and could result in a material adverse impact on the financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements included in this report,
regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
52

ITEM 7A: QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Interest Rate Risk
We are exposed to interest rate risk relating to our investments and outstanding debt. In addition, adverse economic conditions and events
(including  volatility  or  distress  in the  equity  and/or  debt  or  credit  markets)  may  impact  regional  and  global  financial  markets.  These  events  and
conditions could cause us to write down our assets or investments. We seek to reduce earnings volatility that may result from adverse economic
conditions and events or changes in interest rates.
The primary objective of our investments is to preserve principal while at the same time improving yields without significantly increasing risk.
To achieve this objective, we maintain our cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments in a variety of asset types, including bank
deposits, government bonds and corporate debt securities. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 31% of our total cash and investments was
held in cash and cash equivalents. As such, changes in interest rates will impact interest income. As discussed below, the fair market values of our
fixed rate securities may be adversely affected due to a rise in interest rates, and we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell securities
that have declined in market value due to changes in interest rates.
 
As of December 31, 2020, the balance of our corporate debt securities was $2.5 billion, which represented approximately 55% of our total
cash and investments. Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying degrees of interest rate risk. The
fair market value of our fixed-rate investment securities may be adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates. In general, fixed-rate securities
with longer maturities are subject to greater interest rate risk than those with shorter maturities. While floating rate securities generally are subject to
less interest rate risk than fixed-rate securities, floating-rate securities may produce less income than expected if interest rates decrease and may
also suffer a decline in market value if interest rates increase. Due in part to these factors, our investment income may fall short of expectations or
we may suffer losses in principal if we sell securities that have declined in market value due to changes in interest rates. A hypothetical 100 basis
point increase in interest rates would have resulted in a decrease in the fair value of our investments of $5 million and $8 million as of December 31,
2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an aggregate principal amount of $7.8 billion of outstanding senior notes, of which 95% bore interest at
fixed  rates.  In  2014,  we  entered  into  $2.4  billion  of  interest  rate  swap  agreements  that  had  an  economic  effect  of  modifying  the  fixed  interest
obligations associated with $1.15 billion of our 2.200% senior notes due July 2019, $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021, and $500
million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024 so that the interest payable on those notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR plus a
spread. In July 2019, $1.15 billion of the $2.4 billion aggregate notional amount matured and we terminated the interest rate swaps related to $750
million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024, which were designated as fair value
hedges. As a result of the early termination, hedge accounting was discontinued prospectively and the gain on termination was recorded as an
increase to the long-term debt balance and is being recognized over the remaining life of the underlying debt as a reduction to interest expense. The
gain recognized was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
During 2020, we began to hedge the variability of the cash flows in interest payments associated with our floating-rate debt using interest rate
swaps. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert our LIBOR-based floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis, reducing the impact of
interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The total notional amount of these interest swaps was $400 million as of December 31, 2020 with
terms calling for us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest at a fixed rate. Our interest rate swap contracts have maturity dates in
2023. At December 31, 2020, we did not have an unhedged balance on our floating-rate debt.
53

During  2020,  we  began  to  hedge  the  variability  of  forecasted  interest  payments  using  forward-starting  interest  rate  swaps.  The  notional
amount of these swaps was $700 million as of December 31, 2020, with terms calling for us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest
at a fixed rate. These interest rate swaps effectively fix the benchmark interest rate on anticipated debt issuance in 2022, and they will be terminated
upon issuance of the debt. When entering into forward-starting interest rate swaps, we are subject to market risk with respect to changes in the
underlying benchmark interest rate that impacts the fair value of the forward-starting interest rate swaps. We manage market risk by matching the
terms of the swaps with the terms of the expected debt issuance. We considered the historical volatility of short-term interest rates and determined
that it was reasonably possible that an adverse change of 100 basis points could be experienced in the near term. A hypothetical 1% (100 basis
points) decrease in interest rates would have resulted in a decrease in the fair values of our forward-starting and floating to fixed rate interest swaps
of approximately $61 million at December 31, 2020.
Further changes in interest rates will impact interest expense on any borrowings under our revolving credit facility, which bear interest at
floating  rates,  and  the  interest  rate  on  any  commercial  paper  borrowings  we  make  and  any  debt  securities  we  may  issue  in  the  future  and,
accordingly, will impact interest expense. For additional details related to our debt, see “Note 11 – Debt” to the consolidated financial statements
included in this report.
 
Equity Price Risk
Equity Investments
Our equity investments are primarily investments in privately-held companies. Our consolidated results of operations include, as a component
of interest and other, net, our share of the net income or loss of the equity investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting. Equity
investments without readily determinable fair values are accounted for at cost, less impairment and adjusted for subsequent observable price
changes obtained from orderly transactions for identical or similar investments issued by the same investee. Such changes in the basis of the equity
investment are recognized in interest and other, net. As of December 31, 2020, our equity investments totaled $547 million, which represented
approximately 12% of our total cash and investments, and were primarily related to equity investments without readily determinable fair values.
Warrant
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Changes in Adyen’s common stock price and equity
volatility may have a significant impact on the value of the warrant.  As of December 31, 2020, a one dollar change in Adyen’s common stock,
holding other factors constant, would increase or decrease the fair value of the warrant by approximately $1 million. For additional details related to
the warrant, please see “Note 8 – Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues and costs that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the
British pound, euro, Korean won and Australian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency risk, which may adversely impact our financial results. We
transact business in various foreign currencies and have significant international revenues as well as costs. In addition, we charge our international
subsidiaries for their use of intellectual property and technology and for certain corporate services we provide. Our cash flow, results of operations
and certain of our intercompany balances that are exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations may differ materially from expectations and we may
record significant gains or losses due to foreign currency fluctuations and related hedging activities.
We  have  a  foreign  exchange  exposure  management  program  designed  to  identify  material  foreign  currency  exposures,  manage  these
exposures and reduce the potential effects of currency fluctuations on our reported consolidated cash flows and results of operations through the
purchase of foreign currency exchange contracts. The effectiveness of the program and resulting usage of foreign exchange derivative contracts is
at times limited by our ability to achieve cash flow hedge accounting. For additional details related to our derivative instruments, please see “Note 8
– Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
54

We use foreign exchange derivative contracts to help protect our forecasted U.S. dollar-equivalent earnings from adverse changes in foreign
currency exchange rates. These hedging contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of adverse currency exchange rate movements.
Most of these contracts are designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes. For qualifying cash flow hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss
is initially reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) and subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same
period the forecasted transaction affects earnings. For contracts not designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, the derivative’s gain
or loss is recognized immediately in earnings in our consolidated statement of income. However, only certain revenue and costs are eligible for cash
flow hedge accounting.
The following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges and net investment
hedges, and the before-tax effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change in the foreign exchange rates that existed as of December 31,
2020.  The  sensitivity  for  foreign  currency  contracts  is  based  on  a  20%  adverse  change  in  foreign  exchange  rates,  against  relevant  functional
currencies.
 
Fair Value
Asset/(Liability)
Fair Value
Sensitivity
(In millions)
Foreign exchange contracts - Cash flow hedges
$
9 
$
(139)
Foreign exchange contracts - Net investment hedges
$
(2)
$
(54)
Since our risk management programs are highly effective, the potential loss in value described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
We also use foreign exchange contracts to offset the foreign exchange risk on our assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than
the functional currency of our subsidiaries. These contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of currency exchange rate movements
on our assets and liabilities. The foreign currency gains and losses on the assets and liabilities are recorded in interest and other, net, which are
offset by the gains and losses on the foreign exchange contracts.
We  considered  the  historical  trends  in  currency  exchange  rates  and  determined  that  it  was  reasonably  possible  that  adverse  changes  in
exchange rates of 20% for all currencies could be experienced in the near term. These changes would have resulted in an adverse impact on
income before income taxes of approximately $52 million as of December 31, 2020 taking into consideration the offsetting effect of foreign exchange
forwards in place as of December 31, 2020.
ITEM 8: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
The  consolidated  financial  statements  and  accompanying  notes  listed  in  Part  IV,  Item  15(a)(1)  of  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  are
included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9: CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A: CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation  of  disclosure  controls  and  procedures: Based  on  the  evaluation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  the
Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e)  under  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  or  the  Exchange  Act)  required  by  Exchange  Act
Rules  13a-15(b)  or  15d-15(b),  our  principal  executive  officer  and  our  principal  financial  officer  have  concluded  that  our  disclosure  controls  and
procedures were effective as of December 31, 2020.
Changes in internal controls: There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting as defined in Exchange Act Rule 13a-15(f)
that occurred during our most recently completed fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal
control over financial reporting.
55

Management’s  annual report  on internal  control  over financial reporting: Our management  is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting. Our management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, conducted
an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control - Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on its evaluation under the framework in Internal
Control - Integrated Framework, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2020.
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP,
an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which appears in Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9B: OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
56

PART III
ITEM 10: DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2020.
Code of Ethics, Governance Guidelines and Committee Charters
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to all eBay employees and directors. The Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics is posted on our website at https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance/governance-documents/. We will post any amendments
to or waivers from the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics at that location.
We have also adopted Governance Guidelines for the Board of Directors and a written committee charter for each of our Audit Committee,
Compensation  Committee  and  Corporate  Governance  and  Nominating  Committee.  Each  of  these  documents  is  available  on  our  website  at
https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance/governance-documents/.
ITEM 11: EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2020.
ITEM 12: SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2020.
ITEM 13: CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2020.
ITEM 14: PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2020.
57

PART IV
ITEM 15: EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
(a) The following documents are filed as part of this report:
1. Consolidated Financial Statements:
Page Number
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
59
Consolidated Balance Sheet
61
Consolidated Statement of Income
62
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
63
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
64
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
65
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
67
2. Financial Statement Schedule
Schedule II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
107
All other schedules have been omitted because the information required to be set forth therein is not applicable or is
shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.
3. Exhibits Required by Item 601 of Regulation S-K
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index to Exhibits that precedes the signature page of this
Annual Report.
108
ITEM 16: FORM 10-K SUMMARY
None.
58

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of eBay Inc.
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of eBay Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the
related consolidated statements of income, of comprehensive income, of stockholders’ equity and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2020, including the related notes and schedule of valuation and qualifying accounts for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2020 appearing under Item 15(a)(2) (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the Company's internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of  the  Company  as  of
December  31,  2020  and  2019,  and  the  results  of  its operations  and  its  cash  flows  for  each  of  the  three  years  in the  period  ended  December  31,  2020  in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued
by the COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed the manner in which it accounts for leases in 2019.
Basis for Opinions
The Company’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for
its  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  Management’s  Annual  Report  on  Internal  Control  over  Financial
Reporting appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules
and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements,  whether  due  to  error  or  fraud,  and  performing  procedures  that  respond  to  those  risks.  Such  procedures  included  examining,  on  a  test  basis,
evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used
and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal
control  over  financial  reporting  included  obtaining  an  understanding  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  assessing  the  risk that  a  material  weakness
exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing
such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A  company’s  internal  control  over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any  evaluation  of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
59

Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that was communicated or
required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and
(ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on
the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the
critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Income Taxes
As described in Notes 1 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements, significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s tax expense and in
evaluating management’s tax positions, relating to evaluating uncertainties and the complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. As disclosed by management, the
Company’s income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to their foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of the Company’s intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred  tax  benefit  may,  from  time  to  time,  change  based  on  changes  in  tax  rates.  Management  recognizes  and  measures  uncertain  tax  positions  in
accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  the  U.S.,  or  GAAP,  pursuant  to  which  management  only  recognizes  the  tax  benefit  from  an
uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of
the position. The total provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $878 million, and the effective tax rate was 25.7%.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to income taxes is a critical audit matter are the significant judgment
applied by management when determining the tax expense and in evaluating management’s tax positions relating to uncertain tax positions and taxes on foreign
earnings, which in turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, effort, and subjectivity in performing audit procedures and evaluating audit evidence relating to
income taxes.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated financial
statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to income taxes, including controls over uncertain tax positions and the
provision  for  income  taxes.  These  procedures  also  included,  among  others,  evaluating  tax  positions  taken  by  management,  including  evaluating  the
reasonableness of management’s determination of the probability of sustaining the position under tax examination, evaluating communications with the relevant
tax authorities, testing applicable tax rates applied by management, and evaluating the impact of taxes on foreign earnings.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
February 4, 2021
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1997.
60

PART II: FINANCIAL INFORMATION
ITEM 8:    FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
December 31,
 
2020
 
2019
 
(In millions, except par value)
ASSETS
Current assets:
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,428 
$
901 
Short-term investments
2,398 
1,850 
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $97 and $82
412 
555 
Other current assets
1,764 
1,064 
Current assets held for sale
1,188 
195 
Current assets of discontinued operations
— 
141 
Total current assets
7,190 
4,706 
Long-term investments
833 
1,275 
Property and equipment, net
1,358 
1,460 
Goodwill
4,675 
4,533 
Intangible assets, net
12 
39 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
509 
583 
Deferred tax assets
3,537 
3,980 
Warrant asset
1,051 
281 
Other assets
145 
133 
Long-term assets held for sale
— 
878 
Long-term assets of discontinued operations
— 
306 
Total assets
$
19,310 
$
18,174 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities:
 
 
Short-term debt
$
18 
$
1,020 
Accounts payable
332 
229 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
2,910 
2,097 
Deferred revenue
110 
129 
Income taxes payable
180 
169 
Current liabilities held for sale
452 
163 
Current liabilities of discontinued operations
— 
259 
Total current liabilities
4,002 
4,066 
Operating lease liabilities
380 
461 
Deferred tax liabilities
2,359 
2,355 
Long-term debt
7,745 
6,738 
Other liabilities
1,263 
1,353 
Long-term liabilities held for sale
— 
305 
Long-term liabilities of discontinued operations
— 
26 
Total liabilities
15,749 
15,304 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 13)
Stockholders’ equity:
Common stock, $0.001 par value; 3,580 shares authorized; 684 and 796 shares outstanding
2 
2 
Additional paid-in capital
16,497 
16,126 
Treasury stock at cost, 1,021 and 897 shares
(36,515)
(31,396)
Retained earnings
22,961 
17,754 
Accumulated other comprehensive income
616 
384 
Total stockholders’ equity
3,561 
2,870 
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$
19,310 
$
18,174 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
61

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Net revenues
$
10,271 
$
8,636 
$
8,650 
Cost of net revenues
2,473 
2,136 
2,023 
Gross profit
7,798 
6,500 
6,627 
Operating expenses:
 
Sales and marketing
2,639 
2,368 
2,576 
Product development
1,087 
976 
1,051 
General and administrative
1,003 
1,005 
979 
Provision for transaction losses
331 
262 
247 
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
27 
28 
22 
Total operating expenses
5,087 
4,639 
4,875 
Income from operations
2,711 
1,861 
1,752 
Interest and other, net
709 
(112)
497 
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
3,420 
1,749 
2,249 
Income tax provision
(878)
(233)
(121)
Income from continuing operations
$
2,542 
$
1,516 
$
2,128 
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
3,125 
270 
402 
Net income
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
$
2,530 
Income per share - basic:
 
 
Continuing operations
$
3.58 
$
1.79 
$
2.17 
Discontinued operations
4.40 
0.31 
0.41 
Net income per share - basic
$
7.98 
$
2.10 
$
2.58 
Income per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
3.54 
$
1.77 
$
2.15 
Discontinued operations
4.35 
0.32 
0.40 
Net income per share - diluted
$
7.89 
$
2.09 
$
2.55 
Weighted average shares:
 
 
Basic
710 
849 
980 
Diluted
718 
856 
991 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
62

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(In millions)
Net income
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
$
2,530 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of reclassification adjustments:
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation adjustment
291 
(99)
(286)
Unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
— 
61 
(41)
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
— 
(16)
10 
Unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
(76)
(77)
125 
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
17 
17 
(27)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
232 
(114)
(219)
Comprehensive income
$
5,899 
$
1,672 
$
2,311 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
63

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
 
2019
 
2018
 
(In millions)
Common stock:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
$
2  $
2  $
2 
Common stock issued
—  
—  
— 
Common stock repurchased
— 
— 
— 
Balance, end of year
2  
2  
2 
Additional paid-in-capital:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
16,126  
15,716  
15,293 
Common stock and stock-based awards issued
89  
104  
109 
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and units
(175)
(202)
(225)
Stock-based compensation
463  
505  
538 
Other
(6)
3 
1 
Balance, end of year
16,497  
16,126  
15,716 
Treasury stock at cost:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
(31,396)  
(26,394)  
(21,892)
Common stock repurchased
(5,119)  
(5,002)  
(4,502)
Balance, end of year
(36,515)  
(31,396)  
(26,394)
Retained earnings:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
17,754  
16,459  
13,929 
Net income
5,667  
1,786  
2,530 
Dividends and dividend equivalents declared
(460)
(491)
— 
Balance, end of year
22,961  
17,754  
16,459 
Accumulated other comprehensive income:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
384  
498  
717 
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on investments
—  
61  
(41)
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on derivative instruments
(76)  
(77)  
125 
Foreign currency translation adjustment
291  
(99)  
(286)
Tax benefit (provision) on above items
17 
1 
(17)
Balance, end of year
616  
384  
498 
Total stockholders’ equity
$
3,561 
$
2,870  $
6,281 
Number of shares:
 
 
Common stock - shares outstanding:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
796  
915  
1,029 
Common stock issued
12  
15  
17 
Common stock repurchased
(124)  
(134)  
(131)
Balance, end of year
684  
796  
915 
Dividends and dividend equivalents declared per share or restricted stock unit
$
0.64 
$
0.56 
$
— 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
64

eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(In millions)
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Net income
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
$
2,530 
(Income) loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(3,125)
(270)
(402)
Adjustments:
 
 
Provision for transaction losses
331 
262 
247 
Depreciation and amortization
609 
629 
635 
Stock-based compensation
431 
431 
465 
(Gain) loss on investments, net
(237)
— 
(573)
(Gain) loss on sale of business
— 
52 
— 
Deferred income taxes
408 
(5)
(104)
Change in fair value of warrant
(770)
(133)
(104)
Other
— 
— 
19 
Changes in assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects
Accounts receivable
8 
(108)
(76)
Other current assets
(755)
133 
(98)
Other non-current assets
166 
210 
98 
Accounts payable
101 
(11)
(33)
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
307 
(304)
(412)
Deferred revenue
(20)
(1)
31 
Income taxes payable and other tax liabilities
25 
(88)
(13)
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities
3,146 
2,583 
2,210 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
(727)
531 
448 
Net cash provided by operating activities
2,419 
3,114 
2,658 
Cash flows from investing activities:
 
 
 
Purchases of property and equipment
(494)
(523)
(623)
Purchases of investments
(32,887)
(46,966)
(28,115)
Maturities and sales of investments
33,129 
50,548 
30,901 
Equity investment in Paytm Mall
— 
(160)
— 
Proceeds from sale of equity investment in Flipkart
— 
— 
1,029 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
— 
— 
(302)
Other
33 
23 
32 
Net cash provided by (used in) continuing investing activities
(219)
2,922 
2,922 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
4,013 
(135)
(28)
Net cash provided by investing activities
3,794 
2,787 
2,894 
Cash flows from financing activities:
 
 
 
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
90 
106 
109 
Repurchases of common stock
(5,137)
(4,973)
(4,502)
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and units
(175)
(202)
(225)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net
1,765 
— 
— 
Payments for dividends
(447)
(473)
— 
Repayment of debt
(1,771)
(1,550)
(750)
Other
(15)
(1)
(30)
Net cash (used in) continuing financing activities
(5,690)
(7,093)
(5,398)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
(2)
2 
— 
Net cash (used in) financing activities
(5,692)
(7,091)
(5,398)
65

Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
77 
(33)
(75)
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
598 
(1,223)
79 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at beginning of period
996 
2,219 
2,140 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at end of period
$
1,594 
$
996 
$
2,219 
Less: Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of held for sale business
23 
22 
48 
Less: Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of discontinued operations
— 
52 
87 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at end of period
$
1,571 
$
922 
$
2,084 
Supplemental cash flow disclosures of continuing operations:
 
 
 
Cash paid for:
Interest
$
271 
$
304 
$
314 
Interest on finance lease obligations
$
1 
$
1 
$
— 
Income taxes
$
520 
$
270 
$
556 
Noncash investing activities:
Relinquishment of equity method investment
$
— 
$
— 
$
266 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
66

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The Company
eBay Inc. is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace platforms. Founded in 1995 in San Jose, California, eBay is one of the
world’s largest and most vibrant marketplaces  for discovering great value and unique selection. Collectively,  we connect millions of buyers and
sellers around the world, empowering people and creating opportunity for all. Our technologies and services are designed to give buyers choice and
a breadth of relevant inventory and to enable sellers worldwide to organize and offer their inventory for sale, virtually anytime and anywhere. 
When we refer to “we,” “our,” “us,” the “Company” or “eBay” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we mean the current Delaware corporation
(eBay Inc.) and its consolidated subsidiaries, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires.
On November 24, 2019, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of viagogo to sell our StubHub business. The sale of our
StubHub business was completed on February 13, 2020. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, StubHub’s financial results for periods prior to the
sale  have  been  reflected  in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  as  discontinued  operations.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities
associated with the discontinued operations in the prior periods are classified as discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet. See
“Note 4 – Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement with Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”) to transfer our Classifieds business to Adevinta for
$2.5 billion in cash, subject to certain adjustments, and approximately 540 million shares in Adevinta. Together, the total consideration payable
under the definitive agreement is valued at approximately $9.2 billion, based on the closing trading price of Adevinta’s outstanding shares on the
Oslo Stock Exchange on July 17, 2020. We believe the transaction will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021. Completion of the transaction is
subject  to  certain  conditions,  including  receipt  of  certain  regulatory  approvals,  and  other  risks  and  uncertainties,  including  general  industry  and
economic conditions outside our control. If the conditions to the closing of the transfer of Classifieds are neither satisfied nor, where permissible,
waived  on  a  timely  basis  or  at  all,  we  may  be  unable  to  complete  the  transfer  of  Classifieds  or  such  completion  may  be  delayed  beyond  our
expected  timeline.  As  a  result  of  entering  into  a  definitive  agreement,  we  have  classified  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  our
Classifieds  business  as  held  for  sale  in  our  consolidated  balance  sheet.  The  results  of  our  Classifieds  business  have  been  presented  as
discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for all periods presented as the transfer represents a strategic shift in our business
that has a major effect on our operations and financial results. See “Note 4 – Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
During  the  first  quarter  of  2020,  we  classified  the  results  of  our  previously  reported  StubHub  segment  as  discontinued  operations  in  our
consolidated statement of income for all periods presented. In addition, during the third quarter of 2020, we classified the results of our Classifieds
segment as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for the periods presented. We have one reportable segment, to reflect
the way management and our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) review and assess performance of the business. Our reportable segment is
Marketplace, which includes our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay suite of mobile apps. For
further information on our segments, refer to “Note 6 – Segments”. Prior period segment information has been reclassified to conform to the current
period segment presentation.
67

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (“GAAP”)  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an
ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to provisions for transaction losses, legal contingencies, income taxes, revenue
recognition,  stock-based  compensation,  investments,  goodwill  and  the  recoverability  of  intangible  assets.  We  base  our  estimates  on  historical
experience and on various other assumptions  that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.  Actual results could differ from those
estimates.
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements are consolidated and include the financial statements of eBay Inc., our wholly and majority-owned
subsidiaries  and  variable  interest  entities  (“VIE”)  where  we  are  the  primary  beneficiary.  All  intercompany  balances  and  transactions  have  been
eliminated in consolidation. Minority interests are recorded as a noncontrolling interest. A qualitative approach is applied to assess the consolidation
requirement for VIEs. Investments in entities where we hold at least a 20% ownership interest and have the ability to exercise significant influence,
but not control, over the investee are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. For such investments, our share of the investees’ results
of operations is included in interest and other, net and our investment balance is included in long-term investments. Investments in entities where we
hold less than a 20% ownership interest are generally accounted for as equity investments to be measured at fair value or, under an election, at cost
if it does not have readily determinable fair value, in which case the carrying value would be adjusted upon the occurrence of an observable price
change in an orderly transaction for identical or similar instruments or impairment.
Significant Accounting Policies
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to
which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected, which are subsequently
remitted to governmental authorities.
Net transaction revenues
Our net transaction revenues primarily include final value fees, feature fees, including fees to promote listings, and listing fees from sellers in
our Marketplace. Our net transaction revenues also include store subscription and other fees often from large enterprise sellers. Our net transaction
revenues are reduced by incentives provided to our customers.
We identified one performance obligation to sellers on our Marketplace platform, which is to connect buyers and sellers on our secure and
trusted  Marketplace  platforms.  Final  value  fees  are  recognized  when  an  item  is  sold  on  a  Marketplace  platform,  satisfying  this  performance
obligation. There may be additional services available to Marketplace sellers, mainly to promote or feature listings, that are not distinct within the
context of the contract. Accordingly, fees for these additional services are recognized when the single performance obligation is satisfied. Promoted
listing fees are recognized when the item is sold and feature and listing fees are recognized when an item is sold, or when the contract expires.
Store  subscription  and  other  nonstandard  listing  contracts  may  contain  multiple  performance  obligations,  including  discounts  on  future
services.  Determining  whether  performance  obligations  should  be  accounted  for  separately  or  combined  may  require  significant  judgment.  The
transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on its stand-alone selling price (“SSP”). In instances where SSP is not directly
observable, we generally estimate selling prices based on when they are sold to customers of a similar nature and geography. These estimates are
generally based on pricing strategies, market factors, strategic objectives and observable inputs. Store subscription revenues are recognized over
the  subscription  period,  and  discounts  offered  through  store  subscription  or  nonstandard  listing  contracts  are  recognized  when  the  options  are
exercised or when the options expire.
68

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Further, to drive traffic to our platforms, we provide incentives to buyers and sellers in various forms including discounts on fees, discounts on
items  sold,  coupons  and  rewards.  Evaluating  whether  a  promotion  or  incentive  is  a  payment  to  a  customer  may  require  significant  judgment.
Promotions and incentives which are consideration payable to a customer are recognized as a reduction of revenue at the later of when revenue is
recognized or when we pay or promise to pay the incentive. Promotions and incentives to most buyers on our Marketplace platforms, to whom we
have no performance obligation, are recognized as sales and marketing expense. In addition, we may provide credits to customers when we refund
certain fees. Credits are accounted for as variable consideration at contract inception when estimating the amount of revenue to be recognized
when  a  performance  obligation  is  satisfied  to  the  extent  that  it  is  probable  that  a  significant  reversal  of  revenue  will  not  occur  and  updated  as
additional information becomes available.
Marketing services and other revenues
Our marketing services and other revenues are derived principally from the sale of advertisements, classifieds fees, and revenue sharing
arrangements. Advertising revenue is derived principally from the sale of online advertisements which are based on “impressions” (i.e., the number
of times that an advertisement appears in pages viewed by users of our platforms) or “clicks” (which are generated each time users on our platforms
click through our advertisements to an advertiser’s designated website) delivered to advertisers. We use the output method and apply the practical
expedient to recognize advertising revenue in the amount to which we have a right to invoice. For contracts with target advertising commitments with
rebates, estimated payout is accounted for as a variable consideration to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur.
Revenues related to revenue sharing arrangements are recognized based on whether we are the principal and are responsible for fulfilling the
promise to provide the specified services or whether we are an agent arranging for those services to be provided by our partners. Determining
whether we are a principal or agent in these contracts may require significant judgment. If we are the principal, we recognize revenue in the gross
amount of consideration received from the customer, whereas if we are an agent, we recognize revenue net of the consideration due to our partners
at a point in time when the services are provided. Our most significant revenue share arrangements are with shipping service providers. We are
primarily acting as an agent in these contracts and revenues are recognized at a point in time when we have satisfied our promise of connecting the
shipping service provider to our customer.
Contract balances  
Timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. Accounts receivable represents amounts invoiced and
revenue  recognized  prior  to  invoicing  when  we  have  satisfied  our  performance  obligation  and  have  the  unconditional  right  to  payment.  The
allowance for doubtful accounts and authorized credits is estimated based upon our assessment of various factors including historical experience,
the  age  of  the  accounts  receivable  balances,  current  economic  conditions  and  other  factors  that  may  affect  our  customers’  ability  to  pay.  The
allowance  for  doubtful  accounts  and  authorized  credits  was  $136  million  and  $110  million  as  of  December  31,  2020  and  December  31,  2019,
respectively.
Deferred revenue consists of fees received related to unsatisfied performance obligations at the end of the period. Due to the generally short-
term  duration  of  contracts,  the  majority  of  the  performance  obligations  are  satisfied  in  the  following  reporting  period.  The  amount  of  revenue
recognized for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 that was included in the deferred revenue balance at the beginning of the period was
$78 million. The amount of revenue recognized for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 that was included in the deferred revenue balance
at the beginning of the period was $65 million.
Internal use software and platform development costs
Direct costs incurred to develop software for internal use and platform development costs are capitalized and amortized over an estimated
useful life of one to five years. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we capitalized costs, primarily related to labor and stock-
based compensation, of $129 million and $137 million, respectively. Amortization of previously capitalized amounts was $139 million, $150 million
and  $160  million  for  2020,  2019  and  2018,  respectively.  Costs  related  to  the  design  or  maintenance  of  internal  use  software  and  platform
development are expensed as incurred.
69

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Advertising expense
We expense the costs of producing advertisements at the time production occurs and expense the cost of communicating advertisements in
the period during which the advertising space or airtime is used, in each case as sales and marketing expense. Internet advertising expenses are
recognized based on the terms of the individual agreements, which are generally over the greater of the ratio of the number of impressions delivered
over  the  total  number  of  contracted  impressions,  on  a  pay-per-click  basis,  or  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  term  of  the  contract.  Advertising
expense totaled $1.2 billion, $1.0 billion and $1.1 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Stock-based compensation
We have equity incentive plans under which we grant equity awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), total shareholder
return performance stock units (“TSR PSUs”), performance-based restricted stock units, and performance share units, to our directors, officers and
employees. We primarily issue RSUs. We determine compensation expense associated with RSUs based on the fair value of our common stock on
the date of grant. We determine compensation expense associated with stock options based on the estimated grant date fair value method using the
Black-Scholes valuation model. We generally recognize compensation expense using a straight-line amortization method over the respective vesting
period for awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Accordingly, stock-based compensation expense for 2020, 2019 and 2018 has been reduced
for estimated forfeitures. When estimating forfeitures, we consider voluntary termination behaviors as well as trends of actual option forfeitures. We
recognize  a  benefit  or  provision  from  stock-based  compensation  in  earnings  as  a  component  of  income  tax  expense  to  the  extent  that  an
incremental tax benefit or deficiency is realized by following the ordering provisions of the tax law.
Provision for transaction losses
Provision  for  transaction  losses  consists  primarily  of  losses  resulting  from  our  buyer  protection  programs,  payment  misuse  including
chargebacks for unauthorized credit card use and merchant related chargebacks due to non-delivery of goods or services and account takeovers.
Provision for transaction losses represent our estimate of actual losses based on our historical experience and many other factors including
changes to our protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes as well as economic conditions such as COVID-19.
Provision for credit losses
Provision  for  credit  losses  consist  of  bad  debt  expense  associated  with  our  accounts  receivable  balance.  These  losses  are  recorded  in
provision for transaction losses in our consolidated statement of income.
We are exposed to credit losses primarily through our receivables from sellers or advertisers. We develop estimates to reflect the risk of credit
loss which are based on historical loss trends adjusted for asset specific attributes, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of
the economic conditions that will exist through the contractual life of the financial asset. Our receivables are recovered over a period of 0-180 days,
therefore, forecasted changes to economic conditions are not expected to have a significant effect on the estimate of the allowance for doubtful
accounts, except in extraordinary circumstances. We write off the asset when it is no longer deemed collectible or when it goes past due 180 days
whichever  is earlier,  with certain  limited  exceptions.  We monitor  our  ongoing credit  exposure  through  an active  review  of collection  trends.  Our
activities include monitoring the timeliness of payment collection, managing dispute resolution and performing timely account reconciliations. We
may employ collection agencies to pursue recovery of defaulted receivables.
Customer accounts and funds receivable
These  balances  are  either  held  by  financial  institutions  associated  with  payment  intermediation  activity  and  awaiting  settlement,  or  are
installment collections from financial institutions.
70

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
We are exposed to credit losses from customer accounts and funds receivable balances held by third party financial institutions. We assess
these balances for credit loss based on a review of the average period for which the funds are held, credit ratings of the financial institutions and by
assessing the probability of default and loss given default models. At December 31, 2020, we did not record any credit-related loss.
Income taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties and the
complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Tax
positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. Our
income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of our intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. 
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach, which requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the
current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements
or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of enacted tax laws; the effects of future
changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated. If necessary, the measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by the amount of any tax benefits
that are not expected to be realized based on available evidence.
We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We
recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
Cash and cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less when purchased, which
may include bank deposits, U.S. Treasury securities, time deposits, and certificates of deposit.
We consider cash to be restricted when withdrawal or general use is legally restricted. Our restricted cash balance is primarily comprised of
cash on deposit with banks restricted to safeguard seller payables.
Investments
Short-term investments are investments with original maturities of less than one year when purchased, are classified as available-for-sale and
are  reported  at  fair  value  using  the  specific  identification  method.  Short-term  investments  are  primarily  comprised  of  corporate  debt  securities,
commercial paper, and agency securities. Long-term investments are primarily comprised of corporate debt securities, agency securities, and equity
investments. Debt securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value using the specific identification method. Unrealized
gains and losses on our available-for-sale debt securities are excluded from earnings and reported as a component of other comprehensive income
(loss), net of related estimated income tax provisions or benefits.
Our  equity  investments  are  non-marketable  equity  securities,  which  are  investments  in  privately-held  companies.  We  account  for  equity
investments through which we exercise significant influence but do not have control over the investee under the equity method. Our consolidated
results of operations include, as a component of interest and other, net, our share of the net income or loss of the equity investments accounted for
under the equity method of accounting. Our share of investees’ results of operations is not material for any period presented. Our equity investments
for which we do not exercise significant influence are accounted for under the measurement alternative. Under the measurement alternative, the
carrying value is measured at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions
for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer. Such changes in the basis of the equity investment are recognized in interest and other,
net.
71

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
We  perform  a  qualitative  impairment  assessment  on  a  quarterly  basis  over  our  equity  investments.  Equity  investments  without  readily
determinable fair value are considered impaired when there is an indication that the fair value of our interest is less than the carrying amount. Equity
method investments are considered impaired when there is an indication of an other-than-temporary decline in value below the carrying amount.
Impairments of equity investments are recorded in interest and other, net.
We periodically assess our portfolio of debt investments for impairment. For debt securities in an unrealized loss position, this assessment
first takes into account our intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its
amortized cost basis. If either of these criteria are met, the debt security’s amortized cost basis is written down to fair value through interest and
other, net. For debt securities in an unrealized loss position that do not meet the aforementioned criteria, we assess whether the decline in fair value
has resulted from credit losses or other factors. In making this assessment, we consider the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost,
any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, and any adverse conditions specifically related to the security, among other factors. If
this assessment indicates that a credit loss may exist, the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to
the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit
loss exists and an allowance for credit losses will be recorded through interest and other, net, limited by the amount that the fair value is less than
the  amortized  cost  basis.  Any  additional  impairment  not  recorded  through  an  allowance  for  credit  losses  is  recognized  in  other  comprehensive
income. Changes in the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit loss expense. Losses are charged against
the allowance when management believes the uncollectability of an available-for-sale security is confirmed or when either of the criteria regarding
intent or requirement to sell is met. These changes are recorded in interest & other, net
Leases
At the beginning of the first quarter of 2019, we adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases. We determine if an arrangement is a lease or contains a
lease at inception. Operating and finance lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted
using the discount rate for the lease at the commencement date. As the rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable for our operating leases,
we generally use an incremental borrowing rate based on information available at the commencement date to determine the present value of future
lease  payments.  Operating  right-of-use  (“ROU”)  assets  and  finance  lease  assets  are  generally  recognized  based  on  the  amount  of  the  initial
measurement of the lease liability. Our leases have remaining lease terms of up to ten years, some of which include options to extend the leases for
up to five years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases within one year. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the lease term. We account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for our data center leases. Lease and non-lease
components for all other leases are accounted for separately.
Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use assets, other current liabilities and operating lease liabilities on our consolidated
balance  sheets.  Finance  leases  are  included  in  property  and  equipment,  net,  short-term  debt,  and  long-term  debt  on  our  consolidated  balance
sheet.
Property and equipment
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  historical  cost  less  accumulated  depreciation.  Depreciation  for  equipment,  buildings  and  leasehold
improvements commences once they are ready for our intended use. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated
useful  lives  of  the  assets,  generally, one to  three  years  for  computer  equipment  and  software,  up  to  thirty  years  for  buildings  and  building
improvements, the shorter of five years or the term of the lease for leasehold improvements and three years for furniture, fixtures and vehicles. Land
is not depreciated.
72

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a minimum on an annual basis at the reporting unit level. A qualitative assessment can be performed to
determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass
the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using
income and market approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The discounted
cash  flow  method,  a  form  of  the  income  approach,  uses  expected  future  operating  results  and  a  market  participant  discount  rate.  The  market
approach  uses  comparable  company  prices  and  other  relevant  information  generated  by  market  transactions  (either  publicly  traded  entities  or
mergers and acquisitions) to develop pricing metrics to be applied to historical and expected future operating results of our reporting unit. Failure to
achieve these expected results, changes in the discount rate or market pricing metrics may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting
unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill as of August 31, 2020 and 2019 and determined that no adjustment to the carrying value
of goodwill for any reporting unit was required. 
Intangible assets consist of purchased customer lists and user base, marketing related, developed technologies and other intangible assets,
including patents and contractual agreements. Intangible assets are amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method
and estimated useful lives ranging from one to five years. No significant residual value is estimated for intangible assets.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We evaluate long-lived assets (including intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable. An asset is considered impaired if its carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted
future net cash flow the asset is expected to generate. In 2020, the impairment recorded was immaterial. In 2019 and 2018, no impairment was
recorded.
Foreign currency
Most  of our foreign  subsidiaries  use the local currency  of  their  respective  countries  as their  functional  currency.  Assets  and liabilities  are
translated  into U.S. dollars  using exchange  rates  prevailing at  the balance sheet  date,  while revenues  and expenses  are translated  at  average
exchange rates during the year. Gains and losses resulting from the translation of our consolidated balance sheet are recorded as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income.
Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are recognized as interest and other, net.
Derivative instruments
We use derivative financial instruments, primarily forwards, options and swaps, to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures.
We may also use other derivative instruments not designated as hedges, such as forwards to hedge foreign currency balance sheet exposures. We
do not use derivative financial instruments for trading purposes. 
We also entered into a warrant agreement in addition to a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
See “Note 8 – Derivative Instruments” for a full description of our derivative instrument activities and related accounting policies.
73

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Concentration of credit risk
Our cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable and derivative instruments are potentially subject to concentration of credit risk. Cash and
cash equivalents are placed with financial institutions that management believes are of high credit quality. Our accounts receivable are derived from
revenue earned from customers. In each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, no customer accounted for more than 10% of net
revenues.  Our  derivative  instruments  expose  us  to  credit  risk  to  the  extent  that  our  counterparties  may  be  unable  to  meet  the  terms  of  the
agreements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued new guidance that requires credit losses on financial assets measured at
amortized cost basis to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected, not based on incurred losses. Further, credit losses on available-
for-sale debt securities should be recorded through an allowance for credit losses limited to the amount by which fair value is below amortized cost.
This  standard  impacts  the  Company’s  accounting  for  allowances  for  doubtful  accounts,  available-for-sale  securities  and  other  assets  subject  to
credit risk. In preparation for the adoption of this standard, we have updated our credit loss models as needed. The standard is effective for fiscal
years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. We adopted this guidance in the first quarter of 2020 with
no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In  2017,  the  FASB  issued  new  guidance  to  simplify  the  subsequent  measurement  of  goodwill  by  removing  the  requirement  to  perform  a
hypothetical purchase price allocation to compute the implied fair value of goodwill to measure impairment. Instead, any goodwill impairment will
equal  the  amount  by  which  a  reporting  unit’s  carrying  value  exceeds  its  fair  value,  not  to  exceed  the  carrying  amount  of  goodwill.  Further,  the
guidance eliminates the requirements for any reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment and, if it
fails that qualitative test, to perform Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test. This standard is effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment
test  in  fiscal  years  beginning  after  December  15,  2019.  We  adopted  this  guidance  in  the  first  quarter  of  2020  with  no  material  impact  on  our
consolidated financial statements.
In 2018, the FASB issued new guidance on a customer's accounting for implementation, set-up, and other upfront costs incurred in a cloud
computing arrangement that is hosted by the vendor (i.e., a service contract). Under the new guidance, customers will apply the same criteria for
capitalizing  implementation  costs  as  they  would  for  an  arrangement  that  has  a  software  license.  This  standard  is  effective  for  annual  reporting
periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim reporting periods within those fiscal years. We adopted this guidance prospectively in
the first quarter of 2020 with no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In 2018, the FASB issued new guidance to  clarify  the interaction  between Collaborative  Arrangements  and Revenue from  Contracts  with
Customers standards. The guidance (1) clarifies that certain transactions between collaborative arrangement participants should be accounted for
under revenue guidance; (2) adds unit of account guidance to the collaborative arrangement guidance to align with the revenue standard; and (3)
clarifies presentation guidance for transactions with a collaborative arrangement participant that is not accounted for under the revenue standard.
The guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim reporting periods within those annual
reporting periods. We adopted this guidance in the first quarter of 2020 with no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In 2019, the FASB issued new guidance to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles
and also simplification of areas such as franchise taxes, step-up in tax basis goodwill, separate entity financial statements and interim recognition of
enactment of tax laws or rate changes. The standard will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, including
interim reporting periods within those fiscal years. We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on our consolidated
financial statements.
74

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In  2020,  the  FASB  issued  new  guidance  to  decrease  diversity  in practice  and  increase  comparability  for  the  accounting  of  certain  equity
securities and investments under the equity method of accounting. The standard will be effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those
fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on our consolidated
financial statements.
Note 2 – Net Income Per Share
Basic  net  income  per  share  is  computed  by  dividing  net  income  for  the  period  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  common  shares
outstanding during the period. Diluted net income per share is computed by dividing net income for the period by the weighted average number of
shares of common stock and potentially dilutive common stock outstanding during the period. The dilutive effect of outstanding options and equity
incentive awards is reflected in diluted net income per share by application of the treasury stock method. The calculation of diluted net income per
share excludes all anti-dilutive common shares.
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted net income per share (in millions, except per share amounts):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Numerator:
Income from continuing operations
$
2,542 
$
1,516 
$
2,128 
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
3,125 
270 
402 
Net income
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
$
2,530 
Denominator:
Weighted average shares of common stock - basic
710 
849 
980 
Dilutive effect of equity incentive awards
8 
7 
11 
Weighted average shares of common stock - diluted
718 
856 
991 
Income per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
3.58 
$
1.79 
$
2.17 
Discontinued operations
4.40 
0.31 
0.41 
Net income per share - basic
$
7.98 
$
2.10 
$
2.58 
Income per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
3.54 
$
1.77 
$
2.15 
Discontinued operations
4.35 
0.32 
0.40 
Net income per share - diluted
$
7.89 
$
2.09 
$
2.55 
Common stock equivalents excluded from income per diluted share because their effect would
have been anti-dilutive
5 
18 
12 
75

Note 3 – Business Combinations
Business Combinations
The net assets and liabilities acquired from the acquisition activities in 2020 and 2019 are classified as held for sale on our consolidated
balance sheet.
In 2018, we completed the acquisition of 100% of Giosis Pte. Ltd.’s (“Giosis”) Japan business, including the Qoo10.jp platform, in exchange
for $306 million in cash and the relinquishment of our existing equity method investment in Giosis. We believe the acquisition allows us to offer
Japanese consumers more inventory and grow our international presence. Refer to “Note 7 – Investments” for further details on the relinquishment
of our equity method investment in Giosis’ non-Japanese business. The aggregate purchase consideration was allocated as follows (in millions):
Giosis
Goodwill
$
532 
Purchased intangible assets
91 
Net liabilities
(50)
Total
$
573 
The goodwill recognized is primarily attributable to expected synergies and the assembled workforce of Giosis. We generally do not expect
goodwill to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Our consolidated financial statements include the operating results of acquired businesses from the date of acquisition. Separate operating
results and pro forma results of operations for the acquisition above have not been presented as the effect of these acquisitions is not material to our
financial results.
Note 4 — Discontinued Operations
StubHub
On November 24, 2019, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of viagogo to sell our StubHub business. On February
13, 2020, we completed the sale of our StubHub business for a purchase price of $4.05 billion in cash, subject to certain adjustments specified in
the purchase agreement, including adjustments for indebtedness, cash, working capital and transaction expenses of StubHub at the closing of the
transaction. The sale was completed for $4.1 billion in proceeds ($3.2 billion, net of income taxes of approximately $900 million) and a pre-tax gain
of $3.9 billion within income from discontinued operations, both subject to working capital adjustments.
In  connection  with  the  sale  of  StubHub,  we  entered  into  a  transition  service  agreement  (“TSA”)  with  viagogo  pursuant  to  which  we  are
providing  services,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  business  support  services  for  StubHub  after  the  divestiture,  for  fees  of  $40  million.  These
agreements commenced with the close of the transaction and have minimum initial terms ranging from 12 to 18 months and can be extended by
viagogo for a maximum of 12 months.
Classifieds
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement with Adevinta to transfer our Classifieds business to Adevinta for $2.5 billion in cash,
subject  to  certain  adjustments,  and approximately  540  million  shares  in Adevinta.  Together,  the  total  consideration  payable  under  the  definitive
agreement is valued at approximately $9.2 billion, based on the closing trading price of Adevinta’s outstanding shares on the Oslo Stock Exchange
on July 17, 2020. We believe the transaction will close by the end of the first quarter of 2021. Completion of the transaction is subject to certain
conditions, including receipt of certain regulatory approvals, and other risks and uncertainties, including general industry and economic conditions
outside our control. We have classified the results of our Classifieds business as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income
for the periods presented. Additionally, the related assets and liabilities associated with the discontinued operations are classified as held for sale in
our consolidated balance sheet. The assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2020 are classified as current in our consolidated balance sheet as
we expect to close the transaction discussed above within one year.
76

The following table presents financial results from discontinued operations, net of income taxes in our consolidated statement of income (in
millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020 
2019
2018
Classifieds income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
197 
$
217 
$
322 
StubHub income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
2,930 
59 
78 
PayPal and Enterprise income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(2)
(6)
2 
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
3,125 
$
270 
$
402 
Includes StubHub financial results from January 1, 2020 to February 13, 2020, and includes the gain on sale recorded for the StubHub transaction.
The following table presents cash flows for discontinued operations (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020 
2019
2018
Classifieds net cash provided by discontinued operating activities
$
328 
$
378 
$
349 
StubHub net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
(1,055)
153 
102 
PayPal and Enterprise net cash (used in) discontinued operating activities
— 
— 
(3)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
$
(727)
$
531 
$
448 
Classifieds net cash (used in) discontinued investing activities
$
(54)
$
(114)
$
(14)
StubHub net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
4,067 
(21)
(14)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
$
4,013 
$
(135)
$
(28)
Classifieds net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
$
(2)
$
2 
$
— 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
$
(2)
$
2 
$
— 
Includes StubHub financial results from January 1, 2020 to February 13, 2020, and includes the gain on sale recorded for the StubHub transaction.
(1)
(1) 
(1)
(1) 
77

The financial results of StubHub are presented as income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes on our consolidated statement of
income. The following table presents the financial results of StubHub (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Net revenues
$
100 
$
1,121 
$
1,083 
Cost of net revenues
31 
290 
265 
Gross profit
69 
831 
818 
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
51 
491 
485 
Product development
26 
114 
100 
General and administrative
30 
125 
90 
Provision for transaction losses
3 
23 
33 
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
1 
9 
10 
Total operating expenses
111 
762 
718 
Income (loss) from operations of discontinued operations
(42)
69 
100 
Pre-tax gain on sale
3,868 
— 
— 
Income from discontinued operations before income taxes
3,826 
69 
100 
Income tax provision
(896)
(10)
(22)
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
2,930 
$
59 
$
78 
Includes StubHub financial results from January 1, 2020 to February 13, 2020, and includes the gain on sale recorded for the StubHub transaction.
The  financial  results  of  Classifieds  are  presented  as  income  from  discontinued  operations,  net  of  income  taxes  on  our  consolidated
statement  of  income.  Each  period  presented  below  includes  the  impact  of  intercompany  revenue  agreements  that  will  continue  with  eBay
subsequent to the completion of the transfer of the Classifieds business. The impact of these intercompany revenue agreements to net revenues
and cost of net revenues were $14 million, $20 million and $10 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The
expected continuing cash flows are not considered to be significant. The following table presents the financial results of Classifieds (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Net revenues
$
980 
$
1,043 
$
1,013 
Cost of net revenues
103 
82 
94 
Gross profit
877 
961 
919 
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
286 
335 
330 
Product development
161 
150 
134 
General and administrative
124 
59 
62 
Provision for transaction losses
17 
15 
6 
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
6 
11 
17 
Total operating expenses
594 
570 
549 
Income from operations of discontinued operations
283 
391 
370 
Interest and other, net
— 
(2)
(1)
Income from discontinued operations before income taxes
283 
389 
369 
Income tax provision
(86)
(172)
(47)
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
197 
$
217 
$
322 
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the discontinued operations activity related to our former PayPal and Enterprise
businesses was immaterial.
(1)
(1) 
78

The following table presents the aggregate carrying amounts of the classes of assets and liabilities of discontinued operations for StubHub in
the consolidated balance sheet (in millions):
 
December 31,
2019
Carrying amounts of assets included as part of discontinued operations:
Cash and cash equivalents
$
52 
Accounts receivable, net
9 
Other current assets
80 
Total current assets of discontinued operations
$
141 
Long-term investments
11 
Property and equipment, net
26 
Goodwill
224 
Intangible assets, net
5 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
29 
Deferred tax assets
8 
Other assets
3 
Total long-term assets of discontinued operations
$
306 
Carrying amounts of liabilities included as part of discontinued operations:
Accounts payable
$
19 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
215 
Deferred revenue
23 
Income taxes payable
2 
Total current liabilities of discontinued operations
$
259 
Operating lease liabilities
20 
Other liabilities
6 
Total long-term liabilities of discontinued operations
$
26 
The following table presents the aggregate carrying amounts of held for sale assets and liabilities related to Classifieds in the consolidated
balance sheet (in millions):
 
December 31,
2020
December 31,
2019
Carrying amounts of assets included as part of held for sale:
Cash and cash equivalents
$
23 
$
22 
Accounts receivable, net
117 
136 
Other current assets
30 
37 
Long-term investments
32 
30 
Property and equipment, net
31 
24 
Goodwill
465 
396 
Intangible assets, net
35 
23 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
20 
16 
Deferred tax assets
435 
389 
Total assets classified as held for sale in the consolidated balance sheet
$
1,188 
$
1,073 
Carrying amounts of liabilities included as part of held for sale:
Short-term debt
$
— 
$
2 
Accounts payable
18 
22 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
104 
92 
Deferred revenue
4 
6 
Income taxes payable
35 
41 
Operating lease liabilities
11 
11 
Deferred tax liabilities
278 
291 
Other liabilities
2 
3 
Total liabilities classified as held for sale in the consolidated balance sheet
$
452 
$
468 
79

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 5 – Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
The following table presents goodwill activity by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
 
December 31, 
2018
Goodwill 
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31, 
2019
Goodwill 
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31, 
2020
Marketplace
$
4,594 
$
— 
$
(61)
$
4,533 
$
— 
$
142 
$
4,675 
The adjustments to goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were primarily due to foreign currency translation. There
were no impairments to goodwill in 2020 and 2019.
Intangible Assets
The components of identifiable intangible assets are as follows (in millions, except years): 
 
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2019
 
Gross
Carrying
Amount  
Accumulated
Amortization 
Net Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average Useful
Life (Years)
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization 
Net Carrying
Amount
Weighted
Average Useful
Life (Years)
Intangible assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Customer lists and user
base
$
369 
$
(360)
$
9 
3
$
356 
$
(321)
$
35 
5
Marketing-related
376 
(376)
— 
0
360 
(360)
— 
5
Developed technologies
218 
(218)
— 
0
216 
(214)
2 
3
All other
159 
(156)
3 
3
155 
(153)
2 
4
Total
$
1,122 
$
(1,110)
$
12 
 
$
1,087 
$
(1,048)
$
39 
 
 
Amortization expense for intangible assets was $28 million, $35 million and $34 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, respectively.
Expected future intangible asset amortization as of December 31, 2020 is as follows (in millions):
Fiscal year:
2021
$
12 
Total
$
12 
Note 6 – Segments
We have one operating and reportable segment. Our reportable segment is Marketplace which includes our online marketplace located at
www.ebay.com, its localized counterparts and the eBay suite of mobile apps. Our management and our CODM review and assess performance of
the  business.  During  the  first  quarter  of  2020,  we  classified  the  results  of  our  previous  StubHub  segment  as  discontinued  operations  in  our
consolidated statement of income for all periods presented. In addition, during the third quarter of 2020, we classified the results of our Classifieds
segment as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for the periods presented. See “Note – 4 Discontinued Operations” for
additional information.
The accounting policies of our segment are the same as those described in “Note 1 – The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting
Policies”. Prior period segment information has been reclassified to conform to the current period segment presentation.
80

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table sets forth the breakdown of net revenues by type (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Net Revenues by type
Net transaction revenues
$
9,300 
$
7,578 
$
7,416 
Marketing services and other revenues
971 
1,058 
1,234 
Total net revenues
$
10,271 
$
8,636 
$
8,650 
The following tables summarize the allocation of net revenues and long-lived tangible assets based on geography (in millions): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
  
2019
  
2018
Net revenues by geography:
U.S.
$
4,151   $
3,303   $
3,382 
United Kingdom
1,678   
1,323   
1,385 
South Korea
1,390 
1,220 
1,194 
Germany
1,106   
1,034   
1,169 
Rest of world
1,946   
1,756   
1,520 
Total net revenues
$
10,271 
$
8,636 
$
8,650 
 
December 31,
 
2020
  
2019
Long-lived tangible assets by geography:
U.S.
$
1,579   $
1,743 
International
288   
300 
Total long-lived tangible assets
$
1,867   $
2,043 
Net revenues, inclusive of the effects of foreign exchange during each period, are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily
based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays advertising, other service provider, or customer, as the case may be, is located.
Long-lived assets attributed to the U.S. and international geographies are based upon the country in which the asset is located or owned.
81

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 7 – Investments
The following tables summarize the unrealized gains and losses and estimated fair value of our investments classified as available-for-sale as
of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2020
 
Gross 
Amortized 
Cost
  
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
  
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
 
Estimated 
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
143   $
—   $
—  $
143 
Corporate debt securities
2,252   
3   
—  
2,255 
$
2,395   $
3   $
—  $
2,398 
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
284   
2   
—  
286 
$
284   $
2   $
—  $
286 
 
 
December 31, 2019
 
Gross 
Amortized 
Cost
  
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
  
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
 
Estimated 
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
21   $
—   $
—  $
21 
Corporate debt securities
1,653   
1   
—  
1,654 
Government and agency securities
175   
—   
—  
175 
$
1,849 
$
1 
$
— 
$
1,850 
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
957   
4   
—  
961 
$
957   $
4   $
—  $
961 
Our restricted cash balance is primarily comprised of cash on deposit with banks restricted to safeguard seller payables. Our fixed-income
investments consist of predominantly investment grade corporate debt securities and government and agency securities. The corporate debt and
government and agency securities that we invest in are generally deemed to be low risk based on their credit ratings from the major rating agencies.
The longer the duration of these securities, the more susceptible they are to changes in market interest rates and bond yields. As interest
rates  increase,  those  securities  purchased  at  a  lower  yield  show  a  mark-to-market  unrealized  loss.  The  unrealized  losses  are  due  primarily  to
changes in credit spreads and interest rates. We regularly review investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment using both qualitative
and quantitative criteria. Investments classified as available-for-sale are carried at fair value with changes reflected in other comprehensive income.
Where there is an intention or a requirement to sell an impaired available-for-sale debt security, the entire impairment is recognized in earnings with
a corresponding adjustment to the amortized cost basis of the security. We presently do not intend to sell any of the securities in an unrealized loss
position and expect to realize the full value of all these investments upon maturity or sale.
We regularly review investment securities for credit impairment using both qualitative and quantitative criteria. In making this assessment, we
consider  the  extent  to  which  fair  value  is  less  than  amortized  cost,  any  changes  to  the  rating  of  the  security  by  a  rating  agency,  any  adverse
conditions specifically related to the security, among other factors. If this assessment indicates that a credit loss exists, the present value of cash
flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected
to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit loss exists and an allowance for credit losses will be recorded through interest and
other, net for the credit loss, limited by the amount that the fair value is less than the amortized cost basis. Any impairment that has not been
recorded through an allowance for credit losses is recognized in other comprehensive income. We did not recognize any credit-related impairment
through an allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2020.
82

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Investment securities in a continuous loss position for less than 12 months had an estimated fair value of $261 million and an immaterial
amount of unrealized losses as of December 31, 2020, and an estimated fair value of $774 million and an immaterial amount of unrealized losses as
of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, there were no investment securities in a continuous loss position for greater than 12 months.
Investment securities in a continuous loss position for greater than 12 months had an estimated fair value of $92 million and an immaterial amount
of  unrealized  losses  as  of  December  31,  2019.  As  of  December  31,  2020,  these  securities  had  a  weighted  average  remaining  maturity  of
approximately five months. Refer to “Note 18 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income” for amounts reclassified to earnings from unrealized
gains and losses.
 
The  estimated  fair  values  of  our  short-term  and  long-term  investments  classified  as  available-for-sale  and  restricted  cash  by  date  of
contractual maturity as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (in millions): 
 
December 31, 2020
One year or less (including restricted cash of $143)
$
2,398 
One year through two years
198 
Two years through three years
88 
Total
$
2,684 
Equity Investments
Our equity investments are reported in long-term investments on our consolidated balance sheet. The following table provides a summary of
our equity investments (in millions):
 
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2019
Equity investments without readily determinable fair values
$
539 
$
307 
Equity investments under the equity method of accounting
8 
7 
Total equity investments
$
547 
$
314 
In 2020, we recorded an upward adjustment for an observable price change of $239 million to the carrying value of our investment in Kakao
Bank Co., Ltd. (“Kakao Bank”) and invested an additional $18 million in cash in exchange for equity in Kakao Bank. The upward adjustment was
recorded  in  interest  and  other,  net  on our  consolidated  statement  of  income.  This  investment  is  accounted  for  as  an  equity  investment  without
readily determinable fair value.
In 2019, we invested $160 million in cash in exchange for an equity interest in Paytm Mall and $40 million in other investments. These
investments are accounted for as equity investments without readily determinable fair value.
In 2018, we sold our investment in Flipkart and relinquished our existing equity method investment in Giosis as part of the exchange for the
acquisition of Giosis’ Japan business. The $313 million gain upon sale of our investment in Flipkart and the $266 million gain upon relinquishment of
our  equity  method  investment  in  Giosis  were  recorded  in  interest  and  other,  net  on  our  consolidated  statement  of  income.  Refer  to  “Note  3 –
Business Combinations” for further details on the Giosis acquisition.
The following table provides a summary of unrealized gains and losses recorded in interest and other, net during the twelve months ended
December 31, 2020 related to equity investments held at December 31, 2020.
 
Year Ended 
December 31, 2020
Net gains/(losses) recognized during the period on equity investments
$
240 
Less: Net gains/(losses) recognized during the period on equity investments sold during the period
— 
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on equity investments still held at December 31, 2020
$
240 
83

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table summarizes the total carrying value of equity investments without readily determinable fair values still held (in millions):
Year Ended 
December 31, 2020
Year Ended December
31, 2019
Carrying value, beginning of period
$
307 
$
107 
Additions
22 
200 
Upward adjustments for observable price changes
239 
— 
Downward adjustments for observable price changes and impairment
(40)
— 
Foreign currency translation and other
11 
— 
Carrying value, end of period
$
539 
$
307 
For such equity investments without readily determinable fair values still held at December 31, 2020, the cumulative upward adjustment for
observable  price  changes  were  $239  million  and  cumulative  downward  adjustments  for  observable  price  changes  and  impairments  were  $121
million.
Note 8 – Derivative Instruments
Our primary objective in holding derivatives is to reduce the volatility of earnings and cash flows associated with changes in foreign currency
exchange rates and interest rates. These hedging contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of adverse foreign exchange rate and
interest rate movements. We do not use any of our derivative instruments for trading purposes.
We  use  foreign  currency  exchange  contracts  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  cash  flows  related  to  forecasted  revenues,  expenses,  assets  and
liabilities, including intercompany balances denominated in foreign currencies. These contracts are generally one month to one year in duration, but
with maturities up to 24 months. The objective of the foreign exchange contracts is to better ensure that ultimately the U.S. dollar-equivalent cash
flows  are not adversely  affected  by changes  in the  applicable U.S.  dollar/foreign  currency  exchange  rate.  We  evaluate  the effectiveness  of  our
foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow or net investment hedges on a quarterly basis.
During 2020, we began to hedge the variability of forecasted interest payments on anticipated debt issuance using forward-starting interest
rate swaps. The total notional amount of these forward-starting interest rate swaps was $700 million as of December 31, 2020 with terms calling for
us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest at a fixed rate. These interest rate swaps effectively fix the benchmark interest rate and
have the economic effect of hedging the variability of forecasted interest payments for up to 10 years on an anticipated debt issuance in 2022, and
they will be terminated upon issuance of the debt. Similar to other cash flow hedges, we record changes in the fair value of these interest rate swaps
in  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (loss)  until  the  anticipated  debt  issuance.  Upon  debt  issuance  and  termination  of  the  derivative
instruments, their fair value will be amortized over the term of the new debt to interest expense. We evaluate the effectiveness of interest rate swaps
designated as cash flow hedges on a quarterly basis.
During 2020, we began to hedge the variability of the cash flows in interest payments associated with our floating-rate debt using interest rate
swaps. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert our floating-rate debt that is based on London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) to
a fixed-rate basis, reducing the impact of interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The total notional amount of these interest swaps was
$400 million as of December 31, 2020 with terms calling for us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest at a fixed rate. Our interest
rate swap contracts have maturity dates in 2023. Similar to other cash flow hedges, we record changes in the fair value of these interest rate swaps
in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and their fair value will be amortized over the term of the debt to interest expense.
We used interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on our fixed rate notes issued in July 2014 and maturing in 2019, 2021 and 2024.
These interest rate swaps had the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with $2.4 billion of these notes so that the
interest payable on these senior notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR plus a spread. These interest rate swaps were terminated in
2019.
84

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Cash Flow Hedges
For  derivative  instruments  that  are  designated  as  cash  flow  hedges,  the  derivative’s  gain  or  loss  is  initially  reported  as  a  component  of
accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (“AOCI”)  and  subsequently  reclassified  into  earnings  in  the  same  period  the  forecasted  hedged
transaction  affects  earnings.  Derivative  instruments  designated  as cash  flow  hedges must  be de-designated  as hedges when it is probable  the
forecasted hedged transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a subsequent two-month time period. Unrealized gains and
losses in AOCI associated with such derivative instruments are immediately reclassified into earnings. As of December 31, 2020, we have estimated
that approximately $73 million of net derivative loss related to our foreign exchange cash flow hedges and $1 million of net derivative loss related to
our interest rate cash flow hedges included in accumulated other comprehensive income will be reclassified into earnings within the next 12 months.
We classify cash flows related to our cash flow hedges as operating activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
Net Investment Hedges
For derivative instruments that are designated as net investment hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported in the translation
adjustments  component  of  AOCI  and  is  reclassified  to  net  earnings  in  the  period  in  which  the  hedged  subsidiary  is  either  sold  or  substantially
liquidated.
Fair Value Hedges
We designated the interest rate swaps used to manage interest rate risk on our fixed rate notes issued in July 2014 and maturing in 2019,
2021 and 2024 as qualifying hedging instruments and accounted for them as fair value hedges. These transactions were designated as fair value
hedges for financial accounting purposes because they protected us against changes in the fair value of certain of our fixed rate borrowings due to
benchmark  interest  rate  movements.  In  2019,  $1.15  billion  related  to  our  2.200%  senior  notes  due  2019  of  the  $2.4  billion  aggregate  notional
amount matured. In addition, during 2019, we terminated the interest rate swaps related to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021
and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024. As a result of the early termination, hedge accounting was discontinued prospectively
and the gain on termination was recorded as an increase to the long-term  debt balance and is being recognized over the remaining life of the
underlying debt as a reduction to interest expense. The gain recognized was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31,
2019.
Non-Designated Hedges
Our derivatives not designated as hedging instruments consist of foreign currency forward contracts that we primarily use to hedge monetary
assets  or  liabilities,  including  intercompany  balances  denominated  in  non-functional  currencies.  The  gains  and  losses  on  our  derivatives  not
designated as hedging instruments are recorded in interest and other, net, which are offset by the foreign currency gains and losses on the related
assets and liabilities that are also recorded in interest and other, net. We classify cash flows related to our non-designated hedging instruments as
operating activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
Warrant
We  entered  into  a warrant  agreement  in conjunction  with  a  commercial  agreement  with  Adyen  that,  subject  to  meeting  certain  conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
has a term of seven years and will vest in a series of four tranches, at a specified price per share (fixed for the first two tranches) upon meeting
processing volume milestone targets on a calendar year basis. If and when a relevant milestone is reached, the warrant becomes exercisable with
respect to the corresponding tranche of warrant shares up until the warrant expiration date of January 31, 2025. The maximum number of tranches
that can vest in one calendar year is two.
 
The warrant is accounted for as a derivative under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. We report the warrant at fair value within warrant
asset in our consolidated balance sheets and changes in the fair value of the warrant are recognized in interest and other, net in our consolidated
statement of income. The day-one value attributable to the other side of the warrant, which was recorded as a deferred credit, is reported within
other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets and will be amortized over the life of the commercial arrangement.
85

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Fair Value of Derivative Contracts
The fair values of our outstanding derivative instruments were as follows (in millions):
 
Balance Sheet Location
December 31, 
2020
December 31, 
2019
Derivative Assets:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Assets
$
12 
$
36 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other Current Assets
23 
13 
Warrant
Warrant Asset
1,051 
281 
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Assets
14 
15 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Assets
13 
— 
Total derivative assets
$
1,113 
$
345 
Derivative Liabilities:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Liabilities
$
17 
$
2 
Foreign exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges
Other Current Liabilities
2 
2 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other Current Liabilities
25 
16 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Current Liabilities
1 
— 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other Liabilities
1 
— 
Total derivative liabilities
$
46 
$
20 
Total fair value of derivative instruments
$
1,067 
$
325 
Under the master netting agreements with the respective counterparties to our derivative contracts, subject to applicable requirements, we are
allowed to net settle transactions of the same type with a single net amount payable by one party to the other. However, we have elected to present
the derivative assets and derivative liabilities on a gross basis on our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2020, the potential effect of
rights  of  set-off  associated  with  the  foreign  exchange  contracts  would  be  an  offset  to  both  assets  and  liabilities  by  $26  million,  resulting  in  net
derivative  assets  of  $23  million  and  net  derivative  liabilities  of  $18  million.  As  of  December  31,  2020,  the  potential  effect  of  rights  of  set-off
associated with the interest rate contracts would be an offset to both assets and liabilities by $1 million, resulting in net derivative assets of $12
million and net derivative liabilities of $1 million.
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables present the activity of derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and
the impact of these derivative contracts on AOCI for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
 
December 31, 2019
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive 
Income
Less: Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From AOCI to
Earnings
December 31, 2020
Foreign exchange contracts designated
as cash flow hedges
$
(9)
(71)
15 
$
(95)
Interest rate contracts designated as cash
flow hedges
— 
10 
— 
$
10 
Total
$
(9)
$
(61)
$
15 
$
(85)
86

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
 
December 31, 2018
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive 
Income
Less: Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From AOCI to
Earnings
December 31, 2019
Foreign exchange contracts designated
as cash flow hedges
$
68 
4 
81 
$
(9)
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Consolidated Statement of Income
The following table provides a summary of the total gain (loss) recognized in the consolidated statement of income from our foreign exchange
derivative contracts by location (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in net revenues
$
15 
$
81 
$
(8)
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments recognized in interest and
other, net
(20)
(11)
6 
Total gain (loss) recognized from foreign exchange derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
(5)
$
70 
$
(2)
The following table provides a summary of the total gain (loss) recognized in the consolidated statement of income from our interest rate
derivative contracts by location (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Gain (loss) from interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges recognized in interest and
other, net
$
— 
$
34 
$
(19)
Gain (loss) from hedged items attributable to hedged risk recognized in interest and other, net
— 
(34)
19 
Gain (loss) from interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in interest and
other, net
— 
— 
— 
Total gain (loss) recognized from interest rate derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
The following table provides a summary of the total gain recognized in the consolidated statement of income due to changes in the fair value
of the warrant (in millions): 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Gain attributable to changes in the fair value of warrant recognized in interest and other, net
$
770 
$
133 
$
104 
87

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Notional Amounts of Derivative Contracts
Derivative transactions are measured in terms of the notional amount, but this amount is not recorded on the balance sheet and is not, when
viewed in isolation, a meaningful measure of the risk profile of the instruments. The notional amount is generally not exchanged, but is used only as
the  basis  on  which  the  value  of  foreign  exchange  payments  under  these  contracts  are  determined.  The  following  table  provides  the  notional
amounts of our outstanding derivatives (in millions):
December 31,
2020
2019
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
$
2,305 
$
1,983 
Foreign exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges
134 
200 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
3,027 
2,276 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
1,100 
— 
Total
$
6,566 
$
4,459 
Credit Risk
Our derivatives expose us to credit risk to the extent that the counterparties may be unable to meet the terms of the arrangement. We seek to
mitigate such risk by limiting our counterparties to, and by spreading the risk across, major financial institutions. In addition, the potential risk of loss
with any one counterparty resulting from this type of credit risk is monitored on an ongoing basis. To further limit credit risk, we also enter into
collateral security arrangements related to certain interest rate derivative instruments whereby collateral is posted between counterparties if the fair
value of the derivative instrument exceeds certain thresholds. Additional collateral would be required in the event of a significant credit downgrade
by either party. We are not required to pledge, nor are we entitled to receive, collateral related to our foreign exchange derivative transactions.
Note 9 – Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities
The following tables present our financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis (in millions):
December 31, 2020
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1)
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant 
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,428 
$
1,217 
$
211 
$
— 
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
143 
143 
— 
— 
Corporate debt securities
2,255 
— 
2,255 
— 
Total short-term investments
2,398 
143 
2,255 
— 
Derivatives
1,113 
— 
62 
1,051 
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
286 
— 
286 
— 
Total long-term investments
286 
— 
286 
— 
Total financial assets
$
5,225 
$
1,360 
$
2,814 
$
1,051 
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
46 
$
— 
$
46 
$
— 
88

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
December 31, 2019
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1)
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant  
Unobservable Inputs 
(Level 3)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
901 
$
901 
$
— 
$
— 
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
21 
21 
— 
— 
Corporate debt securities
1,654 
— 
1,654 
— 
Government and agency securities
175 
— 
175 
— 
Total short-term investments
1,850 
21 
1,829 
— 
Derivatives
345 
— 
64 
281 
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
961 
— 
961 
— 
Total long-term investments
961 
— 
961 
— 
Total financial assets
$
4,057 
$
922 
$
2,854 
$
281 
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
20 
$
— 
$
20 
$
— 
 
Our financial assets and liabilities are valued using market prices on both active markets (Level 1), less active markets (Level 2) and little or
no market activity (Level 3). Level 1 instrument valuations are obtained from real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets involving
identical assets. Level 2 instrument valuations are obtained from readily available pricing sources for comparable instruments, identical instruments
in  less  active  markets,  or  models  using  market  observable  inputs.  Level  3  instrument  valuations  typically  reflect  management’s  estimate  of
assumptions  that  market  participants  would use in pricing  the  asset  or liability.  We  did not  have any transfers  of  financial  instruments  between
valuation levels during 2020 or 2019.
The majority of our derivative instruments are valued using pricing models that take into account the contract terms as well as multiple inputs
where applicable, such as equity prices, interest rate yield curves, option volatility and currency rates. Our warrant, which is accounted for as a
derivative  instrument,  is  valued  using  a  Black-Scholes  model.  Key  assumptions  used  in  the  valuation  include  risk-free  interest  rates;  Adyen’s
common stock price, equity volatility and common stock outstanding; exercise price; and details specific to the warrant. The value is also probability
adjusted for management’s assumptions with respect to vesting of the four tranches which are each subject to meeting processing volume milestone
targets. These assumptions and the probability of meeting processing volume milestone targets may have a significant impact on the value of the
warrant. Refer to “Note 8 – Derivative Instruments” for further details on our derivative instruments.
Other  financial  instruments,  including  accounts  receivable  and  accounts  payable,  are  carried  at  cost,  which  approximates  their  fair  value
because of the short-term nature of these instruments.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the opening to closing balance of assets measured using significant unobservable inputs
(Level 3) (in millions):
December 31, 
2020
December 31,
2019
Opening balance at beginning of period
$
281 
$
148 
Change in fair value
770 
133 
Closing balance at end of period
$
1,051 
$
281 
89

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table presents quantitative information about Level 3 significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurement of the
warrant as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
Fair value
Valuation technique
Unobservable Input
Range (weighted average)
Warrant
$
1,051 
Black-Scholes and Monte
Carlo
Probability of vesting
0.0% - 95.0% (71%)
Equity volatility
21.8% - 57.9% (40%)
 Probability of vesting were weighted by the unadjusted value of the tranches. For volatility, the average represents the arithmetic average of the points within the range and
is not weighted by the relative fair value or notional amount.
Note 10 – Balance Sheet Components
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
 
December 31,
2020
 
2019
(In millions)
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,428  $
901 
Restricted cash included in short-term investments
143 
21 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
$
1,571 
$
922 
Other Current Assets
 
December 31,
2020
 
2019
(In millions)
Customer accounts and funds receivable
$
939  $
625 
Payment processor advances
363 
23 
Other
462 
416 
Other current assets
$
1,764 
$
1,064 
Property and Equipment, Net
 
December 31,
2020
 
2019
(In millions)
Computer equipment and software
$
4,810  $
4,779 
Land and buildings, including building improvements
744  
739 
Leasehold improvements
343  
362 
Furniture and fixtures
156  
159 
Construction in progress and other
154  
102 
Property and equipment, gross
6,207  
6,141 
Accumulated depreciation
(4,849)  
(4,681)
Property and equipment, net
$
1,358  $
1,460 
Total depreciation expense on our property and equipment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $580 million, $594
million and $591 million, respectively.
(1)
(1)
90

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Accrued Expenses and Other Current Liabilities
 
December 31,
2020
 
2019
(In millions)
Customer accounts and funds payable
$
1,052 
$
695 
Compensation and related benefits
538 
420 
Sales and use tax accruals
243 
90 
Advertising accruals
221 
147 
Other
856 
745 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
$
2,910 
$
2,097 
Note 11 – Debt
The following table summarizes the carrying value of our outstanding debt (in millions, except percentages):
Coupon
As of
Effective
As of
Effective
 Rate
December 31, 2020
 Interest Rate
December 31, 2019
 Interest Rate
Long-Term Debt
Floating Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2023
LIBOR plus 0.87%
400 
1.187 %
400 
2.913 %
Fixed Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2020
3.250%
— 
— %
500 
3.389 %
Senior notes due 2020
2.150%
— 
— %
500 
2.344 %
Senior notes due 2021
2.875%
— 
— %
750 
2.993 %
Senior notes due 2022
3.800%
750 
3.989 %
750 
3.989 %
Senior notes due 2022
2.600%
1,000 
2.678 %
1,000 
2.678 %
Senior notes due 2023
2.750%
750 
2.866 %
750 
2.866 %
Senior notes due 2024
3.450%
750 
3.531 %
750 
3.531 %
Senior notes due 2025
1.900%
800 
1.803 %
— 
— %
Senior notes due 2027
3.600%
850 
3.689 %
850 
3.689 %
Senior notes due 2030
2.700%
950 
2.623 %
— 
— %
Senior notes due 2042
4.000%
750 
4.114 %
750 
4.114 %
Senior notes due 2056
6.000%
750 
6.547 %
750 
6.547 %
Total senior notes
7,750 
7,750 
Hedge accounting fair value adjustments 
10 
15 
Unamortized premium/(discount) and debt issuance
costs
(20)
(44)
Other long-term borrowings
5 
17 
Less: Current portion of long-term debt
— 
(1,000)
Total long-term debt
7,745 
6,738 
Short-Term Debt
Current portion of long-term debt
— 
1,000 
Unamortized premium/(discount) and debt
issuance costs
— 
(1)
Other short-term borrowings
18 
21 
Total short-term debt
18 
1,020 
Total Debt
$
7,763 
$
7,758 
(1)    Includes the fair value adjustments to debt associated with terminated interest rate swaps which are being recorded as a reduction to interest expense over the
remaining term of the related notes.
(1)
91

Senior Notes
In March 2020, we issued senior unsecured notes, or senior notes, in an aggregate principal amount of $1 billion. The issuance consisted of
$500 million of 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025 and $500 million of 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030.
In June 2020, $500 million of our 2.150% senior fixed rate notes matured and were repaid.
In June 2020, we also issued additional senior unsecured notes in a reopening of our outstanding 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025 and
2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030 that were issued  in March  2020 in an aggregate  principal amount  of $750 million.  The June 2020 issuance
consisted of $300 million of additional 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025 and $450 million of additional 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030. We used
a portion of these proceeds to complete a tender offer to purchase any and all of the $750 million aggregate principal amount of our 2.875% senior
fixed rate notes due in 2021. We settled tender offers with holders of approximately 44% of the total outstanding principal amount of the 2.875%
senior fixed rate notes due in 2021. Total cash consideration paid for these purchases was $339 million and the total carrying amount of the notes
was $329 million, resulting in a loss on extinguishment of $10 million (including an immaterial amount of fees and other costs associated with the
tender), which was recorded in interest and other, net in our consolidated statement of income. In addition, we paid any accrued interest on the
tendered notes up to, but not including, the date of settlement. In July 2020, we paid $2 million to purchase additional 2.875% senior notes due 2021
upon final settlement of the tender offer initiated in June 2020. During August 2020, we redeemed the remaining $419 million outstanding principal
balance of 2.875% senior notes due 2021. Total cash consideration paid was $430 million, which included the total carrying amount of the notes of
$419 million and $11 million of premium which was recorded in interest and other, net in our consolidated statement of income. In addition, we paid
accrued interest up to the settlement date.
In July 2020, we exercised our option to redeem in whole the 3.250% senior fixed rate notes due in 2020 at a price equal to 100% of the
principal amount of $500 million, plus accrued interest.
On January 29, 2021, the company announced that it issued a notice of redemption for the $750 million aggregate principal amount of the
6.000% senior notes due 2056. The effective date of this redemption will be March 1, 2021.
In 2019, $400 million of floating rate notes and $1.15 billion of 2.200% fixed rate notes matured and were repaid.
None of the floating rate notes are redeemable prior to maturity. On and after March 1, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the 6.000% fixed
rate notes due 2056 at any time and from time to time prior to their maturity at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes
to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. We may redeem some or all of the other fixed rate notes of each series at any time and from time
to time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
If a change of control triggering event (as defined in the applicable senior notes) occurs with respect to the 3.800% fixed rate notes due 2022,
the floating rate notes due 2023, the 2.750% fixed rate notes due 2023, the 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025, the 3.600% fixed rate notes due
2027, the 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030 or the 6.000% fixed rate notes due 2056, we must, subject to certain exceptions, offer to repurchase all
of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default with customary grace periods in certain circumstances, including
payment defaults and bankruptcy-related defaults.
To help achieve our interest rate risk management objectives, in connection with the previous issuance of certain senior notes, we entered
into interest rate swap agreements that effectively converted $2.4 billion of our fixed rate notes to floating rate debt based on LIBOR plus a spread.
These swaps were designated as fair value hedges against changes in the fair value of certain fixed rate senior notes resulting from changes in
interest rates. The gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps substantially offset changes in the
92

fair value of the hedged portion of the underlying debt that are attributable to changes in market interest rates. In 2019, $1.15 billion related to our
2.200% senior notes of the $2.4 billion aggregate notional amount matured. In addition, during 2019, we terminated the interest rate swaps related
to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021 and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024. As a result of the early
termination,  hedge  accounting  was  discontinued  prospectively  and  the  gain  on  termination  was  recorded  as  an  increase  to  the  long-term  debt
balance  and  is  being  recognized  over  the  remaining  life  of  the  underlying  debt  as  a  reduction  to  interest  expense.  The  gain  recognized  was
immaterial during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
To  help  achieve  our  interest  rate  risk  management  objectives,  during  the  second  quarter  of  2020,  we  entered  into  interest  rate  swap
agreements that effectively converted $400 million of our LIBOR-based floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis. These swaps were designated as
cash flow hedges and have maturity dates in 2023.
The effective interest rates for our senior notes include the interest payable, the amortization of debt issuance costs and the amortization of
any original issue discount and premium on these senior notes. Interest on these senior notes is payable either quarterly or semiannually. Interest
expense associated with these senior notes, including amortization of debt issuance costs, during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018 was approximately $284 million, $301 million and $318 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the estimated fair value of
these senior notes, using Level 2 inputs, was approximately $8.3 billion and $7.9 billion, respectively.
Commercial Paper
We have a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes in an aggregate principal amount at maturity
of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time with maturities of up to 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were
no commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In March 2020, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year credit facility. We may also, subject to
the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to $1 billion. Funds borrowed under the
credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes. The credit agreement
replaced our prior $2 billion unsecured revolving credit agreement dated November 2015, which was terminated effective March 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and therefore maintain $1.5 billion of available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order
to repay commercial paper borrowings in the event we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due, in an
aggregate  amount  of  $1.5  billion.  However  as  of  December  31,  2020,  no  borrowings  were  outstanding  under  our  commercial  paper  program;
therefore, $2 billion of borrowing capacity was available for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement, subject to customary conditions to
borrowing.  The  credit  agreement  includes  a  covenant  limiting  our  consolidated  leverage  ratio  to  no  more  than  4.0:1.0,  subject  to,  upon  the
occurrence of a qualified material acquisition, if so elected by us, a step-up to 4.5:1.0 for the four fiscal quarters completed following such qualified
material  acquisition.  The  credit  agreement  includes  customary  events  of  default,  with  corresponding  grace  periods  in  certain  circumstances,
including payment defaults, cross-defaults and bankruptcy-related defaults. In addition, the credit agreement contains customary affirmative and
negative  covenants,  including  restrictions  regarding  the  incurrence  of  liens  and  subsidiary  indebtedness,  in  each  case,  subject  to  customary
exceptions. The credit agreement also contains customary representations and warranties. 
We were in compliance with all financial covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2020.
93

Future Maturities
Expected future principal maturities as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (in millions):
Fiscal Years:
2021
$
750 
2022
1,750 
2023
1,150 
2024
750 
2025
800 
Thereafter
2,550 
Total future maturities
$
7,750 
Note 12 – Leases
We have operating and finance leases for office space, data and fulfillment centers, and other corporate assets that we utilize under lease
arrangements.
The following table provides a summary of leases by balance sheet location (in millions):
 
As of
As of
Balance Sheet Location
December 31, 2020
December 31, 2019
Assets
Operating
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$
509 
$
583 
Finance
Property and equipment, net 
28 
31 
Total leased assets
$
537 
$
614 
Liabilities
Operating - current
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
$
172 
$
153 
Finance - current
Short-term debt
13 
11 
Operating - noncurrent
Operating lease liabilities
380 
461 
Finance - noncurrent
Long-term debt
5 
16 
Total lease liabilities
$
570 
$
641 
 
(1)
Recorded net of accumulated amortization of $7 million and $2 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The components of lease expense were as follows (in millions):
Lease Costs
Statement of Income Location
Year Ended December
31, 2020
Year Ended December
31, 2019
Finance lease cost:
Amortization of right-of-use assets
Cost of net revenues
$
4 
$
2 
Interest on lease liabilities
Interest and other, net
1 
1 
Operating lease cost 
Cost of net revenues, Sales and marketing, Product
development and General and administrative expenses
186 
193 
Total lease cost
$
191 
$
196 
(2)
Includes variable lease payments and sublease income that were immaterial during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
(1)
(2)
94

Maturity of lease liabilities under our non-cancelable operating and financing leases as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (in millions): 
Operating
Finance
2021
$
183 
$
13 
2022
165 
5 
2023
115 
1 
2024
45 
— 
2025
34 
— 
Thereafter
42 
— 
Total lease payments
584 
19 
Less interest
(32)
(1)
Present value of lease liabilities
$
552 
$
18 
Rent expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $204 million, $211 million and $97 million, respectively. Rent
expense includes operating lease costs as well as expense for non-lease components such as common area maintenance.
The following table provides a summary of our lease terms and discount rates:
 
Year Ended December 31,
2020
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Weighted Average Remaining Lease Term
Operating leases
3.92 years
4.72 years
Weighted Average Discount Rate
Operating leases
2.29 %
3.10 %
Supplemental information related to our leases is as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
2020
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows from operating leases
$
171 
$
175 
Operating cash flows from finance leases
$
1 
$
1 
Financing cash flows from finance leases
$
11 
$
6 
 
Year Ended December 31,
2020
Year Ended December 31,
2019
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for new lease obligations:
Operating leases
$
88 
$
93 
Finance leases
$
— 
$
34 
95

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 13 – Commitments and Contingencies
Commitments
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or income under the arrangement. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $5.2 billion in aggregate cash deposits, partially offset by $4.9 billion
in cash withdrawals, held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
Litigation and Other Legal Matters
 
Overview
We are involved in legal and regulatory proceedings on an ongoing basis. Many of these proceedings are in early stages and may seek an
indeterminate amount of damages. If we believe that a loss arising from such matters is probable and can be reasonably estimated, we accrue the
estimated liability in our financial statements. If only a range of estimated losses can be determined, we accrue an amount within the range that, in
our judgment, reflects the most likely outcome; if none of the estimates within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the
low  end  of  the  range.  For  those  proceedings  in  which  an  unfavorable  outcome  is  reasonably  possible  but  not  probable,  we  have  disclosed  an
estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses or we have concluded that an estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses
arising directly from the proceeding (i.e., monetary damages or amounts paid in judgment or settlement) is not material. If we cannot estimate the
probable or reasonably possible loss or range of losses arising from a proceeding, we have disclosed that fact. In assessing the materiality of a
proceeding, we evaluate, among other factors, the amount of monetary damages claimed, as well as the potential impact of non-monetary remedies
sought by plaintiffs (e.g., injunctive relief) that may require us to change our business practices in a manner that could have a material adverse
impact on our business. With respect to the matters disclosed in this Note 13, we are unable to estimate the possible loss or range of losses that
could potentially result from the application of such non-monetary remedies.
Amounts accrued for legal and regulatory proceedings for which we believe a loss is probable were not material for the twelve months ended
December 31, 2020. Except as otherwise noted for the proceedings described in this Note 13, we have concluded, based on currently available
information,  that  reasonably  possible  losses  arising  directly  from  the  proceedings  (i.e.,  monetary  damages  or  amounts  paid  in  judgment  or
settlement) in excess of our recorded accruals are also not material. However, legal and regulatory proceedings are inherently unpredictable and
subject to significant uncertainties. If one or more matters were resolved against us in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s
expectations,  the  impact  on  our  operating  results  or  financial  condition  for  that  reporting  period  could  be  material.  Legal  fees  are  expensed  as
incurred.
General Matters
Third parties have from time to time claimed, and others may claim in the future, that we have infringed their intellectual property rights. We
are subject to patent disputes, and expect that we could be subject to additional patent infringement claims involving various aspects of our business
as our products  and services continue to expand in scope and complexity.  Such claims may be brought  directly or indirectly  against us and/or
against our customers (who may be entitled to contractual indemnification under their contracts with us), and we are subject to increased exposure
to such claims as a result of our acquisitions and divestitures and in cases where we are entering new lines of business. We have in the past been
forced to litigate such claims. We may also become more vulnerable to third-party claims as laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, the
Lanham Act and the
96

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Communications Decency Act are interpreted by the courts, and as we expand the scope of our business (both in terms of the range of products
and services that we offer and our geographical operations) and become subject to laws in jurisdictions where the underlying laws with respect to
the potential liability of online intermediaries like ourselves are either unclear or less favorable. We believe that additional lawsuits alleging that we
have  violated  patent,  copyright  or  trademark  laws  will  be  filed  against  us.  Intellectual  property  claims,  whether  meritorious  or  not,  are  time
consuming and costly to defend and resolve, could require expensive changes in our methods of doing business or could require us to enter into
costly royalty or licensing agreements on unfavorable terms.
From time to time, we are involved in other disputes or regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business, including suits by our
users (individually or as class actions) alleging, among other things, improper disclosure of our prices, rules or policies, that our practices, prices,
rules, policies or customer/user agreements violate applicable law or that we have acted unfairly and/or not acted in conformity with such practices,
prices,  rules,  policies  or  agreements.  Further,  the  number  and  significance  of  these  disputes  and  inquiries  are  increasing  as  the  political  and
regulatory landscape changes and, as we have grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope (both in terms of the range of products and
services  that  we  offer  and  our  geographical  operations)  and  our  products  and  services  have  increased  in  complexity.  Any  claims  or  regulatory
actions against us, whether meritorious or not, could be time consuming, result in costly litigation, damage awards (including statutory damages for
certain  causes  of  action  in  certain  jurisdictions),  injunctive  relief  or  increased  costs  of  doing  business  through  adverse  judgment  or  settlement,
require us to change our business practices in expensive ways, require significant amounts of management time, result in the diversion of significant
operational resources or otherwise harm our business.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us and PayPal,
which may be significant. In addition, the indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us and our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application programming interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision.
To date, losses recorded in our consolidated statement of income in connection with our indemnification provisions have not been significant,
either individually or collectively. 
Note 14 – Stockholders’ Equity
Preferred Stock
We are authorized, subject to limitations prescribed by Delaware law, to issue preferred stock in one or more series; to establish the number
of shares included within each series; to fix the rights, preferences and privileges of the shares of each wholly unissued series and any related
qualifications, limitations or restrictions; and to increase or decrease the number of shares of any series (but not below the number of shares of a
series then outstanding) without any further vote or action by our stockholders. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were 10 million shares of
$0.001 par value preferred stock authorized for issuance, and no shares issued or outstanding.
97

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Common Stock
Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation authorizes us to issue 3.6 billion shares of common stock.
Stock Repurchase Programs
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and,
subject to market conditions and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding
share count. Any share repurchases under our stock repurchase programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately
negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems
appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives. Our stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated
at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and
regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
In January 2019, our Board authorized a $4.0 billion stock repurchase program and in January 2020 our Board authorized an additional $5.0
billion stock repurchase program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of authorization.
On  February  13,  2020,  we  entered  into  accelerated  share  repurchase  agreements  (the  “ASR  Agreements”)  with  each  of  three  financial
institutions (each an “ASR Counterparty”), as part of our share repurchase program. Under the ASR Agreements, we paid an aggregate amount of
$3.0 billion to the ASR Counterparties and received an initial delivery of approximately 69 million shares of our common stock, which shares were
recorded as a $2.55 billion increase to treasury stock. The remaining $450 million was evaluated as an unsettled forward contract indexed to our
own  stock,  classified  within  stockholders’  equity.  In  July  2020,  the  ASR  Agreements  settled  and  resulted  in  approximately  74  million  shares
repurchased at an average price per share of $40.77 and the forward contract was settled and recorded as an increase to treasury stock.
The stock repurchase activity under our stock repurchase programs during 2020 was as follows (in millions, except per share amounts):
Shares Repurchased 
Average Price
per Share 
Value of Shares
Repurchased 
Remaining Amount
Authorized
Balance as of January 1, 2020
$
2,151 
Authorization of additional plan in January 2020
5,000 
Repurchase of shares of common stock
50 
$
42.09 
$
2,118 
(2,118)
Accelerated share repurchases
74 
$
40.77 
$
3,000 
(3,000)
Balance as of December 31, 2020
$
2,033 
(1)
These repurchased shares of common stock were recorded as treasury stock and were accounted for under the cost method. None of the repurchased shares of common
stock have been retired.
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
In February 2021, our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
Dividends
The company paid a total of $447 million and $473 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31,
2019,  respectively.  In  February  2021,  we  declared  a  cash  dividend  of  $0.18  per  share  of  common  stock  to  be  paid  on  March  19,  2021  to
stockholders of record as of March 1, 2021.
(1)
(2)
(2)
98

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 15 – Employee Benefit Plans
Equity Incentive Plans
We have equity incentive plans under which we grant equity awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-
based restricted  stock  units (“PBRSUs”),  stock  payment  awards,  performance  share units  and total  shareholder  return  performance  share units
(“TSR PSUs”), to our directors, officers and employees. As of December 31, 2020, 755 million shares were authorized under our equity incentive
plans and 46 million shares were available for future grant.
Stock options granted under these plans generally vest 12.5% six months from the date of grant (or 25% one year from the date of grant for
grants to new employees) with the remainder vesting at a rate of 2.08% per month thereafter, and generally expire seven to ten years from the date
of grant. RSU awards granted to eligible employees under our equity incentive plans generally vest in annual or quarterly installments over a period
of three to five years, are subject to the employees’ continuing service to us and do not have an expiration date.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, certain executives were eligible to receive PBRSUs. PBRSU awards are subject to performance and time-based
vesting  requirements.  The  target  number  of  shares  subject  to  the  PBRSU  award  are  adjusted  based  on  our  business  performance  measured
against the performance goals approved by the Compensation Committee at the beginning of the performance period. Generally, if the performance
criteria are satisfied, one-half of the award vests in March following the end of the performance period and the other half of the award vests in March
of the following year.
During 2020, our Chief Executive Officer was granted TSR PSUs with performance and time-based vesting requirements. The number of
stock  units  ultimately  received  will  depend  on  our  total  shareholder  return  relative  to  that  of  the  S&P  500  index  over two and  three  year
measurement periods. The target number of shares will be divided into two tranches, with each tranche corresponding to 50% of the target shares.
The first tranche will vest in full on the second anniversary of the grant date and second tranche will vest on the third anniversary of the grant date.
Deferred Stock Units
Prior  to  December  31, 2016, we  granted  deferred  stock  units  to  each non-employee  director  (other  than  Mr.  Omidyar)  at  the  time  of  our
annual meeting of stockholders and to new non-employee directors upon their election to the Board. Each deferred stock unit award granted to a
new non-employee director upon election to the Board vests 25% one year from the date of grant, and at a rate of 2.08% per month thereafter. In
addition, directors were permitted to elect to receive, in lieu of annual retainer and committee chair fees and at the time these fees would otherwise
be payable, fully vested deferred stock units with an initial value equal to the amount based on the fair market value of common stock at the date of
grant. Following termination of a non-employee director’s service on the Board, deferred stock units granted prior to August 1, 2013 are payable in
stock or cash (at our election), while deferred stock units granted on or after August 1, 2013 are payable solely in stock. As of December 31, 2020,
there  were  approximately  109,993  deferred  stock  units  outstanding,  which  are  included  in  our  restricted  stock  unit  activity  below.  As  of
December 31, 2016, we no longer grant deferred stock units.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
We  have  an  Employee  Stock  Purchase  Plan  (“ESPP”)  for  all  eligible  employees.  Under  the  plan,  shares  of  our  common  stock  may  be
purchased  over  an  offering  period  with  a  maximum  duration  of  two  years  at  85%  of  the  lower  of  the  fair  market  value  on  the  first  day  of  the
applicable offering period or on the last day of the six-month purchase period. Employees may purchase shares having a value not exceeding 10%
of their eligible compensation during an offering period. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, employees purchased approximately 3 million, 3 million and 4
million shares under this plan at average prices of $25.93, $25.24 and $23.82 per share, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 6
million shares of common stock were reserved for future issuance.
Stock Option Activity
No stock options were granted in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
99

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the aggregate intrinsic value of options exercised under our equity incentive plans was $15 million, $20 million
and $18 million, respectively, determined as of the date of option exercise.
Restricted Stock Unit Activity
The following table presents RSU activity (including PBRSUs that have been earned) under our equity incentive plans as of and for the year
ended December 31, 2020 (in millions except per share amounts):
 
Units 
Weighted Average 
Grant-Date 
Fair Value 
(per share)
Outstanding as of January 1, 2020
28 
$
36.82 
Awarded and assumed
16 
$
33.26 
Vested
(12)
$
34.53 
Forfeited
(7)
$
35.98 
Outstanding as of December 31, 2020
25 
$
35.85 
Expected to vest as of December 31, 2020
20 
 Activity presented is inclusive of units granted to employees of our Classifieds business.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the aggregate intrinsic value of RSUs vested under our equity incentive plans was $552 million, $609 million and
$684 million, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The following table presents stock-based compensation expense from continuing operations (in millions):  
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Cost of net revenues
$
43 
$
46 
$
48 
Sales and marketing
89 
76 
91 
Product development
159 
169 
169 
General and administrative
140 
140 
157 
Total stock-based compensation expense
$
431 
$
431 
$
465 
Capitalized in product development
$
15 
$
14 
$
14 
As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $682 million of unearned stock-based compensation that will be expensed from 2021
through 2025. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or
cancel all or a portion of the remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense. Future unearned stock-based compensation will increase to
the extent we grant additional equity awards, change the mix of grants between stock options and restricted stock units or assume unvested equity
awards in connection with acquisitions.
Employee Savings Plans
We have a defined contribution plan, which is qualified under Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Participating employees may
contribute up to 50% of their eligible compensation, but not more than statutory limits. In 2020, 2019 and 2018, we contributed one dollar for each
dollar a participant contributed,  with a maximum  contribution  of 4% of each employee’s eligible compensation,  subject to a maximum employer
contribution of $11,400, $11,200 and $11,000 per employee for each period, respectively. Our non-U.S. employees are covered by various other
savings plans. Total expense for these plans was $52 million, $51 million and $49 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(1)
(1)
100

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 16 – Income Taxes
The components of pretax income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
  
2019
  
2018
United States
$
1,163   $
177   $
144 
International
2,257   
1,572   
2,105 
$
3,420 
$
1,749 
$
2,249 
The provision (benefit) for income taxes is comprised of the following (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
 
2019
 
2018
Current:
 
 
Federal
$
252  $
35  $
34 
State and local
87  
23  
22 
Foreign
131  
180  
169 
$
470  $
238  $
225 
Deferred:
 
 
Federal
$
(73)  $
(149)  $
(458)
State and local
(8)  
(44)  
(10)
Foreign
489  
188  
364 
408  
(5)  
(104)
$
878  $
233  $
121 
The following is a reconciliation of the difference between the actual provision for income taxes and the provision computed by applying the
federal statutory rate of 21% to income before income taxes (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
 
2019
 
2018
Provision at statutory rate
$
718  $
367  $
472 
Foreign income taxed at different rates
21  
16  
(30)
Other taxes on foreign operations
19 
(33)
24 
Stock-based compensation
(1)  
(1)  
5 
State taxes, net of federal benefit
80  
(24)  
8 
Research and other tax credits
(28)  
(29)  
(26)
Impact of tax rate change
43 
(21)
108 
U.S. tax reform
— 
— 
(429)
Effective settlement of audits
— 
(69)
— 
Other
26  
27  
(11)
$
878 
$
233 
$
121 
101

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of differences between the carrying amounts of assets and
liabilities  and  their  respective  tax  bases  using  enacted  tax  rates  in  effect  for  the  year  in  which  the  differences  are  expected  to  be  reversed.
Significant deferred tax assets and liabilities consist of the following (in millions):
 
As of December 31,
 
2020
 
2019
Deferred tax assets:
 
Net operating loss, capital loss and credits
$
174  $
124 
Accruals and allowances
427  
220 
Stock-based compensation
10  
14 
Amortizable tax basis in intangibles
3,470 
3,916 
Net deferred tax assets
4,081  
4,274 
Valuation allowance
(149)  
(96)
$
3,932  $
4,178 
Deferred tax liabilities:
 
Unremitted foreign earnings
$
(2,177)
$
(2,328)
Acquisition-related intangibles
(36)  
(31)
Depreciation and amortization
(237)  
(131)
Net unrealized gain on investments
(306)
(63)
(2,756)  
(2,553)
$
1,176  $
1,625 
As of December 31, 2020, our federal, state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards for income tax purposes were approximately $10
million, $52 million and $315 million, respectively. The federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are subject to various limitations under
Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and applicable state tax laws. If not utilized, the federal and state net operating loss carryforwards will
begin to expire in 2021 and 2023, respectively. The carryforward periods on our foreign net operating loss carryforwards are as follows: $5 million do
not expire and $310 million are subject to valuation allowance and begin to expire in 2021. As of December 31, 2020, state tax credit carryforwards
for income tax purposes were approximately $161 million. Most of the state tax credits carry forward indefinitely.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we maintained a valuation allowance with respect to certain of our deferred tax assets relating primarily
to operating losses in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions and certain state tax credits that we believe are not likely to be realized.
We recognized the tax consequences of all foreign unremitted earnings and management has no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest the
unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries as of the balance sheet date. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $791 million and
$884 million, respectively, of our liability for deemed repatriation of foreign earnings was included in other liabilities on our consolidated balance
sheet. We have not provided for deferred taxes on outside basis differences in our investments in our foreign subsidiaries that are unrelated to
unremitted earnings. With the exception of our Classifieds entities recognized in discontinued operations, these basis differences will be indefinitely
reinvested. A determination of the unrecognized deferred taxes related to these other components of our outside basis difference is not practicable.
In  connection  with  the  intent  to  sell  the  Classifieds  business  as  discussed  in  “Note  1  –  The  Company  and  Summary  of  Significant  Accounting
Policies”, we assessed the outside basis differences relating to Classifieds and determined that no material deferred taxes need to be provided on
the difference as of December 31, 2020.
102

eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table reflects changes in unrecognized tax benefits for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
2020
2019
2018
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the beginning of the period
$
387 
$
544 
$
487 
Increases related to prior period tax positions
30 
37 
62 
Decreases related to prior period tax positions
(15)
(114)
(10)
Increases related to current period tax positions
39 
28 
23 
Settlements
(21)
(108)
(18)
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the end of the period
$
420 
$
387 
$
544 
Included within our gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits of $420 million as of December 31, 2020 is $50 million of unrecognized tax
benefits indemnified by PayPal. If total unrecognized tax benefits were realized in a future period, it would result in a tax benefit of $295 million. Of
this amount, approximately $47 million of unrecognized tax benefit is indemnified by PayPal and a corresponding receivable would be reduced upon
a future  realization.  As  of  December  31,  2020,  our  liabilities  for  unrecognized  tax  benefits  were  included  in  other  liabilities  on  our  consolidated
balance sheet.
We recognize interest and/or penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. In 2020, a $10 million benefit was included in
tax expense for interest and penalties. The amount of interest and penalties accrued as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $39
million and $46 million, respectively.
 
We are subject to both direct  and indirect  taxation  in the U.S.  and various  states  and foreign  jurisdictions.  We are under examination  by
certain  tax  authorities  for  the  2010  to  2019  tax  years.  We  believe  that  adequate  amounts  have  been  reserved  for  any  adjustments  that  may
ultimately result from these or other examinations. The material jurisdictions where we are subject to potential examination by tax authorities for tax
years after 2009 include, among others, the U.S. (Federal and California), Germany, Korea, Israel, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
 
Although  the  timing  of  the  resolution  and/or  closure  of  audits  is  highly  uncertain,  it  is  reasonably  possible  that  the  balance  of  gross
unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change in the next 12 months. However, given the number of years remaining subject to examination
and the number of matters being examined, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized
tax benefits.
 
On July 27, 2015, in Altera Corp. v. Commissioner, the U.S. Tax Court issued an opinion invalidating the regulations relating to the treatment
of stock-based compensation expense in an intercompany cost-sharing arrangement. On June 22, 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to issue
a writ of certiorari, thus leaving the Ninth Circuit’s ruling intact. There is no impact to our consolidated financial statements.
Note 17 – Interest and Other, Net
The components of interest and other, net for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are as follows (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
  
2019
  
2018
Interest income
$
39   $
120   $
176 
Interest expense
(305)
(311)
(326)
Gains on investments and sale of business 
1,007 
80 
663 
Other
(32)   
(1)   
(16)
Total interest and other, net
$
709   $
(112)   $
497 
(1)
Gains on investments and sale of business includes: (i) 2020 included a $770 million gain recognized due to the change in fair value of the Adyen warrant, $239 million
upward adjustment recognized for our investment in Kakao Bank, $40 million impairment recorded on an investment and $37 million gain for the receipt of proceeds that
were held in escrow related to a long-term investment that was sold in 2018; (ii) 2019 included a $52 million loss recorded on the divestiture of brands4friends and a $133
million gain recognized due to the change in fair value of the Adyen warrant; and (iii) 2018 included a $313 million gain on the sale of our equity investment in Flipkart, a
$266 million gain recognized upon the relinquishment of our equity investment in Giosis and a $104 million gain recognized due to the change in fair value of the Adyen
warrant.
(1)
103

Note 18 – Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables summarize the changes in AOCI for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized 
Gains (Losses) 
on Investments
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation
Estimated Tax
(Expense) Benefit
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
(9)
$
5 
$
363 
$
25 
$
384 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications
(61)
— 
291 
14 
244 
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI
15 
— 
— 
(3)
12 
Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
(76)
— 
291 
17 
232 
Balance as of December 31, 2020
$
(85)
$
5 
$
654 
$
42 
$
616 
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized 
Gains (Losses) 
on Investments
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation
Estimated Tax
(Expense) Benefit
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
68 
$
(56)
$
462 
$
24 
$
498 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications
4 
61 
(99)
(16)
(50)
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI
81 
— 
— 
(17)
64 
Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
(77)
61 
(99)
1 
(114)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
(9)
$
5 
$
363 
$
25 
$
384 
The following table provides a summary of reclassifications out of AOCI for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
Details about AOCI Components
 
Affected Line Item in the Statement of
Income
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified from AOCI
2020
2019
Gains (losses) on cash flow hedges - foreign exchange contracts
Net Revenues
$
15 
$
81 
Total, from continuing operations before
income taxes
15 
81 
Income tax provision
(3)
(17)
Total, from continuing operations net of
income taxes
12 
64 
Total, from discontinued operations net of
income taxes
— 
— 
Total, net of income taxes
12 
64 
Total reclassifications for the period
Total, net of income taxes
$
12 
$
64 
104

Note 19 — Restructuring
The following table summarizes restructuring reserve activity during 2020 (in millions):
 
Employee Severance
and Benefits
Accrued liability as of January 1, 2020
$
28 
Charges
6 
Payments
(34)
Accrued liability as of December 31, 2020
$
— 
During the first quarter of 2020 we substantially completed the reduction in workforce that was approved by management during the fourth
quarter of 2019. We incurred pre-tax restructuring charges of approximately $6 million primarily during the first quarter of 2020 in connection with the
action taken in the fourth quarter of 2019.
During the first quarter of 2019, management approved a plan to drive operational improvement that included the reduction of workforce. The
reduction was substantially completed in the first quarter of 2019 and resulted in pre-tax restructuring charges of approximately $39 million. During
the fourth quarter of 2019, management approved a plan to drive operational improvement that included the reduction of workforce. We incurred a
pre-tax charge of $25 million, which was primarily related to employee severance and benefits.
In  June  2018,  management  approved  a  plan  to  implement  a  strategic  reduction  of  our  existing  global  workforce.  The  reduction  was
substantially completed in the second quarter of 2018 and resulted in pre-tax restructuring charges of approximately $69 million.
The  restructuring  charges  incurred  in  2020,  2019  and  2018  were  aggregated  in  general  and  administrative  expenses  in  the  consolidated
statement of income.
105

Supplementary Data — Quarterly Financial Data — Unaudited
The following tables present certain unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information for each of the eight quarters in the two year period
ended December 31, 2020. This quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as the Consolidated Financial Statements and includes
all adjustments necessary to state fairly the information for the periods presented. Prior period quarterly information has been recast to reflect results
of our previous StubHub business and our Classifieds business as discontinued operations.
Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited, in millions, except per share amounts)
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2020
Net revenues
$
2,129 
$
2,668 
$
2,606 
$
2,868 
Gross profit
$
1,627 
$
2,095 
$
1,950 
$
2,126 
Income from continuing operations
$
431 
$
709 
$
621 
$
781 
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
2,981 
$
37 
$
43 
$
64 
Net income (loss)
$
3,412 
$
746 
$
664 
$
845 
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.57 
$
1.01 
$
0.89 
$
1.14 
Discontinued operations
3.96 
0.05 
0.06 
0.09 
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
4.53 
$
1.06 
$
0.95 
$
1.23 
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.57 
$
1.00 
$
0.88 
$
1.12 
Discontinued operations
3.94 
0.05 
0.06 
0.09 
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
4.51 
$
1.05 
$
0.94 
$
1.21 
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
753 
703 
696 
688 
Diluted
757 
711 
708 
697 
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2019
Net revenues
$
2,161 
$
2,156 
$
2,083 
$
2,236 
Gross profit
$
1,643 
$
1,624 
$
1,553 
$
1,680 
Income from continuing operations
$
460 
$
377 
$
210 
$
469 
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
58 
$
25 
$
100 
$
87 
Net income (loss)
$
518 
$
402 
$
310 
$
556 
Income per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.51 
$
0.44 
$
0.25 
$
0.58 
Discontinued operations
0.07 
0.03 
0.12 
0.11 
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
0.58 
$
0.47 
$
0.37 
$
0.69 
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.51 
$
0.43 
$
0.25 
$
0.58 
Discontinued operations
0.06 
0.03 
0.12 
0.11 
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
0.57 
$
0.46 
$
0.37 
$
0.69 
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
900 
860 
830 
807 
Diluted
908 
867 
837 
812 
106

eBay Inc.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
The  Financial  Statement  Schedule  II  —  VALUATION  AND  QUALIFYING  ACCOUNTS  for  continuing  operations  as  of  and  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Charged/Credited to
Net Income
Charged to Other
Account
Charges
Utilized/Write-offs
Balance at End
of Period
(In millions)
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
Year Ended December 31, 2018
$
64 
$
85 
$
— 
$
(84)
$
65 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
65 
108 
— 
(91)
82 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
82 
$
133 
$
— 
$
(118)
$
97 
Allowance for Authorized Credits
Year Ended December 31, 2018
$
29 
$
2 
$
— 
$
— 
$
31 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
31 
(3)
— 
— 
28 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
28 
$
11 
$
— 
$
— 
$
39 
Allowance for Transaction Losses
Year Ended December 31, 2018
$
21 
$
162 
$
— 
$
(159)
$
24 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
24 
154 
— 
(155)
23 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
23 
$
198 
$
— 
$
(188)
$
33 
Tax Valuation Allowance
Year Ended December 31, 2018
$
15 
$
34 
$
13 
$
— 
$
62 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
62 
42 
(1)
(7)
96 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
96 
$
53 
$
— 
$
— 
$
149 
107

INDEX TO EXHIBITS
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished with 
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
2.01
Separation and Distribution Agreement by and between
Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc. dated as of June 26, 2015.
8-K
000-24821
6/30/2015
2.02*
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 24, 2019 by
and among eBay Inc., eBay International AG, PUG LLC, and
solely for the purposes set forth therein, Pugnacious Endeavors,
Inc.
8-K
001-37713
11/25/2019
2.03
Transaction Agreement, dated as of July 20, 2020 by and
between eBay Inc., and Adevinta ASA.
8-K
001-37713
7/22/2020
2.04
Letter Agreement, dated as of October 16, 2020, amending
Transaction Agreement, dated as of July 20, 2020, by and
between eBay Inc., and Adevinta ASA.
X
3.01
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
 
 
10-Q
 
001-37713
7/18/2019
3.02
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Bylaws.
 
 
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
4.01
  Form of Specimen Certificate for Registrant’s Common Stock.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097  
8/19/1998
4.02
Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between Registrant and
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.03
Supplemental Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between
Registrant and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as
trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.04
Form of 3.250% Note due 2020 (included in Exhibit 4.03).
8-K
 
000-24821  
10/28/2010
4.05
Officer’s Certificate dated July 24, 2012.
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.06
Forms of 2.600% Note due 2022 and 4.000% Note due 2042
(included in Exhibit 4.05).
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.07
Officer’s Certificate dated July 28, 2014.
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.08
Forms of 2.875% Note due 2021 and 3.450% Note due 2024
(included in Exhibit 4.07).
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.09
Officer’s Certificate dated February 29, 2016.
8-K
000-24821
2/29/2016
4.10
Form of 6.00% Note due 2056 (included in Exhibit 4.09).
8-K
000-24821
2/29/2016
4.11
Officer’s Certificate dated March 9, 2016.
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
4.12
Form of 3.800% Note due 2022 (included in Exhibit 4.11).
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
4.13
Officer’s Certificate dated June 6, 2017.
8-K
001-37713
6/6/2017
4.14
Form of Floating Rate Note due 2023, 2.150% Note due 2020,
2.750% Note due 2023 and 3.600% Note due 2027 (included in
Exhibit 4.13).
8-K
001-37713
6/6/2017
4.15
Officer’s Certificate dated March 11, 2020.
8-K
001-37713
3/11/2020
4.16
Form of Note due 2025, 1.900% and Note due 2030, 2.700%
(included in Exhibit 4.15).
8-K
001-37713
3/11/2020
4.17
Officer’s Certificate dated June 15, 2020.
8-K
001-37713
6/15/2020
4.18
Form of Note due 2025, 1.900% and Note due 2030, 2.700%
(included in Exhibit 4.17).
8-K
001-37713
6/15/2020
4.19
Description of Securities.
10-K
001-37713
1/31/2020
10.01+
  Form of Indemnity Agreement entered into by Registrant with
each of its directors and executive officers.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097  
7/15/1998
108

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 Filed or Furnished with 
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.02+
  Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan, as amended.
 
 
10-K
 
000-24821  
2/28/2007
10.03+
Amendment to Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan,
effective April 2, 2012.
10-Q
 
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.04+
Form of Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.05+
  
Form of Electing Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.06+
  
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.07+
  
Form of 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan Restricted Stock Unit
Grant Notice and Agreement.
 
 
10-Q/A
 
000-24821  
4/24/2008
10.08+
  
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan, as amended and
restated.
 
 
8-K
 
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.09+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan and Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.10+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (with Modified
Vesting) under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.11+
Form of Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.12+
Form of Stock Option Agreement (with Modified Vesting) under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.13+
Form of Director Deferred Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821  
7/19/2012
10.14+
  Amended and Restated eBay Incentive Plan.
 
 
8-K
 
000-24821  
5/5/2015
10.15+
  
eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and restated
effective April 1, 2018.
 
 
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.16+
eBay Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
DEF 14A
000-24821
3/19/2012
10.17
Credit Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2015, by and among
Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent,
and the other parties thereto.
8-K
000-24821
11/12/2015
10.18+
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.19+
Form of Director Annual Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.20+
Form of Electing Director Quarterly Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.21+
Form of Global Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.22+
Form of Global Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (and
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.23+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award
Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.24+
Form of Stock Payment Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.25+
Form of Director Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
109

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished with 
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.26+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant
Notice and Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award
Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.27+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant Notice and Restricted
Stock Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.28+
Notice Regarding Payment of Dividend Equivalents on Restricted
Stock Units and Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.29
Amendment dated June 30, 2016, to the Operating Agreement by
and among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings,
Inc., PayPal, Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte.
Holdings S.C.S.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.30+
Operating Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015,  by and among
Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal,
Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.31+
Transition Services Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.32+
Tax Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.33+
Employee Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.34+
Intellectual Property Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17,
2015, by and among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal
Holdings, Inc., PayPal, Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal
Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.35+
Letter dated September 30, 2014 from Registrant to Scott
Schenkel.
10-Q
000-24821
7/21/2015
10.36+
Offer Letter dated April 2, 2015 between Registrant and Marie Oh
Huber.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.37+
Offer Letter dated February 1, 2017, between Registrant and
Wendy Jones.
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
10.38+
Offer Letter dated July 3, 2018, between Registrant and Wendy
Jones.
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
10.39+
Letter Agreement between Scott Schenkel and eBay Inc., dated
October 11, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
10/16/2019
10.40+
Letter Agreement between Andrew Cring and eBay Inc., dated
October 11, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
10/16/2019
10.41
Offer Letter dated June 25, 2019 between Registrant and Jae
Hyun Lee.
10-Q
001-37713
10/24/2019
10.42
Credit Agreement, dated as of March 6, 2020, by and among the
Company, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent
and the other parties thereto.
8-K
001-37713
3/11/2020
10.43
Master Confirmation - Accelerated share repurchase agreement
dated February 13, 2020 between eBay Inc. and Citibank N.A.
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
10.44
Master Confirmation - Accelerated share repurchase agreement
dated February 13, 2020 between eBay Inc. and Morgan Stanley
& Co, LLC
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
10.45
Master Confirmation - Accelerated share repurchase agreement
dated February 13, 2020 between eBay Inc. and HSBC Bank
USA, National Association
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
110

No.
  
Exhibit Description
 Filed or Furnished with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.46+
Offer Letter dated July 7, 2019 between Registrant and Peter
Thompson.
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
10.47+
Offer Letter dated May 1, 2015 between Registrant and Kristin Yetto.
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
10.48+
Letter Agreement between Jamie Iannone and eBay Inc., dated April
12, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.49+
Letter Agreement between Scott Schenkel and eBay Inc., dated
April 13, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.50+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. SVP and Above Standard
Severance Plan, effective April 11, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.51+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. Change in Control Severance
Plan, effective April 11, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.52+
Letter Agreement between Andy Cring and eBay Inc., dated July 1,
2020.
10-Q
001-37713
10/29/2020
10.53+
Amended and Restated eBay Incentive Plan
X
10-K
001-37713
2/4/2020
21.01
  List of Subsidiaries.
 
X
 
 
 
23.01
  PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP consent.
 
X
 
 
 
24.01
  Power of Attorney (see signature page).
 
X
 
 
 
31.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
31.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
101.INS
  
XBRL Instance Document- the instance document does not appear
in the Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags are embedded
within the Inline XBRL document.
 
X
 
 
 
101.SCH
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.CAL
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.DEF
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.LAB
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
101.PRE
  Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
 
X
 
 
 
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted as Inline XBRL and
contained in Exhibit 101).
X
*    Schedules and exhibits have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The registrant agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule or
exhibit to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission upon request.
+    Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
111

SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized on February 4, 2021.
eBay Inc.
By:
/s/ Jamie Iannone
Jamie Iannone
Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Jamie Iannone, Andy Cring,
Brian J. Doerger and Marie Oh Huber and each or any one of them, each with the power of substitution, his or her attorney-in-fact, to sign any amendments to
this report, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all
that each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf
of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on February 4, 2021.
Principal Executive Officer and Director:
Principal Financial Officer:
By:
/s/ Jamie Iannone
By:
/s/ Andy Cring
Jamie Iannone
Andy Cring
Chief Executive Officer
Interim Chief Financial Officer
Principal Accounting Officer:
By:
/s/ Brian J. Doerger
Brian J. Doerger
Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
112

Additional Directors
By:
/s/ Paul S. Pressler
By:
/s/ Anthony J. Bates
Paul S. Pressler
Anthony J. Bates
Chairman of the Board and Director
Director
By:
/s/ Adriane Brown
By:
/s/ Diana Farrell
Adriane Brown
Diana Farrell
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Logan D. Green
By:
/s/ Bonnie S. Hammer
Logan D. Green
Bonnie S. Hammer
Director
Director
By:
/s/ E. Carol Hayles
By:
/s/ Kathleen C. Mitic
E. Carol Hayles
Kathleen C. Mitic
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Matthew J. Murphy
By:
/s/ Mohak Shroff
Matthew J. Murphy
Mohak Shroff
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Robert H. Swan
By:
/s/ Perry M. Traquina
Robert H. Swan
Perry M. Traquina
Director
Director
113

Exhibit 2.04
eBay Inc.
2025 Hamilton Avenue San Jose, California 95125
October 16, 2020
Adevinta ASA Grensen 5
NO-0159 Oslo
Norway
Attention: Jeremy Briscombe, General Counsel
Dear Mr. Briscombe,
Reference  is  made  to  that  certain  Transaction  Agreement,  dated  as  of  July  20,  2020  (the  “Agreement”),  by  and  among  eBay  Inc.,  a
Delaware corporation (“Parent”) and Adevinta ASA, a public company with limited liability organized under the laws of Norway (“Purchaser”).
Capitalized terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Agreement.
1.
The Parties hereby amend and restate Section 2.1(a) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read as follows:
“(a) Incurrence  of  Classifieds  Indebtedness.  Prior  to  the  Closing,  Classifieds  DutchCo  shall  enter  into  one  or  more  definitive
agreements providing for, and shall incur directly from the financing sources providing such financing, effective as of immediately prior
to the Share Sale Effective Time, indebtedness in an aggregate principal amount of $1,200,000,000 (the “Classifieds Indebtedness”),
which indebtedness shall consist of borrowings on the terms and conditions contemplated by the Commitment Letter or Replacement
Financing (the “Classifieds Financing Arrangements”).”
2.
The Parties hereby amend and restate the provison in Section 2.1(d)(i) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read as follows:
“(provided  that,  if,  as  of  immediately  prior  to  the  Classifieds  DutchCo  Cash  Distribution,  there  is  outstanding  indebtedness
pursuant to which Classifieds DutchCo is the obligor (whether such indebtedness is payable to Parent or any of its Affiliates or a third
party) (such debt, “Outstanding Classifieds Indebtedness”), then (A) a portion of the amount otherwise constituting the Classifieds
DutchCo Cash Distribution equal to the aggregate principal amount of such Outstanding Classifieds Indebtedness shall be paid to the
relevant creditor pursuant to this Section 2.1(d) in full satisfaction and settlement of such Outstanding Classifieds Indebtedness (and
such payment shall be deemed not to be part of the Classifieds DutchCo Cash Distribution), and (B) notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in this Agreement, the issuance of any Outstanding Classifieds Indebtedness by Classifieds DutchCo to SwissCo after the
date hereof shall be deemed to be part of the Classifieds DutchCo Cash Distribution)”

1.
The Parties hereby amend and restate the last sentence of Section 2.1(d) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read
as follows:
“The cash comprising the Classifieds DutchCo Cash Distribution shall be paid by wire transfer of immediately available funds to
an account designated by SwissCo to Classifieds DutchCo, in accordance with the applicable provisions under Dutch law.”
2.
The Parties hereby delete Section 4.2(b)(iv) of the Transaction Agreement.
3.
The Parties hereby amend and restate Section 4.22(a) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read as follows:
“(a)     (i)  With  respect  to  the  portion  of  the  Debt  Financing  or  Replacement  Financing  representing  the  Classifieds
Indebtedness (or any refinancing thereof), Purchaser represents and warrants that:
a.
any transactions occurring after the Closing related to the integration of the Contribution Entities, on the one hand, and
Purchaser and its Subsidiaries (other than the Contribution Entities), on the other hand, are for the primary purpose of realizing
synergies and cost savings and not for the purpose of ensuring that payments in respect of interest or principal in respect of such
portion of such Debt Financing or Replacement Financing can be made by the Contribution Entities (such transactions “Permitted
Transactions”);
b.
Purchaser  intends  to  cause  payments  of  interest  or  principal  in  respect  of  such  portion  of  the  Debt  Financing  or
Replacement Financing to be made solely from the income or assets of the Contribution Entities;
c.
(I) any guarantee by Purchaser or any of its Affiliates (other than the Contribution Entities) of such portion of such Debt
Financing or Replacement Financing and (II) the provision by Purchaser or any of its Affiliates (other than the Contribution Entities)
of any other form of credit support for such portion of such Debt Financing or Replacement Financing, including by serving as a co-
borrower or co-obligor, with respect to such portion of such Debt Financing or Replacement Financing, in each case, are made to (x)
reduce the overall cost of the Debt Financing or Replacement Financing, (y) enhance the marketability of the Debt Financing or
Replacement Financing, and (z) facilitate the realization of synergies by Purchaser, and, based on the information contained in the
Banker Letters, Purchaser believes such guarantees or other forms of credit support are not necessary to enable a borrowing by
Classifieds DutchCo of an amount equal to the Classifieds Indebtedness. In the experience of Purchaser, such guarantees or other
forms of credit support are customary for similar lending arrangements involving subsidiaries of affiliated groups;
d.
Purchaser  has  no  plan  or  intention  to  (I)  make  or  cause  any  of  its  Affiliates  to  make,  any  (x)  payment  of  interest  or
principal on such portion of such Debt
- 2 -

Financing  or  Replacement  Financing  or  (y)  contribution  of  cash  or  other  liquid  assets  to  any  of  the  Contribution  Entities  for  the
purpose of enabling them to make any such payments of interest or principal, (II) except for any guarantee or other credit support
described in clause (C) above, provide or cause any of its Affiliates to provide any guarantee or other credit support for such portion
of such Debt Financing or Replacement Financing, (III) assume or cause any of its Affiliates to assume any portion of such Debt
Financing or Replacement Financing prior to the repayment thereof in accordance with its terms, or (IV) transfer or cause any of its
Affiliates to transfer any material assets to any of the Contribution Entities (other than pursuant to Permitted Transactions).
(ii)  Purchaser  represents  and  warrants  that  it  has  no  plan  or  intention  to  take  or  cause  any  of  its  Affiliates  (including  the
Contribution Entities) to take any action that could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the Intended Tax Treatment.”
1.
The Parties hereby delete Sections 4.22(b) and (c) of the Transaction Agreement.
2.
The Parties hereby amend and restate Section 5.15(b)(ii) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read as follows:
“(ii)    Reserved.”
3.
The Parties hereby amend and restate Section 5.18(b) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read as follows:
“Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  herein,  not  later  than  October  7,  2020,  Parent  may  deliver  a  written  notice  to
Purchaser identifying changes to the allocation of Transferred Entities between Contribution Entities and Second Share Sale
Companies on Schedule I Part B. Any other changes to the allocation of Transferred Entities between Contribution Entities, First
Share Sale Companies and Second Share Sale Companies may be made only with the written consent of Purchaser (not to be
unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed).”
4.
The Parties hereby add a new Section 5.29 of the Transaction Agreement to read as follows:
“Section 5.29. Certain Tax Matters.
(a)
Documentation  from  Financing  Parties.  Purchaser  shall  use  reasonable  best  efforts  to  cause  each  of  the  Financing
Parties to issue, immediately prior to the incurrence by Classifieds DutchCo of the Classifieds Indebtedness, a letter to Purchaser
and Parent, in each case, confirming the accuracy and validity, as of such date, of the letter issued to Purchaser and Parent by
each such Financing Party on or prior to October 16, 2020 and attached as Exhibits 5.29(a)(i) and 5.29(a)(ii) hereto (the “Banker
Letters”).  Solely  for  purposes  of  this Section  5.29(a),  “incurrence”  shall  mean,  with  respect  to  any  Classifieds  Indebtedness  (i)
represented by notes
- 3 -

under which Classifieds DutchCo is a borrower, the pricing of such notes and,
(ii)  represented  by  any  credit  agreement  under  which  Classifieds  DutchCo  is  a  borrower,  the  execution  of  such  credit
agreement.
a.
Additional Matters. Parent and Purchaser hereby agree to the covenants and agreements set forth on Exhibit 5.29(b)
hereto.
b.
Additional Agreements Regarding Classifieds Indebtedness. Purchaser covenants that, with respect to the portion of the
Debt Financing or Replacement Financing representing the Classifieds Indebtedness (or any refinancing thereof), for a period
ending on the later of (i) January 1, 2022 and (ii) the one-year anniversary of the date on which funding in full of such portion of
such  Debt  Financing  or  Replacement  Financing  occurs,  it  shall  not,  and  shall  cause  its  Affiliates  (including  the  Contribution
Entities) not to, take any action that would cause any of the representations or warranties contained in Section 4.22(a)(i) to be
untrue with respect to such portion of such Debt Financing or Replacement Financing (or any refinancing thereof), determined as
if such representations were made at the time such action is taken.
c.
Intended Tax Treatment. Purchaser shall (and shall cause its Affiliates (including the Contribution Entities) to) treat (i) any
Classifieds Indebtedness as indebtedness of Classifieds DutchCo (and, following the Merger Effective Time, as indebtedness of
DutchCo Merger Sub) for U.S. federal income Tax purposes and
(ii) the Classifieds DutchCo Distribution as constituting a “distribution” within the meaning of Section 301 of the Code (clauses (i)
and (ii), collectively, the “Intended Tax Treatment”). Except as required by Law, Purchaser shall not, and shall cause its Affiliates
(including the Contribution Entities) not to, take any position that could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the Intended Tax
Treatment (x) in any press release, public announcement, or disclosure to shareholders or creditors, (y) except as required by
IFRS, for financial accounting purposes, or (z) for Tax purposes.”
1.
    The Parties hereby amend and restate Section 10.3(d) of the Transaction Agreement in its entirety to read as follows:
“(d)    Parent and Purchaser hereby agree to the matters set forth on Exhibit 10.3(d) hereto.”
2.
The Parties hereby add a new Section 10.9 of the Transaction Agreement to read as follows:
“Section  10.9 Permitted  Actions.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  implementation  of  any  Permitted  Action  within  the  meaning  of
Exhibit  10.9  and  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  Exhibit  10.9  shall  not  constitute  a  breach  or  a  violation  of  any
representation and warranty contained in Section 4.22(a) or any covenant or agreement contained in Section 5.29.”
- 4 -

1.
The Parties hereby add Schedule 1, Schedule 2, Schedule 3, Schedule 4, and Schedule 5 hereto as Exhibit 5.29(a)(i), Exhibit 5.29(a)
(ii), Exhibit 5.29(b), Exhibit 10.3(d) and Exhibit 10.9, respectively, to the Transaction Agreement.
This agreement (the “Letter Agreement”), the Agreement and any other documents delivered pursuant hereto or thereto constitute the
entire agreement among the parties hereto and thereto and their respective Affiliates with respect to the subject matter hereof and thereof and
supersede all prior negotiations, discussions, writings, agreements and understandings, oral and written, between the parties with respect to the
subject matter hereof and thereof. Except as expressly set forth herein, nothing in this Letter Agreement shall modify, amend, affect or diminish
any right or obligation of any party pursuant to the Agreement. The provisions of Article 11 of the Agreement shall apply to this Letter Agreement,
mutatis mutandis.
[Signature page follows]
- 5 -

Very truly yours,
eBay Inc.
By:
/s/ Andrew Cring
Name:
Andrew Cring
Title:
Chief Financial Officer
ACCEPTED AND AGREED:
Adevinta ASA
By:
/s/ Uvashni Raman
Name:
Uvashni Raman
Title:
Chief Financial Officer
                        
-6-

Exhibit 10.53
EBAY INCENTIVE PLAN
Initial Stockholder Approval on June 23, 2005
Amendment and Restatement adopted by the Compensation Committee of the
Board of Directors on December 14, 2020
1.
Purpose.
The eBay Incentive Plan is an element of eBay’s overall compensation strategy to align employee compensation with eBay’s
business objectives, strategy, and performance. The Plan is designed to reward eBay’s employees for delivering measurable
results. The purpose of the Plan is to align compensation with quarterly and annual performance and to enable eBay to attract,
retain, and reward highly qualified individuals who contribute to eBay’s success and motivate them to enhance the value of the
Company.
2.
Definitions.
(a)
“Board” means eBay’s Board of Directors.
(b)
“Committee” means the Compensation Committee of eBay’s Board of Directors (and any committee to which the
Compensation Committee has delegated its authority as set forth in Section 3(b) hereof).
(c)
“eBay” or “Company” means eBay Inc. or any corporation or business entity of which eBay (i) directly or indirectly
has an ownership interest of 50% or more, or (ii) has a right to elect or appoint 50% or more of the board of
directors or other governing body.
(d)
“Eligible Employee” means all active regular full-time and part-time employees who are notified by the Company
that they are eligible to participate in the Plan.
(e)
“Incentive Award” means any cash or equity incentive payment made under the Plan.
(f)
“Performance Period” means the period in which performance is measured for which Incentive Awards are paid,
as determined by the Committee.
(g)
“Plan” means this plan, which shall be known as the eBay Incentive Plan or eIP.
(h)
“Plan Year” means the calendar year.
3.
Administration.
(a)
The Plan shall be administered by the Committee. The Committee shall have full power and authority to:
(i)
interpret, construe, and administer all questions of policy and expediency pertaining to the Plan;

(ii)
adopt  such  rules,  regulations,  agreements,  and  instruments  as  it  deems  necessary  for  its  proper
administration;
(iii)
select Eligible Employees to receive Incentive Awards;
(iv)
determine the terms of the Incentive Awards;
(v)
determine the amounts subject to Incentive Awards, including the exclusive right to establish, adjust, pay
or decline to pay the Incentive Award for each Eligible Employee;
(vi)
determine  whether  Incentive  Awards  will  be  granted  in  replacement  of,  or  alternatives  to,  any  other
incentive or compensation plan of eBay or an acquired business unit;
(vii)
grant waivers of Plan or Incentive Award conditions;
(viii)
determine the form of payment of an Incentive Award, which may be in cash, stock or other property as
determined by the Committee;
(ix)
correct any defect, supply any omission, or reconcile any inconsistency in the Plan, or any Incentive Award
or notice;
(x)
take any and all actions it deems necessary or advisable for the proper administration of the Plan;
(xi)
adopt such Plan procedures, regulations, subplans and the like as deemed necessary to enable Eligible
Employees to receive awards; and
(xii)
amend the Plan at any time and from time to time.
(b)
The Committee may delegate its authority to grant and administer Incentive Awards to a separate committee or
officer of the Company.
4.
Eligibility.
An active regular full-time or part-time employee shall be eligible to participate in the Plan if such employee is notified of such
eligibility  by  the  Company.  Employees  who  participate  in  other  bonus  programs,  such  as  any  sales  incentive  plan,  are  not
eligible to participate in the Plan unless they are specifically made eligible in writing by an executive officer of the Company. In
addition,  the  Company  may,  in  its  sole  discretion,  provide  for  a  payout  under  the  Plan  for  any  employee  who  has  changed
positions and, as a result, may have been eligible to participate in the Plan and another bonus program during a Performance
Period.
2

5.
Performance Measures and Goals.
(a)
The  Compensation  Committee  shall  establish  performance  measures  and  goals  applicable  to  a  particular
Performance Period.
(b)
Each performance measure applicable to a Performance Period shall identify one or more criteria that are to be
monitored for eBay or any business unit during the Performance Period, which may include, without limitation, any
of the following criteria:
(i)
trading volume;
(ii)
users;
(iii)
gross merchandise volume;
(iv)
total payment volume;
(v)
revenue;
(vi)
operating income;
(vii)
EBITDA and/or net earnings (either before or after interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization);
(viii)
net income (either before or after taxes);
(ix)
earnings per share;
(x)
earnings  as  determined  other  than  pursuant  to  United  States  generally  accepted  accounting  principles
(“GAAP”);
(xi)
multiples of price to earnings;
(xii)
multiples of price/earnings to growth;
(xiii)
return on net assets;
(xiv)
return on gross assets;
(xv)
return on equity;
(xvi)
return on invested capital;
(xvii)
cash flow (including, but not limited to, operating cash flow and free cash flow);
(xviii)
net or operating margin;
(xix)
economic profit;
3

(xx)
stock price appreciation;
(xxi)
total stockholder return;
(xxii)
employee productivity;
(xxiii)
market share;
(xxiv)
volume;
(xxv)
customer satisfaction metrics; and
(xxvi)
employee engagement/satisfaction metrics.
The measures may be described in terms of growth, an absolute number, or relative to an external group, and may be calculated
on a pro forma basis or in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The Compensation Committee may set
Performance Periods and performance goals that differ among Eligible Employees.
6.
Establishment of Target Bonuses.
The Compensation Committee will designate those Eligible Employees who are to be participants in the eIP for that year and will
specify  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  determination  and  payment  of  an  Incentive  Award  to  each  Eligible  Employee.  The
Compensation Committee may condition the payment of an Incentive Award upon the satisfaction of such objective or subjective
standards as it deems appropriate.
7.
Incentive Awards.
(a)
Incentive Awards may be made on the basis of eBay and/or business unit performance measures, goals, and
formulas determined by the Committee.
(b)
As soon as practicable after the end of each Performance Period, the Compensation Committee will determine
whether, and the extent to which, the stated performance goals have been met and the amount, if any, of the
Incentive Award to be paid to each Eligible Employee.
(c)
In determining the Incentive Award, the Compensation Committee will consider the target goals established at the
beginning of the Plan Year or applicable Performance Period, the degree to which the established goals were
satisfied  and  any  other  objective  or  subjective  factors  it  deems  appropriate.  The  Committee  may  increase  or
reduce the amount of, or eliminate altogether, any Incentive Award that would otherwise be payable. Individuals
who enter the eIP during the Plan Year may have their awards prorated.
4

8.
Payment of Incentive Awards.
Subject to any election duly and validly made by an Eligible Employee with respect to the deferral of all or a portion of his or her
Incentive Award under the terms of the eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan, or any successor thereto, Incentive Awards shall
be paid in cash or equity pursuant to an eBay equity-based award plan under which securities have been registered on Form S-
8 at such times and on such terms as are determined by the Committee in its sole and absolute discretion, and for Incentive
Awards subject  Internal Revenue Code  Section  409A, not later  than March  15th  of the  year  following  the  year in which the
Incentive Awards are earned.
9.
No Right to Bonus or Continued Employment.
(a)
Neither the establishment of the Plan, the provision for or payment of any amounts hereunder nor any action of
the Company, the Board or the Committee with respect to the Plan shall be held or construed to confer upon any
person:
(i)
any legal right to receive, or any interest in, an Incentive Award or any other benefit under the Plan, or
(ii)
any legal right to continue to serve as an officer or employee of the Company or any subsidiary or affiliate
of the Company.
(b)
The Company expressly reserves any and all rights to discharge any Eligible Employee without incurring liability
to any person under the Plan or otherwise. Upon such discharge and notwithstanding any other provision hereof
and regardless of whether or not specified performance goals have been achieved or the amount of an Incentive
Award  has  been  determined,  the  Company  shall  have  no  obligation  to  pay  any  Incentive  Award,  unless  the
Committee otherwise expressly provides by written contract or other written commitment.
10.
Withholding.
The Company shall have the right to withhold, or require an Eligible Employee to remit to the Company, an amount sufficient to
satisfy any applicable federal, state, local or foreign withholding tax requirements imposed with respect to the payment of any
Incentive Award.
11.
Nontransferability.
Except as expressly provided by the Committee, the rights and benefits under the Plan are personal to an Eligible Employee and
shall not be subject to any voluntary or involuntary alienation, assignment, pledge, transfer or other disposition.
12.
Unfunded Plan.
The  Company  shall  have  no  obligation  to  reserve  or  otherwise  fund  in  advance  any  amounts  that  are  or  may  in  the  future
become payable under the Plan. Any funds that the Company, acting in its sole and absolute discretion, determines to reserve
for future payments under the Plan may be commingled with other funds of the Company and need not in any way be
5

segregated from other assets or funds held by the Company. An Eligible Employee’s rights to payment under the Plan shall be
limited to those of a general creditor of the Company.
The Incentive Awards and any cash payment, stock or other property delivered pursuant to an Incentive Award are subject to
forfeiture, recovery by the Company or other action pursuant to any agreement evidencing an Incentive Award or any clawback
or recoupment policy which the Company may adopt from time to time, including without limitation any such policy which the
Company may be required to adopt under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and implementing
rules and regulations thereunder, or as otherwise required by law.
13.
Adoption, Amendment, Suspension and Termination of the Plan.
(a)
The Plan, as amended and restated as set forth herein, shall be effective for Performance Periods beginning on
or after January 1, 2020, and shall continue in effect until terminated as provided below.
(b)
Subject to the limitations set forth in this subsection, the Board may at any time suspend or terminate the Plan
and may amend it from time to time in such respects as the Board may deem advisable.
(c)
No Incentive Award may be awarded during any suspension or after termination of the Plan, and no amendment,
suspension or termination of the Plan shall, without the consent of the person affected thereby, alter or impair any
rights or obligations under any Incentive Award previously awarded under the Plan.
14.
Governing Law.
The validity, interpretation and effect of the Plan, and the rights of all persons hereunder, shall be governed by and determined
in accordance with the laws of Delaware without regard to principles of conflict of laws.
6

 Exhibit 21.01
 
LIST OF SUBSIDIARIES
The following is a list of our subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020 that are required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K.
INTERNATIONAL SUBSIDIARIES
 
 
Jurisdiction of
Name
 
Incorporation
mobile.de GmbH
Germany
eBay GmbH
Germany
eBay International Treasury Center Sarl
Luxembourg
eBay Korea Co., Ltd.
Korea
eBay International Holding GmbH
Switzerland
eBay Korea Holding GmbH
Switzerland
eBay Marketplaces GmbH
Switzerland
Marktplaats B.V.
The Netherlands
eBay Classifieds Holding B.V.
The Netherlands
eBay KTA (UK) Limited
United Kingdom
eBay (UK) Limited
United Kingdom

Exhibit 23.01
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-3 (No.333-236491, 333-215919), Form S-4 (No.
333-117914), and Form S-8 (Nos. 333-64179, 333-87593, 333-41944, 333-58046, 333-97729, 333-100426, 333-107832, 333-117913, 333-127971,
333-129072, 333-136118, 333-140942, 333-143880, 333-149131, 333-149132, 333-151851, 333-155314, 333-159778, 333-165438, 333-168295,
333-171154, 333-174242, 333-175416, 333-175417, 333-176477, 333-176663, 333-178369, 333-181535, 333-181539, 333-192514, 333-193299,
333-195987, 333-203546, 333-213340) of eBay Inc. of our report dated February 4, 2021 relating to the financial statements and financial statement
schedule and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in this Form 10‑K.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
February 4, 2021

Exhibit 31.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Jamie Iannone, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.
 
/s/ Jamie Iannone
Jamie Iannone
Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: February 4, 2021

Exhibit 31.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Andy Cring, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.
/s/ Andy Cring
Andy Cring
Interim Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: February 4, 2021

Exhibit 32.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Jamie Iannone, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
 
/s/ Jamie Iannone
Jamie Iannone
Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: February 4, 2021
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.

Exhibit 32.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Andy Cring, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
 
/s/ Andy Cring
Andy Cring
Interim Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: February 4, 2021
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.
