UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 10-K
 
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
OR 
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Transition Period from             to             .
Commission file number 001-37713
eBay Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Delaware
77-0430924
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
2025 Hamilton Avenue
San Jose , California
95125
(Address of principal executive offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(408) 376-7108
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: 
Title of each class
Trading symbol
Name of exchange on which registered
Common stock
EBAY
The Nasdaq Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.     Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    Yes ☐  No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).  Yes ☒  No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large
accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant
to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.  ☐

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).   Yes  ☐  No  ☒
As of June 30, 2021, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $46,329,747,291 based on the closing sale price as reported on The Nasdaq Global
Select Market.
587,528,915 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of February 21, 2022.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference from the definitive proxy statement for the registrant’s 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders.

eBay Inc.
Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page
Part I
Item 1.
Business
4
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
11
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
28
Item 2.
Properties
28
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
28
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
28
Part II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
29
Item 6.
[Reserved]
30
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
31
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
49
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
52
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
52
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
52
Item 9B.
Other Information
52
Item 9C.
Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections.
52
Part III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
53
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
53
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
53
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
53
Item 14.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
53
Part IV
Item 15.
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule
54
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
54
3

Table of Contents
PART I
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future  business,  future  results  of  operations  or  financial  condition,  including  with  respect  to  the  ongoing  effects  of  COVID-19,  new  or  planned
features  or  services,  or  management  strategies).  You  can  identify  these  forward-looking  statements  by  words  such  as  “may,”  “will,”  “would,”
“should,”  “could,”  “expect,”  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “estimate,”  “intend,”  “plan”  and  other  similar  expressions.  These  forward-looking  statements
involve  risks  and  uncertainties  that  could  cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied  in  our  forward-looking
statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as
well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with
the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-looking statements
after the date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not
to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
ITEM 1: BUSINESS
Overview
eBay  Inc.  was  formed  as  a  sole  proprietorship  in  September  1995  and  was  incorporated  in  California  in  May  1996.  In  April  1998,  we
reincorporated in Delaware, and in September 1998, we completed the initial public offering of our common stock. Our principal executive offices are
located at 2025 Hamilton Avenue, San Jose, California, 95125, and our telephone number is (408) 376-7008. Unless otherwise expressly stated or
the  context  otherwise  requires,  when  we  refer  to  “we,”  “our,”  “us,”  or  “eBay”  in  this  annual  report  on  Form  10-K,  we  mean  eBay  Inc.  and  its
consolidated subsidiaries.
eBay is a global commerce leader through our Marketplace platforms which connect millions of buyers and sellers in more than 190 markets
around  the  world.  The  platforms  include  our  online  marketplace  located  at  www.ebay.com  and  its  localized  counterparts,  including  off-platform
businesses in Japan and Turkey, as well as eBay’s suite of mobile apps. Our platforms are accessible through an online experience (e.g. desktop
and  laptop  computers),  iOS  and  Android  mobile  devices  (e.g.  smartphones  and  tablets)  and  our  application  programming  interfaces  (“APIs,”
platform access for third party software developers).
Notably, on June 24 , 2021, we completed the sale of our Classifieds business to Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”) for $2.5 billion in cash, subject to
certain adjustments, and 540 million Adevinta shares, and on November 18, 2021, eBay completed the sale of approximately 135 million shares of
Adevinta to  Astinlux  Finco  S.a.r.l.  (“Permira”)  for  approximately $2.3  billion in  cash.  Further,  on  November  14,  2021,  we  completed  the  sale  of
80.01% of our ownership stake in eBay Korea LLC to E-mart Inc. (“Emart”) for approximately $3.0 billion of gross cash proceeds subject to certain
adjustments.
Our Strategy
As a global commerce leader and third-party marketplace, our technologies and services are designed to provide buyers choice and a breadth
of relevant inventory from around the globe, and to enable sellers’ access to eBay’s 147 million buyers worldwide. Our business model and pricing
are designed so that our business is successful when our sellers are successful. We earn revenue primarily through fees collected on paid sales,
payment processing and first-party advertising.
eBay’s strategy is to leverage technology to enhance the marketplace experience for our customers to drive growth in Gross Merchandise
Volume  (“GMV”),  while increasing the  rate  of  revenue  growth  through  our  managed  payments  and  advertising  initiatives  and  delivering healthy
operating margins. In 2020, we embarked on a multi-year journey to build more compelling category experiences for enthusiastic consumers, to
become the partner of choice for sellers and to strengthen trust in relationships with buyers on our platforms. We derived a majority of GMV in 2021
from the following product categories — parts & accessories, consumer electronics and home & garden.
4

Table of Contents
During 2021, we completed the migration of eBay’s managed payments in all markets, delivering buyers and sellers a simplified end-to-end
payments experience. Through managed payments, we are able to provide a frictionless experience for current and next-generation customers,
consistent with today’s retail standards. We offer buyers more flexibility and choice in how they’d like to pay and offer sellers a more streamlined
way to run their businesses.
Our advertising business remains focused on growing our Promoted Listings offerings (our first-party advertising products) while reducing
non-strategic,  third-party  advertising.  In  2021,  we  launched  three  new  products:  Promoted  Listings  Express  (a  cost-per-acquisition  product  for
auction listings), Promoted Listings Advanced (a cost-per-click product) and External Promoted Listings (an off-platform advertising product). These
new products complement our existing first-party advertising offering, Promoted Listings Standard (a cost-per-acquisition product for fixed-priced
listings).  Through  our  portfolio  of  Promoted  Listings  offerings,  we  are  providing  sellers  with  data-driven  recommendations  to  optimize  their
conversion and drive velocity, while testing and building more technology features to drive growth, position eBay as the seller’s platform of choice
and surface relevant inventory to buyers.
Our Customer Offerings
We provide a number of features for our sellers and buyers that align with our approach to becoming the partner of choice for sellers and
building life-long, trusted buyer relationships. These offerings are designed to build trust and confidence on our platform and drive GMV.
To become the partner of choice for sellers, eBay continuously invests in technology to enhance the selling experience and products to grow
the seller tools ecosystem. The new unified listing experience offers an intuitive and cohesive design across all platforms — desktop, mobile and
app — simplifying the listing flow and enhancing seller benefits. Using computer vision technology, we launched a tool that allows sellers to scan
select trading cards using eBay’s mobile apps to create a listing in less time. eBay expanded the Promoted Listings offerings to make it easier for
sellers to drive velocity. We also launched personalized tools, such as coded coupons, to support a richer online seller experience. Coded coupons
make it possible for sellers to personalize and distribute offers to their target customers, and 6.2 million unique buyers have made purchases using
coded coupons and 69 thousand sellers have made sales with the use of coded coupons since launching in early 2021. In addition, all Seller Hub
users are able to access Terapeak Product Research for free across a number of our markets — U.S., U.K., Germany, Australia, France, Italy,
Spain and Canada — providing pricing insights and listing quality reports without any barriers.
In order to further strengthen our buyers’ confidence and trust in our services, we offer “eBay Money Back Guarantee,” which allows buyers to
receive their money back if the item they ordered does not arrive, is faulty or damaged or does not match the listing. eBay Money Back Guarantee
covers most items purchased on the eBay platform in the U.S., the U.K., Germany, Australia, Canada, France, Italy and Spain through a qualifying
payment method. In 2021, eBay expanded "Authenticity Guarantee," an independent authentication service, to more luxury categories and more
markets. We now authenticate watches sold over $2,000 in the U.S., the U.K. and Germany; select sneakers sold over $100 in the U.S., U.K.,
Germany, Australia and Canada; and select handbags sold over $500 in the U.S. Additionally, to meet consumer demand for top products, we
expanded  our  eBay  Refurbished  offering,  a  dedicated  destination  that  brings  inventory  from  pre-selected  brands  and  top  rated  sellers  with
standardized condition grading.
eBay also invests in product experiences that delight our customers and enhance the buying experience for our enthusiasts. Our Collection
tool allows enthusiasts to view, manage and to track the value of their trading card collection. eBay has increased the tools available for our Motors
enthusiasts by expanding the My Garage feature to Canada, Italy, France and Spain and adding a motorcycle parts finder to the fitment shopping
experience. In the U.S., we added our entire parts and accessories inventory to the eBay Motors app, making it easier to find the most relevant
inventory.
5

Table of Contents
Our Impact and Responsibility
eBay’s purpose is to empower people and create economic opportunity for all through our technology for our global community of users.
Every day, people build businesses on our platforms. With a low cost of entry for sellers, we offer a highly accessible way for all types of users to
interact in a global marketplace that’s inclusive and connects people of all backgrounds. Accordingly, we prioritize our corporate responsibility efforts
to impact the areas of economic empowerment and sustainable commerce. Key economic programs include eBay for Charity, the eBay Foundation
and our small business enablement efforts, such as our Up & Running Grants program.
eBay for Charity empowers buyers and sellers to support charities around the world. In 2021, eBay for Charity matched donations made to
Direct  Relief  and  partnered  with  OXFAM,  Make  a  Wish  Foundation,  Stop  AAPI  Hate  and  The  Andy  Warhol  Foundation.  In  2021,  more  than
$145 million was raised by buyers and sellers to support charities via eBay for Charity.
The  eBay  Foundation  helps  to  build  economically  vibrant  and  thriving  communities.  During  2021,  the  eBay  Foundation  granted  over
$14  million  to  support  historically  excluded  entrepreneurs  and  our  employee  gift-matching  program.  The  eBay  Foundation  also  increased  our
employee gift-matching annual cap to $10,000 per employee, per year. To date, the eBay Foundation has awarded more than $76 million to more
than 1,800 nonprofits.
In 2021, eBay committed to invest $25 million in the Clear Vision Impact Fund to bolster small- and medium-sized minority-owned businesses
that support historically under-served communities.
Recommerce has been an integral part of eBay’s purpose since the Company was founded in 1995. As a pioneer of the circular economy,
eBay has created a space where people can buy and sell pre-owned goods. This helps preserve the world’s natural resources and reduces the
Company’s carbon footprint by saving on the water and energy typically used in producing new goods and saves them from being sent to landfills.
eBay continued its work to reach its goal of 100% renewable energy by 2025 and signed its second virtual power purchase agreement in
2021. In our continued efforts to address climate change, we announced an updated carbon reduction goal that has been approved by the Science
Based Target initiative: eBay commits to reduce its own (scope 1 and scope 2) emissions 90% by 2030 from a 2019 base year and to reduce value
chain (scope 3) emissions from downstream transportation and distribution by 20% in the same timeframe. We will also be carbon neutral for our
scope 1 and 2 emissions by the end of 2021 and each year moving forward. eBay was ranked in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Green
Power Partnership National Top 100 and Top 30 Tech & Telecom for the second year. Additionally, we strive to integrate best practices in our
offices and data center operations and to continually reduce our environmental footprint. This year, eBay was also recognized for its commitment to
sustainability  and  responsible  business  by  its  inclusion  in  the  Dow  Jones  Sustainability  Indices  World  and  North  American  Indices  for  the  third
straight year. eBay also scored an A- on the CDP Climate Change questionnaire.
Financial Information
We measure our footprint in our addressable market according to GMV. GMV consists of the total value of all paid transactions between users
on our platforms during the applicable period inclusive of shipping fees and taxes. In 2021, we generated $87 billion in GMV, of which approximately
54 percent was generated outside the U.S. We believe that GMV provides a useful measure of the overall volume of paid transactions that flow
through our platforms in a given period.
At the end of 2021, eBay had 147 million active buyers and 17 million sellers. In 2021, we had approximately 1.5 billion live listings globally.
The term “active buyer” means, as of any date, all buyer accounts that paid for a transaction on our platforms within the previous 12-month period.
Buyers  may  register  more  than  once  and,  as  a  result,  may  have  more  than  one  account.  “Sellers”  include consumer-to-consumer  (“C2C”)  and
business-to-consumer (“B2C”) sellers that have received payment for a transaction on our platforms within the previous 12-month period.
We generate revenue primarily from the transactions we successfully enable, including monetization of managed payments and first-party
advertising and through marketing services. The majority of our revenue comes from a take rate on the GMV of transactions paid on our platforms.
We define “take rate” as net transaction revenues divided by GMV.
6

Table of Contents
Our platforms are designed to enable our buyers and sellers to leverage our economies of scale and capital investments, such as in sales and
marketing, mobile, customer acquisition, technology innovation and customer service.
Notable Business Transactions in 2021 and 2020
We regularly review and manage our investments to ensure they support eBay’s strategic direction and complement our disciplined approach
to value creation, profitability and capital allocation. eBay completed the sale of its Classifieds business to Adevinta for $2.5 billion in cash, subject to
certain adjustments, and 540 million Adevinta shares in the second quarter of 2021, then completed the sale of approximately 135 million shares of
our Adevinta stake to Permira for approximately $2.3 billion in cash in the fourth quarter of 2021. Additionally, we completed the sale of 80.01% of
our ownership stake in eBay Korea LLC to E-mart for approximately $3.0 billion of gross cash proceeds, subject to certain adjustments in the fourth
quarter of 2021.
In the first quarter of 2020, we completed the sale of StubHub to viagogo for $4.05 billion in cash, subject to certain adjustments.
Competition
We encounter vigorous competition in our business from numerous sources. Our users can list, sell, buy, and pay for similar items through a
variety of competing online, mobile and offline channels. These include, but are not limited to, retailers, distributors, liquidators, import and export
companies, auctioneers, catalog and mail-order companies, directories, search engines, commerce participants (consumer-to-consumer, business-
to-consumer and business-to-business), shopping channels and networks. As our product offerings continue to broaden into new categories of items
and new commerce formats, we expect to face additional competition from other online, mobile and offline channels for those new offerings. We
compete on the basis of price, product selection and services, and global scale.
For more information regarding competitive factors impacting our business, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the captions
“Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business” and “We are subject to regulatory activity and
antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business.”
Government Regulation
Government regulation impacts key aspects of our business. In particular, we are subject to laws and regulations that affect the ecommerce
industry in many countries where we operate.
With two additional states adopting Internet sales tax laws in 2021, some buyers across the U.S. encountered sales tax for the first time on
eBay. To date, 45 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico have enacted Internet sales tax legislation. Additionally, a digital service tax
(DST)  was  implemented  in  Spain  in  2021,  and  we  are  complying  with  the  legislation.  Our  business  will  also  be  required  to  increase  payments
reporting requirements for U.S. sellers as a result of federal legislation. Starting on January 1, 2022, all businesses that process payments are
required to issue a Form 1099-K for all sellers who receive $600 or more in sales, a decrease from the previous reporting threshold of $20,000 and
200  transactions.  Form  1099-Ks  for  the  new  thresholds  will  be  issued  in  January  2023.  Tax  collection  responsibility  and  the  additional  costs
associated with complex sales and use tax collection, remittance and audit requirements, or reporting, could create additional burdens for buyers
and sellers on our websites and mobile platforms.
Legislation requiring increased seller information collection, verification and disclosure for online marketplaces was considered in a number of
states and passed into law in Arkansas in 2021. Federal legislation is also being considered by Congress. Increased seller mandates could create
additional burdens for sellers on our websites and mobile platforms.
For more information regarding regulatory risks, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “Our business is subject to
extensive government regulation and oversight, which could adversely impact our business” and “Our business and our sellers and buyers may be
subject to sales and other tax regimes in various jurisdictions, which may harm our business.”
7

Table of Contents
Seasonality
We expect transaction activity patterns on our platforms to mirror general consumer buying patterns. Please see the additional information in
“Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under the caption “Seasonality.”
Technology
The eBay Marketplace uses a combination of proprietary technologies and services as well as technologies and services provided by others.
We have developed intuitive user interfaces, buyer, seller and developer tools and transaction processing, database and network applications that
help  enable  our  users  to  reliably  and  securely  complete  transactions  on  our  sites.  Our  technology  infrastructure  simplifies  the  storage  and
processing of large amounts of data, eases the deployment and operation of large-scale global products and services and automates much of the
administration  of  large-scale  clusters  of  computers.  Our  infrastructure  has  been  designed  around  industry-standard  architectures  to  reduce
downtime in the event of outages or catastrophic occurrences.
In support of our commitment  to innovation and a better customer experience, we have been on a multi-year evolution to modernize our
marketplace.  Through  technologies  like  artificial  intelligence,  we  are  anticipating  the  needs  of  buyers,  sellers  and  developers,  empowering
entrepreneurs  looking to grow their business, and making the platform more accessible to everyone. We aim to create highly personalized and
inspiring shopping experiences powered by advanced technologies.
For information regarding technology-related risks, see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the captions “Our business is subject
to  online  security  risks,  including  security  breaches  and  cyberattacks,”  “Systems  failures  and  resulting  interruptions  in  the  availability  of  or
degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or services could harm our business” and “Regulation in the areas of privacy
and protection of user data could harm our business.”
Intellectual Property
We  regard  the  protection  of  our  intellectual  property,  including  our  trademarks  (particularly  those  covering  the  eBay  name),  patents,
copyrights, domain names, trade dress and trade secrets as critical to our success. We aggressively protect our intellectual property rights by relying
on federal, state and common law rights in the U.S. and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual
restrictions to protect our proprietary rights in products and services. We routinely enter into confidentiality and invention assignment agreements
with our employees and contractors and nondisclosure agreements with parties with whom we conduct business to limit access to and disclosure of
our proprietary information.
We pursue the registration of our domain names, trademarks and service marks in the U.S. and internationally. Additionally, we have filed
U.S.  and international  patent applications  covering  certain  aspects  of our proprietary  technology.  Effective  trademark,  copyright,  patent,  domain
name, trade dress and trade secret protection is typically expensive to maintain and may require litigation. We must protect our intellectual property
rights  and  other  proprietary  rights  in  an  increasing  number  of  jurisdictions,  a  process  that  is  expensive  and  time  consuming  and  may  not  be
successful.
We have registered our core brands as trademarks and domain names in the U.S. and a large number of other jurisdictions and have in place
an active program to continue to secure trademarks and domain names that correspond to our brands in markets of interest. If we are unable to
register or protect our trademarks or domain names, we could be adversely affected in any jurisdiction in which our trademarks or domain names
are  not  registered  or  protected.  We  have  licensed  in  the  past,  and  expect  to  license  in  the  future,  certain  of  our  proprietary  rights,  such  as
trademarks or copyrighted material, to others.
From time to time, third parties have claimed — and others will likely claim in the future — that we have infringed their intellectual property
rights. We are typically involved in a number of such legal proceedings at any time. Please see the information in “Item 3: Legal Proceedings” and in
“Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the captions “The listing or sale by our users of certain items, including items that allegedly infringe the intellectual
property rights of rights owners, such as pirated or counterfeit items, illegal items or items used in an illegal manner may harm our business,” and
“We  may  be  unable  to  adequately  protect  or  enforce  our  intellectual  property  rights  and  face  ongoing  allegations  by  third  parties  that  we  are
infringing their intellectual property rights.”
8

Table of Contents
Human Capital Management
As of December 31, 2021, we employed approximately 10,800 people globally. Approximately 6,300 of our employees were located in the
U.S. eBay has robust people-focused programs to support and retain our employees globally and to attract our future employees. Our recruitment,
development, compensation and benefits and wellness programs are designed to reflect our values and our goal to make eBay competitive in the
market for talent and a place that is welcoming and inclusive. eBay’s management is focused on delivering programs that develop and support our
people and connect them with our customers, our community, and each other.
Culture
The heart of our culture is Our DNA, a framework launched in 2020 to link all employees to our purpose and beliefs.
Our Purpose: We connect people and build communities to create economic opportunity for all
Our Beliefs: These beliefs reflect our culture at its best and our shared desire to be part of a company with a productive, fun way of working
where we deliver the best we can for ourselves as employees and for our customers.
•
Empower our community
•
Innovate boldly
•
Deliver with impact
•
Be for everyone
•
Act with integrity
In 2021, we continued to integrate Our DNA throughout our people programs and processes, including performance management, recruiting
and hiring, new employee onboarding and training for individuals and managers. The company’s Employee Code of Conduct has been rewritten to
align to our DNA beliefs language.
Pandemic Response
We continue to monitor and adapt to workplace changes brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. eBay continues to support our people who
are predominantly working remotely by providing equipment, systems and resources for remote connection, including for our customer experience
team  members  who  are  continuing  to  work  from  home  in  most  cases.  We  also  increased  work  flexibility  to  balance  personal  and  professional
responsibilities  and  continued  to  provide  back-up  in-home  child  and  adult  care  in  the  U.S.,  U.K.,  Canada,  Germany  and  Ireland.  eBay  has
continually engaged with our people to support physical and mental health for them and their families through online wellness resources, webinars,
telehealth access and expansion of company-paid mental health support as well as additional training for managers and peers to support mental
health. As we continued to hire employees throughout the pandemic, we have reimagined the employee onboarding experience. We have also had
the opportunity to welcome employees back to the office on a voluntary basis, where it is safe to do so, and introduced new hybrid habits to enable
collaboration in a hybrid environment.
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion continues to focus on three strategic areas — workforce, workplace and marketplace. Equity remains at the
forefront of all we do to hire, grow, and keep top talent, enhance corporate performance, and foster a welcoming and inclusive place to work, learn
and grow. We continue efforts to enhance our processes, while leveraging deepened and actionable data insights, coupled with updated learning
and  development  practices  as  well  as  the  planned  design  and  implementation  of  a  new  governance  model  to  ensure  that  we  drive  shared
accountability throughout the organization. Our Communities of Inclusion welcome and connect eBay employees all over the world to help us build
and nurture employees, allies and external communities.  They host events and forums  to connect employees to groups organized around age,
disability  status,  ethnicity,  gender,  religion,  military  status,  parental  status  and  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  and  expression.  We  are
currently preparing our sixth Global Diversity, Equity & Inclusion report for publication in the second quarter of 2022.
9

Table of Contents
Acting with Integrity
We maintained our commitment to ethics and acting with integrity in 2021. We took big and small actions to ensure that we are open, honest,
ethical  and  authentic  with  ongoing  trainings,  quarterly  “tone  from  the  top”  engagements  between  leaders  with  their  employees  and  daily  ethics
contests during Ethics and Compliance Week.
Parental Leave
In addition to competitive pay and benefits, eBay offers additional parental time off beyond what is required by law in the U.S. and in most
countries where we operate. This benefit is offered for parents welcoming a new child into the family whether by giving birth, adopting or welcoming
a child through surrogacy. This is an important demonstration of our commitment to working parents and their families.
Employee Voice & Values
In addition to multiple channels for sharing feedback, we also regularly survey our employees on trust and engagement, their experience with
diversity, equity and inclusion, ethics and integrity, and this year regarding their thoughts on returning to the office. Our employees highly value
eBay’s  approach  to  Impact  and Responsibility  and  Diversity,  Equity  & Inclusion  discussed  earlier  in  the  report.  Employees  are  proud  of  eBay’s
efforts to reduce our carbon footprint and the sustainable commerce that is enabled by our platform. These commitments are core to our business
and they positively impact recruitment, engagement and retention.
Available Information
Our Internet address is www.ebay.com. Our investor relations website is located at investors.ebayinc.com. We make available free of charge
on our investor relations website under the heading “Financial Information - SEC Filings” our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on
Form  10-Q,  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  and  amendments  to  those  reports  as  soon  as  reasonably  practicable  after  such  materials  are
electronically filed with (or furnished to) the SEC at www.sec.gov.
We  webcast  our  earnings  calls  and  certain  events  we  participate  in  or  host  with  members  of  the  investment  community  on  our  investor
relations  website.  Additionally,  we  provide  notifications  of  news  or  announcements  regarding  our  financial  performance,  including  SEC  filings,
investor  events,  press  and  earnings  releases,  and  blogs  on  our  investor  relations  website.  Company  sustainability  information  for  investors  is
available  on  our  investor  relations  website  under  the  heading  “ESG  Investors.”  Corporate  governance  information,  including  our  governance
guidelines for our Board of Directors (“Board”), Board committee charters and code of conduct, is also available on our investor relations website
under the heading “Corporate Governance.”
The contents of our websites and webcasts and information that can be accessed through our websites and webcasts are not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or in any other report or document we file with (or furnish to) the SEC, and any references to our
websites and webcasts are intended to be inactive textual references only.
10

Table of Contents
Item 1A: RISK FACTORS
Risk Factors Summary:
The summary of risks below provides an overview of the principal risks we are exposed to in the normal course of our business activities:
•
Our operating and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows, as well as the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
•
Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business.
•
The global COVID-19 pandemic could harm our business and results of operations.
•
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates could negatively impact our financial results.
•
Our international operations and engagement in cross-border trade are subject to risks, which could harm our business.
•
Our business may be adversely affected by geopolitical events, natural disasters, seasonal factors and similar factors.
•
If we cannot keep pace with rapid technological developments or continue to innovate and create new initiatives to provide new programs,
products and services, the use of our products and our revenues could decline.
•
Changes  to  our  programs  to  protect  buyers  and  sellers  could  increase  our  costs  and  loss  rate,  and  failure  to  manage  such  programs
effectively can result in harm to our reputation.
•
Development  of  our  payments  system  requires  ongoing  investment,  is  subject  to  evolving  laws,  regulations,  rules,  and  standards,  and
involves risk, including risks related to our dependence on third-party providers.
•
We may be unable to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights and face ongoing allegations by third parties that we are
infringing their intellectual property rights.
•
Failure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our platforms would increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely
diminish merchant and consumer confidence in and use of our services.
•
Our business is subject to online security risks, including security breaches and cyberattacks.
•
Systems failures and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or
services could harm our business.
•
We  may  not  be  able  to  attract,  retain,  and  develop  the  highly  skilled  employees  and  senior  management  that  we  need  to  support  our
business.
•
Problems with or price increases by third parties who provide services to us or to our sellers could harm our business.
•
Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight, which could adversely impact our business.
•
Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.
•
We are regularly subject to general litigation, regulatory disputes, and government inquiries.
•
We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business
•
The listing or sale by our users of certain items, including items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners,
including pirated or counterfeit items, illegal items or items used in an illegal manner may harm our business.
•
We are subject to risks associated with information disseminated through our services.
•
Fluctuations in interest rates could adversely impact our financial results.
•
We have substantial indebtedness, and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, and we may not generate sufficient
cash flow from our business to service our indebtedness.
•
Our  business  and  our  sellers  and  buyers  may  be  subject  to  sales  and  other  tax  regimes  in  various  jurisdictions,  which  may  harm  our
business.
•
Acquisitions,  dispositions,  joint  ventures,  strategic  partnerships  and  strategic  investments  could  result  in  operating  difficulties  and  could
harm our business.
•
We could incur significant liability if the Distribution of PayPal is determined to be a taxable transaction.
•
We may be exposed to claims and liabilities as a result of the Distribution of PayPal.
11

Table of Contents
Risk Factors:
You should carefully review the following discussion of the risks that may affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, as
well  as  our  consolidated  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  and  the  other  information  appearing  in  this  report,  for  important  information
regarding risks that affect us. Current global economic events and conditions may amplify many of these risks. These risks are not the only risks that
may affect us. Additional risks that we are not aware of or do not believe are material at the time of this filing may also become important factors that
adversely affect our business.
Business, Economic, Market and Operating Risks
Our operating and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows, as well as the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
Our operating and financial results have varied on a quarterly basis during our operating history and may continue to fluctuate significantly as
a result of a variety of factors, including as a result of the following risks and other risks set forth in this “Risk Factors” section.
•
our ability to convert visits into sales for our sellers;
•
the amount and timing of expenses;
•
our success in attracting and retaining sellers and buyers;
•
changes in consumer discretionary spending trends, including shifts in interests away from any of our major categories;
•
our success in executing on our strategy and the impact of any changes in our strategy;
•
the timing and success of product launches, including new services and features we may introduce;
•
the success of our marketing efforts; and
•
the impact of competitive developments and our response to those developments.
In view of the rapidly evolving nature of our business, period-to-period comparisons of our operating results may not be meaningful, and you
should not rely upon them as an indication of future performance. It is difficult for us to forecast the level or source of our revenues or earnings (loss)
accurately, particularly given that substantially all of our net revenues each quarter come from transactions involving sales during that quarter. Due
to the inherent difficulty in forecasting revenues, it is also difficult to forecast expenses as a percentage of net revenues. Quarterly and annual
expenses  as  a  percentage  of  net  revenues  reflected  in  our  consolidated  financial  statements  may  be  significantly  different  from  historical  or
projected percentages. Because our business model is dependent upon consumer spending, our results of operations are sensitive to changes in or
uncertainty about macro-economic conditions. Our buyers may in the future have less capacity for discretionary purchases and may reduce their
purchases from our sellers as a result of various factors, including job losses, inflation, higher taxes, reduced access to credit, changes in federal
economic policy, the COVID-19 pandemic and recent international trade disputes.
Substantial and increasingly intense competition worldwide in ecommerce may harm our business.
The businesses and markets in which we operate are intensely competitive. We currently and potentially compete with a wide variety of online
and  offline  companies  providing  goods  and  services  to  consumers  and  merchants,  a  number  of  which  have  significant  resources,  large  user
communities and well-established brands. The Internet and mobile networks provide new, rapidly evolving and intensely competitive channels for
the  sale  of  all  types  of  goods  and  services.  We  compete  in  two-sided  markets,  and  must  attract  both  buyers  and  sellers  to  use  our  platforms.
Consumers who purchase or sell goods and services through us have more and more alternatives, and merchants have more channels to reach
consumers. We expect competition to continue to intensify. The barriers to entry into these channels can be low, and businesses can easily launch
online sites or mobile platforms and applications at nominal cost by using commercially available software or partnering with any of a number of
successful ecommerce, search, advertising or social companies. As we respond to changes in the competitive environment, we may, from time to
time, make pricing, service, policy or marketing decisions or acquisitions that may be controversial with and lead to dissatisfaction among sellers,
which could reduce activity on our platform and harm our reputation and profitability.
12

Table of Contents
We face increased competitive pressure online and offline. In particular, the competitive norm for, and the expected level of service from,
ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce  has  significantly  increased  due  to,  among  other  factors,  improved  user  experience,  greater  ease  of  buying
goods,  lower  (or  no)  shipping  costs,  faster  shipping  times  and  more  favorable  return  policies.  In  addition,  certain  platform  businesses,  such  as
Alibaba, Amazon,  Apple, Facebook  and Google,  many  of  whom  are  larger  than  us or have greater  capitalization,  have a dominant  and secure
position in other industries or certain significant markets, and offer other goods and services to consumers and merchants that we do not offer. If we
are  unable  to  change  our  products,  offerings  and  services  in  ways  that  reflect  the  changing  demands  of  ecommerce  and  mobile  commerce
marketplaces, or if products offered through eBay are not available for purchase where the consumers shop, particularly the higher growth of sales
of  fixed-price  items  and  higher  expected  service  levels  (some  of  which  depend  on  services  provided  by  sellers  on  our  platforms),  or  compete
effectively with and adapt to changes in larger platform businesses, our business and reputation will suffer.
Competitors with other revenue sources may also be able to devote more resources to marketing and promotional campaigns and buyer
acquisition,  adopt  more  aggressive  pricing  policies  and  devote  more  resources  to  website,  mobile  platforms  and  applications  and  systems
development than we can. Other competitors may offer or continue to offer faster and/or free shipping, delivery on Sunday, same-day delivery,
favorable return policies or other transaction-related services which improve the user experience on their sites and which could be impractical or
inefficient for our sellers to match. Competitors may be more narrowly focused on a particular type of goods and create a compelling community, be
able to innovate faster and more efficiently, and new technologies may increase the competitive pressures by enabling competitors to offer more
efficient or lower-cost services.
Some of our competitors control other products and services that are important to our success, including credit card interchange, Internet
search, and mobile operating systems. Such competitors could manipulate pricing, availability, terms or operation of service related to their products
and services in a manner that impacts our competitive offerings. For example, Google, which operates a shopping platform service, has from time to
time made changes to its search algorithms that reduced the amount of search traffic directed to us from searches on Google. If we are unable to
use or adapt to operational changes in such services, we may face higher costs for such services, face integration or technological barriers or lose
customers, which could cause our business to suffer.
Consumers who might use our sites to buy goods have a wide variety of alternatives, including traditional department, warehouse, boutique,
discount and general merchandise stores (as well as the online and mobile operations of these traditional retailers), online retailers and their related
mobile offerings, online and offline aggregation and classified services, social media platforms and other shopping channels, such as offline and
online home shopping networks. In the United States, these include, but are not limited to, Amazon, Facebook, Google, Walmart, Target, Macy’s,
Etsy, StockX, Shopify, Wayfair, TheRealReal, Overstock.com and Rakuten, among others. In addition, consumers have a large number of online
and offline channels focused on one or more of the categories of products offered on our site.
Consumers also can turn to many companies that offer a variety of services that provide other channels for buyers to find and buy items from
sellers of all sizes, including social media, online aggregation and classifieds platforms, such as websites operated by Adevinta or Naspers Limited
and others such as craigslist, Oodle.com and Facebook. Consumers also can turn to shopping-comparison sites, such as Google Shopping, or
social networks that enable purchases such as Pinterest and Facebook. In certain markets, our fixed-price listing and traditional auction-style listing
formats increasingly are being challenged by other formats, such as classifieds. We use product search engines and paid search advertising to help
users find our sites, but these services also have the potential to divert users to other online shopping destinations. Consumers may choose to
search for products and services with a horizontal search engine or shopping comparison website, and such sites may also send users to other
shopping destinations. In addition, sellers are increasingly utilizing multiple sales channels, including the acquisition of new customers by paying for
search-related advertisements on horizontal search engine sites, such as Google, Naver and Baidu.
Consumers and merchants who might use our sites to sell goods also have many alternatives, including general ecommerce sites, such as
Amazon,  Alibaba,  and  Zalando,  and  more  specialized  sites,  such  as  Etsy.  Our  international  sites  also  compete  for  sellers  with  general  and
specialized ecommerce sites. Sellers may also choose to sell their goods through other channels, such as multi-channel services like Shopify or
classifieds platforms. Consumers and merchants also can create and sell through their own sites, and may choose to purchase online advertising
instead of using our services. We generate a substantial amount of our revenue from our Promoted Listings (a first-party advertising offering) and, to
a lesser extent,  third-party  advertising.  To sustain  or  increase  our advertising  revenue,  we must  continue to  provide  customers  with  compelling
advertising products to maintain or
13

Table of Contents
increase the amount of advertising purchased through our platform. If we are unable to compete effectively for advertising spend, our business and
operating results could be harmed. In some countries, there are online sites that have larger customer bases and greater brand recognition, as well
as  competitors  that  may  have  a  better  understanding  of  local  culture  and  commerce.  We  may  increasingly  compete  with  local  competitors  in
developing countries that have unique advantages, such as a greater ability to operate under local regulatory authorities.
In addition, certain manufacturers may limit or cease distribution of their products through online channels, such as our sites. Manufacturers
may attempt to use contractual obligations or existing or future government regulation to prohibit or limit ecommerce in certain categories of goods
or services. Manufacturers may also attempt to enforce minimum resale price maintenance or minimum advertised price arrangements to prevent
distributors from selling on our platforms or on the Internet generally, or drive distributors to sell at prices that would make us less attractive relative
to other alternatives. The adoption by those or other policies could adversely affect our results of operations and result in loss of market share and
diminished value of our brands.
The principal competitive factors for us include the following:
    
•
ability to attract, retain and engage buyers and sellers;
•
volume of transactions and price and selection of goods;
•
trust in the seller and the transaction;
•
customer service;
•
brand recognition;    
•
community cohesion, interaction and size;
•
website, mobile platform and application ease-of-use and accessibility;
•
system reliability and security;
•
reliability of delivery and payment, including customer preference for fast delivery and free shipping and returns;
•
level of service fees; and
•
quality of search tools.
We  may  be  unable  to  compete  successfully  against  current  and  future  competitors.  Some  current  and  potential  competitors  have  longer
operating histories, larger customer bases and greater brand recognition in other business and Internet sectors than we do.
The global COVID-19 pandemic could harm our business and results of operations.
The global spread of COVID-19 variants and related measures to contain its spread (such as government mandated business closures and
shelter in-place guidelines) have created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic
impacts our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity in the future will depend on numerous evolving factors that we cannot
predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; any resurgence of the pandemic; the availability and distribution of effective treatments
and vaccines; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; the impact of
the pandemic on national and global economic activity, unemployment levels and financial markets, including the possibility of a national or global
recession; the potential for shipping difficulties, including slowed deliveries from sellers to their customers; and the ability of consumers to pay for
products. The COVID-19 pandemic has generally resulted in a decrease in consumer spending, which could have an adverse impact on our sellers
through reduced consumer demand for their products and availability of inventory, which could in turn negatively impact the demand for use of our
platforms. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to require employees to work remotely for an extended period of time, which could
negatively impact our business and harm productivity and collaboration. If there is a prolonged impact of COVID-19, it could adversely affect our
business,  results  of  operations,  financial  condition  and  liquidity,  perhaps  materially.  The  future  impact  of  COVID-19  and  these  containment
measures cannot be predicted with certainty and may increase our borrowing costs and other costs of capital and otherwise adversely affect our
business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and we cannot assure that we will have access to external financing at times and on
terms we consider acceptable, or at all, or that we will not experience other liquidity issues going forward.
The  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  related  measures  to  contain  its  spread  did  not  adversely  affect  our  consolidated  results  of  operations.
Initially,  our  Marketplace  platforms  experienced  improved  traffic  and  buyer  acquisition  due  to  the  ongoing  impact  of  mobility  restrictions  taken
globally to contain the spread of COVID-19 and changes in consumer behaviors that have resulted in more online shopping. As restrictions have
loosened and
14

Table of Contents
mobility increases, we may experience lower traffic and buyer acquisition, and the impacts seen may continue to create volatility in our results and a
wider range of outcomes as consumer behaviors and mobility restrictions continue to evolve.
We are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, which could negatively impact our financial results.
Because we generate approximately half of our revenues outside the United States but report our financial results in U.S. dollars, our financial
results  are  impacted  by  fluctuations  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates,  or  foreign  exchange  rates.  The  results  of  operations  of  many  of  our
internationally  focused  platforms  are  exposed  to  foreign  exchange  rate  fluctuations  as  the  financial  results  of  the  applicable  subsidiaries  are
translated from the local currency into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes.
While from time to time we enter into transactions to hedge portions of our foreign currency translation exposure, it is impossible to predict or
eliminate  the  effects  of  this  exposure.  Fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  could  significantly  impact  our  financial  results,  which  may  have  a
significant impact on the trading price of our common stock and debt securities.
Our international operations and engagement in cross-border trade are subject to risks, which could harm our business.
Our international businesses, especially in the United Kingdom, Germany and Australia, and cross-border business from greater China, have
generated  a  majority  of  our  net  revenues  in  recent  years.  In  addition  to  uncertainty  about  our  ability  to  generate  revenues  from  our  foreign
operations and expand into international markets, there are risks inherent in doing business internationally, including:
•
uncertainties and instability in economic and market conditions resulting from Brexit;
•
expenses  associated  with  localizing  our  products  and  services  and  customer  data,  including  offering  customers  the  ability  to  transact
business in the local currency and adapting our products and services to local preferences (e.g., payment methods) with which we may
have limited or no experience;
•
trade barriers and changes in trade regulations;
•
difficulties  in  developing,  staffing,  and  simultaneously  managing  a  large  number  of  varying  foreign  operations  as  a  result  of  distance,
language, and cultural differences;
•
stringent local labor laws and regulations;
•
credit risk and higher levels of payment fraud;
•
profit  repatriation  restrictions,  foreign  currency  exchange  restrictions  or  extreme  fluctuations  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates  for  a
particular currency;
•
global or regional economic conditions that impact companies and customers with which we do business;
•
political or social unrest, economic instability, repression, or human rights issues;
•
geopolitical events, including natural disasters, public health issues (such as the coronavirus), acts of war, and terrorism;
•
supply chain disruptions;
•
import or export regulations;
•
compliance with U.S. laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and foreign laws prohibiting corrupt payments to government officials,
as well as U.S. and foreign laws designed to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities;
•
antitrust and competition regulations;
•
potentially adverse tax developments and consequences;
•
economic uncertainties relating to sovereign and other debt;
•
different, uncertain, or more stringent user protection, data protection, privacy, and other laws;
•
risks related to other government regulation or required compliance with local laws;
•
national or regional differences in macroeconomic growth rates;
•
payment intermediation regulations;
•
local licensing and reporting obligations; and
•
increased difficulties in collecting accounts receivable.
 
Violations of the complex foreign and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international operations may result in fines, criminal actions,
or sanctions against us, our officers, or our employees; prohibitions on the conduct of our business; and damage to our reputation. Although we
have implemented policies and procedures designed to
15

Table of Contents
promote compliance with these laws, there can be no assurance that our employees, contractors, or agents will not violate our policies. These risks
inherent in our international operations and expansion increase our costs of doing business internationally and could harm our business.
Cross-border trade is an important source of both revenue and profits for us. Cross-border trade also represents our primary (or in some
cases, only) presence in certain important markets, such as China, and various other countries. The interpretation and/or application of laws, such
as those related to intellectual property rights of authentic products, selective distribution networks, and sellers in other countries listing items on the
Internet,  could  impose  restrictions  on,  or  increase  the  costs  of,  purchasing,  selling,  shipping,  or  returning  goods  across  national  borders.  The
shipping of goods across national borders is often more expensive and complicated than domestic shipping. Any factors that increase the costs of
cross-border trade or restrict, delay, or make cross-border trade more difficult or impractical would lower our revenues and profits and could harm
our business.
Our business may be adversely affected by geopolitical events, natural disasters, seasonal factors and other factors that cause our users to
spend less time on our websites or mobile platforms and applications, including increased usage of other websites.
Our  users  may  spend  less  time  on our  websites  and  our  applications  for  mobile  devices  as  a  result  of  a  variety  of  diversions,  including:
geopolitical events, such as war, the threat of war, or terrorist activity; natural disasters or the effects of climate change (such as drought, flooding,
wildfires,  increased  storm  severity  and  sea  level  rise);  power  shortages  or  outages,  major  public  health  issues,  including  pandemics  (such  as
COVID-19 variants); social networking or other entertainment websites or mobile applications; significant local, national or global events capturing
the attention of a large part of the population; and seasonal fluctuations due to a variety of factors. If any of these, or any other factors, divert our
users from using our websites or mobile applications, our business could be materially adversely affected.
If we cannot keep pace with rapid technological developments or continue to innovate and create new initiatives to provide new programs,
products and services, the use of our products and our revenues could decline.
Rapid,  significant  technological  changes  continue  to  confront  the  industries  in  which  we  operate  and  we  cannot  predict  the  effect  of
technological changes on our business. We also continuously  strive to create new initiatives  and innovations that promote growth,  such as our
payments and advertising offerings and other features that enhance the customer experience. In addition to our own initiatives and innovations, we
rely in part on third parties, including some of our competitors, for the development of and access to new technologies. We expect that new services
and technologies applicable to the industries in which we operate will continue to emerge. These new services and technologies may be superior to,
or render obsolete, the technologies we currently use in our products and services. Incorporating new technologies into our products and services
may require substantial expenditures and take considerable time, and ultimately may not be successful. In addition, our ability to adopt new services
and develop new technologies may be inhibited by industry-wide standards, new laws and regulations, resistance to change from our users, clients
or  merchants,  or  third  parties’  intellectual  property  rights.  Our  success  will  depend  on  our  ability  to  develop  new  technologies  and  adapt  to
technological changes and evolving industry standards.
Changes  to  our  programs  to  protect  buyers  and  sellers  could  increase  our  costs  and  loss  rate,  and  failure  to  manage  such  programs
effectively can result in harm to our reputation.
Our eBay Money Back Guarantee program represents the means by which we compensate users who believe that they have been defrauded,
have not received the item that they purchased  or have received  an item  different  from what was described.  We expect  to continue to receive
communications  from  users  requesting  reimbursement  or  threatening  or commencing  legal action  against us if no reimbursement  is made. Our
liability for these sorts of claims is beginning to be clarified in some jurisdictions. Litigation involving liability for any such third-party actions could be
costly  and  time  consuming  for  us,  divert  management  attention,  result  in  increased  costs  of  doing  business,  lead  to  adverse  judgments  or
settlements or otherwise harm our business. In addition, affected users will likely complain to regulatory agencies that could take action against us,
including imposing fines or seeking injunctions.
Additionally, in order to further strengthen our buyers’ confidence and trust in our services and the goods offered on our marketplace, in 2021,
we expanded "Authenticity Guarantee," an independent authentication service, to more luxury categories and more markets. If we are unable to
effectively manage the authentication process, we may suffer harm to our reputation.
16

Table of Contents
Development of our payments system requires ongoing investment, is subject to evolving laws, regulations, rules, and standards, and involves
risk, including risks related to our dependence on third-party providers.
We have invested and plan to continue to invest internal resources into our payments tools in order to maintain existing availability, expand
into additional markets and offer new payment methods and other types of financial services to our buyers and sellers. If we fail to invest adequate
resources into payments on our platform, or if our investment efforts  are unsuccessful,  unreliable or result in system failure, our payments and
financial services may not function properly or keep pace with competitive offerings, which could negatively impact their usage and our Marketplace.
Future errors, failures or outages could cause our buyers and sellers to lose confidence in our payments system and could cause them to cease
using our marketplace.
If we transition to new third-party payment service providers for any reason, we may be required to invest significant financial and personnel
resources to support such transition or could be unable to find a suitable replacement service provider. As we offer new payment methods and
financial services to our sellers and buyers, we are now subject to additional regulations and compliance requirements, and exposed to heightened
fraud and regulatory risk, which could lead to an increase in our operating expenses.
We rely on third-party service providers to perform services related to compliance among other activities, credit card processing, payment
disbursements,  currency exchange, identity verification,  sanctions screening, and fraud analysis and detection.  As a result,  we are subject to a
number of risks related to our dependence on third-party service providers. If any or some of these service providers fail to perform adequately or if
any such service provider were to terminate or modify its relationship with us unexpectedly, our sellers’ ability to use our platform to receive orders
or payments could be adversely affected, which would increase costs, drive sellers away from our marketplaces, result in potential legal liability, and
harm our business. In addition, we and our third-party service providers may experience service outages from time to time that could adversely
impact payments made on our platform. Additionally, any unexpected termination or modification of those third-party services could lead to a lapse
in the effectiveness of certain fraud prevention and detection tools.
Our third-party  service  providers may increase the fees they charge us in the future,  which would increase our operating expenses. This
could, in turn, require us to increase the fees we charge to sellers and cause some sellers to reduce listings on our marketplaces or to leave our
platform altogether by closing their accounts.
Payments and other financial services are governed by complex and continuously evolving laws and regulations that are subject to change
and vary across different jurisdictions in the United States and globally. As a result, we are required to spend significant time and effort to determine
whether various licensing and registration laws relating to payments and other financial services we offer apply to us and to comply with applicable
laws and licensing and registration regulations. In addition, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or retain any necessary licenses
or registrations. Any failure or claim of failure on the part of the Company or its third-party service providers to comply with applicable laws and
regulations relating to payments or financial services could require us to expend significant resources, result in liabilities, limit or preclude our ability
to enter certain markets and harm our reputation. In addition, changes in payment regulations, or other financial regulation, including changes to the
credit  or  debit  card  interchange  rates  in  the  United  States  or  other  markets,  could  adversely  affect  payments  on  our  platform  and  make  our
payments systems less profitable.
Further, we are indirectly subject to payment card association operating rules and certification requirements pursuant to agreements with our
third-party payment processors. These rules and requirements, including the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard and rules governing
electronic funds transfers, are subject to change or reinterpretation, making it difficult for us to comply. Any failure to comply with these rules and
certification  requirements  could  impact  our  ability  to  meet  our  contractual  obligations  to  our  third-party  payment  processors  and  could  result  in
potential fines. In addition, changes in these rules and requirements, including any change in our designation by major payment card providers,
could require a change in our business operations and could result in limitations on or loss of our ability to accept payment cards or other forms of
payment,  any  of  which  could  negatively  impact  our  business.  Such  changes  could  also  increase  our  costs  of  compliance,  which  could  lead  to
increased fees for us or our sellers and adversely affect payments on our platform or usage of our payments services and Marketplace.
17

Table of Contents
Our payments system is susceptible to illegal uses, including money laundering, terrorist financing, fraud and payments to sanctioned parties.
If our compliance program and internal controls to limit such illegal activity are ineffective, government authorities could bring legal action against us
or otherwise suspend our ability to offer payment services in one or more markets.
We may be unable to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights and face ongoing allegations by third parties that we are
infringing their intellectual property rights.
We believe the protection of our intellectual property, including our trademarks, patents, copyrights, domain names, trade dress, and trade
secrets, is critical to our success. We seek to protect our intellectual property rights by relying on applicable laws and regulations in the United
States and internationally, as well as a variety of administrative procedures. We also rely on contractual restrictions to protect our proprietary rights
when offering or procuring products and services, including confidentiality and invention assignment agreements entered into with our employees
and contractors and confidentiality agreements with parties with whom we conduct business.
However,  effective  intellectual  property  protection  may  not  be  available  in  every  country  in  which  our  products  and  services  are  made
available,  and  contractual  arrangements  and  other  steps  we  have  taken  to  protect  our  intellectual  property  may  not  prevent  third  parties  from
infringing  or  misappropriating  our  intellectual  property  or  deter  independent  development  of  equivalent  or  superior  intellectual  property  rights  by
others. Trademark, copyright, patent, domain name, trade dress and trade secret protection is very expensive to maintain and may require litigation.
We must protect our intellectual property rights and other proprietary rights in an increasing number of jurisdictions, a process that is expensive and
time consuming and may not be successful in every jurisdiction. Also, we may not be able to discover or determine the extent of any unauthorized
use of our proprietary rights. We have licensed in the past, and expect to license in the future, certain of our proprietary rights, such as trademarks
or copyrighted material, to others. These licensees may take actions that diminish the value of our proprietary rights or harm our reputation. Any
failure to adequately protect or enforce our intellectual property rights, or significant costs incurred in doing so, could materially harm our business.
Additionally, we have repeatedly been sued for allegedly infringing other parties’ patents. We are a defendant in various patent suits and have
been notified of several other potential patent disputes.
As the number of patent owners and products in the software industry increases and the functionality of these products further overlap, and as
we acquire technology through acquisitions or licenses, litigation may be necessary to determine the validity and scope of the intellectual property
rights  of  others  and  we  may  become  increasingly  subject  to  patent  suits  and  other  infringement  claims,  including  copyright,  and  trademark
infringement claims. Such claims may be brought directly against us and/or against our customers whom we may indemnify either because we are
contractually obligated to do so or we choose to do so as a business matter. Patent claims, whether meritorious or not, are time-consuming and
costly  to  defend  and  resolve,  and  could  require  us  to  make  expensive  changes  in  our  methods  of  doing  business,  enter  into  costly  royalty  or
licensing  agreements,  make  substantial  payments  to  satisfy  adverse  judgments  or  settle  claims  or  proceedings,  or  cease  conducting  certain
operations, which would harm our business.
Failure to deal effectively with fraudulent activities on our platforms would increase our loss rate and harm our business, and could severely
diminish merchant and consumer confidence in and use of our services.
We face reputational and other risks with respect to fraudulent activities on our platforms and periodically receive complaints from buyers and
sellers  who  may  not  have  received  the  goods  that  they  had  contracted  to  purchase  or  payment  for  the  goods  that  a  buyer  had  contracted  to
purchase. In some European and Asian jurisdictions, buyers may also have the right to withdraw from a sale made by a professional seller within a
specified time period. While we can, in some cases, suspend the accounts of users who fail to fulfill their payment or delivery obligations to other
users,  we  do  not  have  the  ability  to  require  users  to  make  payment  or  deliver  goods,  or  otherwise  make  users  whole  other  than  through  our
protection  programs.  Although  we have  implemented  measures  to  detect  and  reduce  the  occurrence  of  fraudulent  activities,  combat  bad  buyer
experiences  and  increase  buyer  satisfaction,  including  evaluating  sellers  on  the  basis  of  their  identity  and  transaction  history  and  restricting  or
suspending their activity, there can be no assurance that these measures will be effective in combating fraudulent transactions or improving overall
satisfaction among sellers, buyers, and other participants. Additional measures to address fraud could negatively affect the attractiveness of our
services  to  buyers  or  sellers,  resulting  in  a  reduction  in  the  ability  to  attract  new  users  or  retain  current  users,  damage  to  our  reputation,  or  a
diminution in the value of our brand names.
18

Table of Contents
Our business is subject to online security risks, including security breaches and cyberattacks.
Our businesses involve the storage and transmission of users’ personal financial information. In addition, a significant number of our users
authorize us to bill their payment card accounts directly for all transaction and other fees charged by us or, in certain cases, third-party service
providers utilized in our payment services. An increasing number of websites, including those owned by several other large Internet and offline
companies, have disclosed breaches of their security, some of which have involved sophisticated and highly targeted attacks on portions of their
websites or infrastructure. Our information technology and infrastructure may be vulnerable to cyberattacks or security incidents and third parties
may be able to access our users’ proprietary information and payment card data that are stored on or accessible through our systems. Any security
breach at a company providing services to us or our users could have similar effects.
We may also need to expend significant additional resources to protect against security breaches or to redress problems caused by breaches.
Additionally, our insurance policies may not be adequate to reimburse us for losses caused by security breaches and we may not be able to fully
collect, if at all, under these insurance policies.
Systems failures and resulting interruptions in the availability of or degradation in the performance of our websites, applications, products or
services could harm our business.
Our systems may experience service interruptions or degradation due to hardware and software defects or malfunctions, computer denial-of-
service  and  other  cyberattacks,  human  error,  earthquakes,  hurricanes,  floods,  fires,  natural  disasters,  power  losses,  disruptions  in
telecommunications services, fraud, military or political conflicts, terrorist attacks, computer viruses, or other events. Our systems are also subject to
break-ins,  sabotage  and  intentional  acts  of  vandalism.  Some  of  our  systems  are  not  fully  redundant  and  our  disaster  recovery  planning  is  not
sufficient for all eventualities.
We  have  experienced  and  will  likely  continue  to  experience  system  failures,  denial-of-service  attacks,  human  error  and  other  events  or
conditions from time to time that interrupt the availability or reduce the speed or functionality of our websites and mobile applications, including our
payments services. These events have resulted and likely will result in loss of revenue. A prolonged interruption in the availability or reduction in the
speed or other functionality of our websites and mobile applications or payments services could materially harm our business. Frequent or persistent
interruptions  in  our  services  could  cause  current  or  potential  users  to  believe  that  our  systems  are  unreliable,  leading  them  to  switch  to  our
competitors or to avoid our sites, and could permanently harm our reputation and brands. Moreover, to the extent that any system failure or similar
event results in damages to our customers or their businesses, these customers could seek significant compensation from us for their losses and
those claims, even if unsuccessful, would likely be time-consuming and costly for us to address. We also rely on facilities, components and services
supplied  by  third  parties  and  our  business  may  be  materially  adversely  affected  to  the  extent  these  components  or  services  do  not  meet  our
expectations or these third parties cease to provide the services or facilities. In particular, a decision by any of our third party hosting providers to
close a facility that we use could cause system interruptions and delays, result in loss of critical data and cause lengthy interruptions in our services.
We do not carry business interruption insurance sufficient to compensate us for losses that may result from interruptions in our service as a result of
systems failures and similar events.
Our success largely depends on key employees. Because competition for our key employees is intense, we may not be able to attract, retain,
and develop the highly skilled employees we need to support our business. The loss of senior management or other key employees could harm our
business.
Our future performance depends substantially on the continued services of our senior management and other key employees, including highly
skilled engineers and product developers, and our ability to attract, retain, and motivate them. Competition for highly skilled individuals is intense,
especially in the Silicon Valley where our corporate headquarters are located, and we may be unable to successfully attract, integrate or retain
sufficiently  qualified  employees.  In  making  employment  decisions,  particularly  in  the  Internet  and  high-technology  industries,  employees  often
consider the value of their total compensation, including share-based awards such as restricted stock units, that they could receive in connection
with their employment. In addition, our employee hiring and retention also depend on our ability to build and maintain a diverse, welcoming and
inclusive workplace. If our share-based or other compensation programs cease to be viewed as competitive, including due to fluctuations in our
stock price, or our workplace is not viewed as welcoming and inclusive, our ability to attract, retain, and motivate
19

Table of Contents
employees would be weakened, which could harm our business. We do not have long-term employment agreements with any of our key employees
and do not maintain any “key person” life insurance policies. The loss of the services of any of our senior management or other key employees, or
our inability to attract highly qualified senior management and other key employees, could harm our business.
Problems with or price increases by third parties who provide services to us or to our sellers could harm our business.
A  number  of  third  parties  provide  services  to  us  or  to  our  sellers.  Such  services  include  seller  tools  that  automate  and  manage  listings,
merchant  tools  that  manage  listings  and interface  with  inventory  management  software,  storefronts  that  help  our  sellers  list  items  and shipping
providers that deliver goods sold on our platform, managed payments intermediation, among others. Financial or regulatory issues, labor issues
(e.g., strikes, lockouts, worker shortages or work stoppages), or other problems that prevent these companies from providing services to us or our
sellers could harm our business.
Price increases by, or service terminations, disruptions or interruptions at, companies that provide services to us and our sellers and clients
could also reduce the number of listings on our platforms or make it more difficult for our sellers to complete transactions, thereby harming our
business. While we continue to work with global carriers to offer our sellers a variety of shipping options and to enhance their shipping experience,
postal rate increases may reduce the competitiveness of certain sellers’ offerings, and postal service changes could require certain sellers to utilize
alternatives which could be more expensive or inconvenient, which could in turn decrease the number of transactions on our sites, thereby harming
our business.
We  have  outsourced  certain  functions  to  third-party  providers,  including  some  customer  support,  managed  payments  and  product
development functions, which are critical to our operations. If our service providers do not perform satisfactorily, our operations could be disrupted,
which could result in user dissatisfaction and could harm our business.
There can be no assurance that third parties who provide services directly to us or our sellers will continue to do so on acceptable terms, or at
all. If any third parties were to stop providing services to us or our sellers on acceptable terms, including as a result of bankruptcy, we may be
unable to procure alternatives from other third parties in a timely and efficient manner and on acceptable terms, or at all.
Regulatory and Legal Risks
Our business is subject to extensive government regulation and oversight, which could adversely impact our business.
We  are  subject  to  laws  and  regulations  affecting  our  domestic  and  international  operations  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  consumer
protection, data privacy requirements, intellectual property ownership and infringement, prohibited items and stolen goods, tax, antitrust and anti-
competition,  export  requirements,  anti-corruption,  labor,  advertising,  digital  content,  real  estate,  payments  and  financial  services,  billing,
ecommerce/marketplace  liability,  promotions,  quality  of  services,  telecommunications,  mobile  communications  and  media,  environmental,  and
health  and  safety  regulations,  as  well  as  laws  and  regulations  intended  to  combat  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  terrorist  activities.  In
addition, we are, or may become, subject to further regulation in some of the above-mentioned areas or new areas as a result of the continued
development and expansion of our payments capabilities. Further, certain government agencies seek to hold us liable for third party sales on our
Marketplace platforms to the extent such sales implicate laws and regulations enforced by those agencies, including specifically the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Drug Enforcement Agency.
Compliance with these laws, regulations, and similar requirements may be onerous and expensive, and variances and inconsistencies from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction may further increase the cost of compliance and doing business. Any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of
changes in these laws and regulations or in their interpretation, could individually or in the aggregate make our products and services less attractive
to our customers, delay the introduction of new products or services in one or more regions, or cause us to change or limit our business practices.
We have implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance
that our customers, employees, contractors, or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or our policies and procedures. 
20

Table of Contents
Regulation in the areas of privacy and protection of user data could harm our business.
We are subject to laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security, and transfer of personally identifiable information about our users
around  the  world.  Much  of  the  personal  information  that  we  collect,  especially  financial  information,  is  regulated  by  multiple  laws.  User  data
protection  laws  may  be  interpreted  and  applied  inconsistently  from  country  to  country.  In  many  cases,  these  laws  apply  not  only  to  third-party
transactions, but also to transfers of information between or among ourselves, our subsidiaries, and other parties with which we have commercial
relations. These laws continue to develop in ways we cannot predict and that may harm our business.
Regulatory  scrutiny  of  privacy,  user  data protection,  use of  data  and data  collection  is increasing  on a  global basis.  We  are  subject  to  a
number of privacy and similar laws and regulations in the countries in which we operate and these laws and regulations will likely continue to evolve
over time, both through regulatory and legislative action and judicial decisions. In addition, compliance with these laws may restrict our ability to
provide  services  to  our  customers  that  they  may  find  to  be  valuable.  For  example,  the  General  Data  Protection  Regulation  (“GDPR”)  became
effective  in  May  2018.  The  GDPR,  which  applies  to  all  of  our  activities  conducted  from  an  establishment  in  the  European  Union  or  related  to
products and services offered in the European Union, imposes a range of new compliance obligations regarding the handling of personal data. The
GDPR imposes significant new obligations and compliance with these obligations depends in part on how particular regulators interpret and apply
them. If we fail to comply with the GDPR, or if regulators assert we have failed to comply with the GDPR, it may lead to regulatory enforcement
actions,  which  can  result  in  monetary  penalties  of  up  to  4%  of  worldwide  revenue,  private  lawsuits,  or  reputational  damage.  In  June  2021,  the
European Commission finalized recommendations in relation to cross border data transfers and published new versions of the Standard Contractual
Clauses.  The  new  requirements  will  require  us  to  incur  costs  and  expenses  in  order  to  comply  and  may  impact  the  transfer  of  personal  data
throughout our organization and to third parties.
In the U.S., California has adopted the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (“CCPA”), which became effective January 1, 2020 and which
provides  a  new private  right  of  action  for  data  breaches  and  requires  companies  that  process  information  on  California  residents  to  make  new
disclosures to consumers about their data collection, use and sharing practices and allow consumers to opt out of certain data sharing with third
parties. Further, the California Privacy Rights Act, which was passed in November 2020 and is fully effective in January 2023, significantly modifies
the CCPA. These modifications will require us to incur additional costs and expenses in our effort to comply. In addition to the CCPA, several other
U.S.  states  have  adopted  or  are  considering  adopting  laws  and  regulations  imposing  obligations  regarding  the  handling  of  personal  data.
Compliance with the GDPR, the CCPA, and other current and future applicable international and U.S. privacy, cybersecurity and related laws can be
costly  and  time-consuming.  Complying  with  these  varying  national  and  international  requirements  could  cause  us  to  incur  substantial  costs  or
require us to change our business practices in a manner adverse to our business and violations of privacy-related laws can result in significant
penalties.
A determination that there have been violations of laws relating to our practices under communications-based laws could also expose us to
significant damage awards, fines and other penalties that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business. In particular, because
of the enormous number of texts, emails and other communications we send to our users, communications laws that provide a specified monetary
damage award or fine for each violation (such as those described below) could result in particularly large awards or fines.
For example, the Federal Communications Commission amended certain of its regulations under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, or
TCPA, in 2012 and 2013 in a manner that could increase our exposure to liability for certain types of telephonic communication with customers,
including but not limited to text messages to mobile phones. Under the TCPA, plaintiffs may seek actual monetary loss or statutory damages of $500
per violation, whichever is greater, and courts may treble the damage award for willful or knowing violations. We are regularly subject to class-action
lawsuits, as well as individual lawsuits, containing allegations that our businesses violated the TCPA. These lawsuits, and other private lawsuits not
currently alleged as class actions, seek damages (including statutory damages) and injunctive relief, among other remedies. Given the enormous
number of communications we send to our users, a determination that there have been violations of the TCPA or other communications-based
statutes could expose us to significant damage awards that could, individually or in the aggregate, materially harm our business.
We  post  on  our  websites  our  privacy  policies  and  practices  concerning  the  collection,  use  and  disclosure  of  user  data.  Any  failure,  or
perceived  failure,  by  us  to  comply  with  our  posted  privacy  policies  or  with  any  regulatory  requirements  or  orders  or  other  federal,  state  or
international privacy or consumer protection-related laws and
21

Table of Contents
regulations, including the GDPR and the CCPA, could result in proceedings or actions against us by governmental entities or others (e.g., class
action privacy litigation), subject us to significant penalties and negative publicity, require us to change our business practices, increase our costs
and adversely affect our business. Data collection, privacy and security have become the subject of increasing public concern. If Internet and mobile
users were to reduce their use of our websites, mobile platforms, products, and services as a result of these concerns, or not consent to the use of
their  personal  information  for  certain  marketing  or  advertising  purposes,  our  business  could  be  harmed.  We  also  have  experienced  security
breaches and likely will in the future, which themselves may result in a violation of these laws.
Other laws and regulations could harm our business.
It  is  not  always  clear  how  laws  and  regulations  governing  matters  relevant  to  our  business,  such  as  property  ownership,  copyrights,
trademarks, and other intellectual property issues, parallel imports and distribution controls, taxation, libel and defamation, and obscenity apply to
our businesses. Many of these laws were adopted prior to the advent of the Internet, mobile, and related technologies and, as a result, do not
contemplate or address the unique issues of the Internet and related technologies. Many of these laws, including some of those that do reference
the Internet are subject to interpretation by the courts on an ongoing basis and the resulting uncertainty in the scope and application of these laws
and  regulations  increases  the  risk  that  we  will  be  subject  to  private  claims  and  governmental  actions  alleging  violations  of  those  laws  and
regulations.
As our activities, the products and services we offer, our investment in other companies, and our geographical scope continue to expand,
regulatory agencies or courts may claim or hold that we or our users are subject to additional requirements (including licensure) or prohibited from
conducting  our  business  in  their  jurisdiction,  either  generally  or  with  respect  to  certain  actions.  For  example,  we  have  the  ability  to  acquire
investments in other companies (such as Adevinta, Adyen, KakaoBank and Gmarket, formerly known as Apollo Korea) that raise the potential for us
to be deemed an investment company as defined by the Investment Company Act of 1940 (the “Investment Company Act”). While we intend to
conduct our operations such that we will not be deemed an investment company, such a determination would require us to initiate burdensome
compliance requirements and comply with restrictions imposed by the Investment Company Act that would limit our activities, including limitations on
our capital structure and our ability to transact with affiliates, which would have an adverse effect on our financial condition. Further, financial and
political events have increased the level of regulatory scrutiny on large companies, and regulatory agencies may view matters or interpret laws and
regulations differently than they have in the past and in a manner adverse to our businesses.
Numerous U.S. states and foreign jurisdictions, including the State of California, have regulations regarding “auctions” and the handling of
property by “secondhand dealers” or “pawnbrokers.” Several states and some foreign jurisdictions have attempted to impose such regulations upon
us or our users, and others may attempt to do so in the future. Attempted enforcement of these laws against some of our users appears to be
increasing and we could be required to change the way we or our users do business in ways that increase costs or reduce revenues, such as
forcing us to prohibit listings of certain items or restrict certain listing formats in some locations. We could also be subject to fines or other penalties,
and any of these outcomes could harm our business.
As we expand and localize our international activities, we are increasingly becoming obligated to comply with the laws of the countries or
markets in which we operate. In addition, because our services are accessible worldwide and we facilitate sales of goods and provide services to
users worldwide, one or more jurisdictions may claim that we or our users are required to comply with their laws based on the location of our servers
or one or more of our users, or the location of the product or service being sold or provided in an ecommerce transaction. Laws regulating Internet,
mobile and ecommerce technologies outside of the United States are generally less favorable to us than those in the United States. Compliance
may be more costly or may require us to change our business practices or restrict our service offerings, and the imposition of any regulations on us
or our users may harm our business. In addition, we may be subject to multiple overlapping legal or regulatory regimes that impose conflicting
requirements on us (e.g., in cross-border trade). Our alleged failure to comply with foreign laws could subject us to penalties ranging from criminal
prosecution to significant fines to bans on our services, in addition to the significant costs we may incur in defending against such actions.
We are regularly subject to general litigation, regulatory disputes, and government inquiries.
We  are  regularly  subject  to  claims,  lawsuits  (including  class  actions  and  individual  lawsuits),  government  investigations,  and  other
proceedings involving competition and antitrust, intellectual property, privacy, consumer
22

Table of Contents
protection, accessibility claims, securities, tax, labor and employment, commercial disputes, content generated by our users, services and other
matters.  The number  and significance  of these  disputes  and inquiries  have increased  as our Company  has grown  larger,  our  businesses  have
expanded in scope and geographic reach, and our products and services have increased in complexity. As the global regulatory and legal landscape
evolves, we may also become subject to product liability claims when products sold by third parties using our platforms result in personal injury, or
illness, or death or injury to property.
The  outcome  and  impact  of  such  claims,  lawsuits,  government  investigations,  and  other  proceedings  cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty.
Regardless  of  the  outcome,  such  investigations  and  proceedings  can  have  an  adverse  impact  on  us  because  of  legal  costs,  diversion  of
management  resources,  and  other  factors.  Determining  reserves  for  our  pending  litigation  and  other  proceedings  is  a  complex,  fact-intensive
process that is subject to judgment calls. It is possible that a resolution of one or more such proceedings could require us to make substantial
payments to satisfy judgments, fines or penalties or to settle claims or proceedings, any of which could harm our business. These proceedings could
also result in reputational harm, criminal sanctions, consent decrees, or orders preventing us from offering certain products, or services, or requiring
a change in our business practices in costly ways, or requiring development of non-infringing or otherwise altered products or technologies. Any of
these consequences could harm our business.
We are subject to regulatory activity and antitrust litigation under competition laws that could adversely impact our business.
We are subject to scrutiny by various government agencies under U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, including antitrust and competition
laws.  Some  jurisdictions  also  provide  private  rights  of  action  for  competitors  or  consumers  to  assert  claims  of  anti-competitive  conduct.  Other
companies and government agencies have in the past and may in the future allege that our actions violate the antitrust or competition laws of the
United  States,  individual  states,  the  European  Union  or  other  countries,  or  otherwise  constitute  unfair  competition.  An  increasing  number  of
governments are regulating competition law activities, including increased scrutiny in large markets such as China. Our business partnerships or
agreements  or  arrangements  with  customers  or  other  companies  could  give  rise  to  regulatory  action  or  antitrust  litigation.  Some  regulators,
particularly those outside of the United States, may perceive our business to be used so broadly that otherwise uncontroversial business practices
could be deemed anticompetitive. Certain competition authorities have conducted market studies of our industries. Such claims and investigations,
even if without foundation, may be very expensive to defend, involve negative publicity and substantial diversion of management time and effort and
could result in significant judgments against us or require us to change our business practices.
The listing or sale by our users of certain items, including items that allegedly infringe the intellectual property rights of rights owners, including
pirated or counterfeit items, illegal items or items used in an illegal manner may harm our business.
The listing  or  sale by  our  users  of  unlawful,  counterfeit  or  stolen  goods or  unlawful services,  or  sale of  goods  or services  in  an unlawful
manner, has resulted and may continue to result in allegations of civil or criminal liability for unlawful activities against us (including the employees
and  directors  of  our  various  entities)  involving  activities  carried  out  by  users  through  our  services.  In  a  number  of  circumstances,  third  parties,
including government regulators and law enforcement officials, have alleged that our services aid and abet violations of certain laws, including laws
regarding the sale of counterfeit items, laws restricting or prohibiting the transferability (and by extension, the resale) of digital goods (e.g., books,
music and software), the fencing of stolen goods, selective distribution channel laws, customs laws, distance selling laws, and the sale of items
outside of the United States that are regulated by U.S. export controls.
In addition, allegations of infringement of intellectual property rights, including but not limited to counterfeit items, have resulted in threatened
and actual litigation from time to time by rights owners. These and similar suits may also force us to modify our business practices in a manner that
increases costs, lowers revenue, makes our websites and mobile platforms  less convenient to customers,  and requires us to spend substantial
resources to take additional protective measures or discontinue certain service offerings in order to combat these practices. In addition, we have
received significant media attention relating to the listing or sale of illegal or counterfeit goods, which could damage our reputation, diminish the
value of our brand names, and make users reluctant to use our products and services.
23

Table of Contents
Recently, we received requests for information from government agencies related to our potential liability for products sold by sellers on our
Marketplace platforms. We have responded to inquiries from the U.S. Department of Justice regarding products sold on our Marketplace platforms
alleged to violate certain laws and regulations, including regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency and, separately, regulations of the Drug
Enforcement Agency. If we are found to be liable for such activities on our Marketplace, we could be subject to monetary damages, changes in our
business practices, or other remedies that could have a material adverse impact on our business.
We are subject to risks associated with information disseminated through our services.
Online services companies may be subject to claims relating to information disseminated through their services, including claims alleging
defamation, libel, breach of contract, invasion of privacy, negligence, copyright or trademark infringement, among other things. The laws relating to
the liability of online services companies for information disseminated through their services are subject to frequent challenges both in the United
States and foreign jurisdictions. Any liabilities incurred as a result of these matters could require us to incur additional costs and harm our reputation
and our business.
Our potential liability to third parties for the user-provided content on our sites, particularly in jurisdictions outside the United States where laws
governing Internet transactions are unsettled, may increase. If we become liable for information provided by our users and carried on our service in
any jurisdiction in which we operate, we could be directly harmed and we may be forced to implement new measures to reduce our exposure to this
liability, including expending substantial resources or discontinuing certain service offerings, which could harm our business.
Interest Rate and Indebtedness Risks
Fluctuations in interest rates, and changes in regulatory guidance related to such interest rates, could adversely impact our financial results.
Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of
our  fixed-rate  investment  securities  may  be  adversely  impacted  due  to  a  rise  in  interest  rates.  In  addition,  relatively  low  interest  rates  limit  our
investment income.
We have substantial indebtedness, and we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, and we may not generate sufficient
cash flow from our business to service our indebtedness. Failure to comply with the terms of our indebtedness could result in the acceleration of our
indebtedness, which could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and liquidity.
We have a substantial  amount  of  outstanding  indebtedness  and we may  incur substantial  additional indebtedness  in the  future,  including
under  our  commercial  paper  program  and  revolving  credit  facility  or  through  public  or  private  offerings  of  debt  securities.  Our  outstanding
indebtedness and any additional indebtedness we incur may have significant consequences, including, without limitation, any of the following:
    
•
requiring us to use a significant portion of our cash flow from operations and other available cash to service our indebtedness, thereby
reducing the amount of cash available for other purposes, including capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, and acquisitions;
•
our  indebtedness  and  leverage  may  increase  our  vulnerability  to  downturns  in  our  business,  to  competitive  pressures,  and  to  adverse
changes in general economic and industry conditions;
•
adverse changes in the ratings assigned to our debt securities by credit rating agencies will likely increase our borrowing costs;
•
our ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, share repurchases, dividends or other general
corporate and other purposes may be limited; and
•
our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and our industry may be limited.
24

Table of Contents
Tax Risks
Our business and our sellers and buyers may be subject to evolving sales and other tax regimes in various jurisdictions, which may harm our
business.
The application of indirect taxes such as sales and use tax, value-added tax (“VAT”), goods and services tax (“GST”) (including the “digital
services tax”), business tax, withholding tax and gross receipt tax, and tax information reporting obligations to businesses like ours and to our sellers
and buyers is a complex and evolving issue. Many of the fundamental statutes and regulations that impose these taxes were established before the
adoption and growth of the Internet and ecommerce. Significant judgment is required to evaluate applicable tax obligations and as a result amounts
recorded are estimates and are subject to adjustments. In many cases, the ultimate tax determination is uncertain because it is not clear when and
how new and existing statutes might apply to our business or to our sellers’ businesses. In some cases it may be difficult or impossible for us to
validate information provided to us by our sellers on which we must rely to ascertain any obligations that may apply to us related to our sellers’
businesses,  given  the  intricate  nature  of  these  regulations  as  they  apply  to  particular  products  or  services  and  that  many  of  the  products  and
services  sold  in  our  marketplace  are  unique  or  handmade.  If  we  are  found  to  be  deficient  in  how  we  have  addressed  our  tax  obligations,  our
business could be adversely impacted.
From time to time, some taxing authorities in the United States have notified us that they believe we owe them certain taxes imposed on our
services. These notifications have not resulted in any significant tax liabilities to date, but there is a risk that some jurisdiction may be successful in
the  future,  which  would  harm  our  business.  While  we  attempt  to  comply  in  those  jurisdictions  where  it  is  clear  that  a  tax  is  due,  some  of  our
subsidiaries have, from time to time, received claims relating to the applicability of indirect taxes to our fees. Additionally, we pay input VAT on
applicable taxable purchases within the various countries in which we operate. In most cases, we are entitled to reclaim this input VAT from the
various countries. However, because of our unique business model, the application of the laws and rules that allow such reclamation is sometimes
uncertain. A successful assertion by one or more countries that we are not entitled to reclaim VAT could harm our business.
Various  jurisdictions  are  seeking  to,  or  have  recently  imposed  additional  reporting,  record-keeping,  indirect  tax  collection  and  remittance
obligations,  or  revenue-based  taxes  on  businesses  like  ours  that  facilitate  online  commerce.  If  requirements  like  these  become  applicable  in
additional jurisdictions, our business, collectively with eBay sellers’ businesses, could be harmed. For example, taxing authorities in the U.S. and in
other countries have targeted e-commerce platforms as a means to calculate, collect, and remit indirect taxes for transactions taking place over the
internet, and have enacted laws and others are considering similar legislation. With two additional states adopting Internet sales tax laws in 2021,
some buyers across the U.S. encountered sales tax for the first time on eBay. To date, 45 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have
enacted Internet sales tax legislation. Additionally, a digital service tax (DST) was implemented in Spain in 2021, and we are complying with the
legislation. Our business will also be required to increase payments reporting requirements for US sellers as a result of federal legislation. Starting
on January 1, 2022, all businesses that process payments are required to issue a Form 1099-K for all sellers who receive $600 or more in sales, a
decrease from the previous reporting threshold of $20,000 and 200 transactions. Form 1099-Ks for the new thresholds will be issued in January
2023. Tax collection responsibility and the additional costs associated with complex sales and use tax collection, remittance and audit requirements,
or reporting, could create additional burdens for buyers and sellers on our websites and mobile platforms.
These legislative changes or new legislation could adversely affect our business if the requirement of tax to be charged on items sold on our
marketplaces causes our marketplaces to be less attractive to current and prospective buyers, which could materially impact our business and eBay
sellers’ businesses. This legislation could also require us or our sellers to incur substantial costs in order to comply, including costs associated with
tax calculation, collection, remittance, and audit requirements, which could make selling on our marketplaces less attractive.
25

Table of Contents
We may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities.
The determination of our worldwide provision for income taxes and other tax liabilities requires estimation and significant judgment, and there
can be from time to time transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Like many other multinational corporations,
we are subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign jurisdictions and have structured our operations to reduce our effective tax rate. Our determination
of our tax liability is always subject to audit and review by applicable domestic and foreign tax authorities, and we are currently undergoing a number
of  investigations,  audits  and  reviews  by  taxing  authorities  throughout  the  world,  including  with  respect  to  our  business  structure.  Any  adverse
outcome of any such audit or review could harm our business, and the ultimate tax outcome may differ from the amounts recorded in our financial
statements and may materially affect our financial results in the period or periods for which such determination is made. While we have established
reserves  based  on  assumptions  and  estimates  that  we  believe  are  reasonable  to  cover  such  eventualities,  these  reserves  may  prove  to  be
insufficient.
In addition, our future income taxes could be adversely affected by a shift in our jurisdictional earning mix, by changes in the valuation of our
deferred tax assets and liabilities, as a result of gains on our foreign exchange risk management program, or changes in tax laws, regulations, or
accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items.
Transactional Risks
Acquisitions, dispositions, joint ventures, strategic partnerships and strategic investments could result in operating difficulties and could harm
our business or impact our financial results.
We  have  acquired  a  significant  number  of  businesses  of  varying  size  and  scope,  technologies,  services,  and  products,  and  we  maintain
investments in certain businesses. We have also disposed of significant businesses. We expect to continue to evaluate and consider a wide array of
potential  strategic  transactions  as  part  of  our  overall  business  strategy,  including  business  combinations,  acquisitions,  and  dispositions  of
businesses, technologies, services, products, and other assets, as well as strategic investments and joint ventures.
These transactions may involve significant challenges and risks, including:
•
the  potential  loss  of  key  customers,  merchants,  vendors  and  other  key  business  partners  of  the  companies  we  acquire,  or  dispose  of,
following and continuing after announcement of our transaction plans;
•
declining employee morale and retention issues affecting employees of companies that we acquire or dispose of, which may result from
changes in compensation, or changes in management, reporting relationships, future prospects or the direction of the acquired or disposed
business;
•
difficulty making new and strategic hires of new employees;
•
diversion  of management  time  and a shift of focus  from operating  the businesses to the transaction,  and in the case of an acquisition,
integration and administration;
•
the need to provide transition services to a disposed of company, which may result in the diversion of resources and focus;
•
the need to integrate the operations, systems (including accounting, management, information, human resource and other administrative
systems), technologies, products and personnel of each acquired company, which is an inherently risky and potentially lengthy and costly
process;
•
the  inefficiencies  and  lack  of  control  that  may  result  if  such  integration  is  delayed  or  not  implemented,  and  unforeseen  difficulties  and
expenditures that may arise as a result;
•
the need to implement  or improve  controls,  procedures  and policies  appropriate  for  a larger  public company  at  companies that  prior  to
acquisition may have lacked such controls, procedures and policies or whose controls, procedures and policies did not meet applicable
legal and other standards;
•
risks associated with our expansion into new international markets;
•
derivative lawsuits resulting from the acquisition or disposition;
•
liability for activities of the acquired or disposed of company before the transaction, including intellectual property and other litigation claims
or disputes, violations of laws, rules and regulations, commercial disputes, tax liabilities and other known and unknown liabilities and, in the
case of dispositions, liabilities to the acquirors of those businesses under contractual provisions such as representations, warranties and
indemnities;
•
the potential loss of key employees following the transaction;
26

Table of Contents
•
the acquisition of new customer and employee personal information by us or a third party acquiring assets or businesses from us, which in
and of itself may require regulatory approval and or additional controls, policies and procedures and subject us to additional exposure;
•
any fluctuations in share prices, financial results and fluctuations in exchange rates, and our ability to sell our shares in any company we
have invested in; and
•
our dependence on the acquired business’ accounting, financial reporting, operating metrics and similar systems, controls and processes
and the risk that errors or irregularities in those systems, controls and processes will lead to errors in our consolidated financial statements
or make it more difficult to manage the acquired business.
    
We have made certain investments, including through joint ventures, in which we have a minority equity interest and/or lack management and
operational control. The controlling joint venture partner in a joint venture may have business interests, strategies, or goals that are inconsistent with
ours, and business decisions or other actions or omissions of the controlling joint venture partner or the joint venture company may result in harm to
our reputation or adversely affect the value of our investment in the joint venture. Any circumstances, which may be out of our control, that adversely
affect the value of our investments, or cost resulting from regulatory action or lawsuits in connection with our investments, could harm our business
or negatively impact our financial results.
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that entitles us to acquire a fixed number of
shares of Adyen’s common stock subject to certain milestones being met. This warrant is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic
815, Derivatives and Hedging. Changes in Adyen’s common stock price and equity volatility has had, and may continue to have in the future, a
significant impact on the value of this warrant. We report this warrant on a quarterly basis at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets, and
changes in the fair value of this warrant are recognized in our consolidated statement of income. Fluctuations in Adyen’s common stock price and
prevailing foreign exchange rate or other changes in assumptions could result in material changes in the fair value that we report in our consolidated
balance sheets and our consolidated statement of income, which could have a material impact on our financial results.
Upon closing of the transaction to transfer the Classifieds business, we received approximately 540 million Adevinta shares, a portion of which
was later sold to Permira. Fluctuations in Adevinta’s share price, financial results and fluctuations in exchange rates could result in material changes
in our consolidated balance sheet and our consolidated statement of income. In addition, our ability to sell our Adevinta shares in the future will be
subject to market conditions and other factors which could impact the value we are able to realize from any such sales.
We could incur significant liability if the Distribution is determined to be a taxable transaction.
We have received an opinion from outside tax counsel to the effect that our distribution of 100% of the outstanding common stock of PayPal
to our stockholders on July 17, 2015 (the “Distribution”) qualifies as a transaction that is described in Sections 355 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal
Revenue Code. The opinion relies on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from PayPal and us regarding the past and
future conduct of the companies’ respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are
incorrect or not satisfied, our stockholders and we may not be able to rely on the opinion of tax counsel and could be subject to significant tax
liabilities.  Notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  tax  counsel  we  have  received,  the  IRS  could  determine  on  audit  that  the  Distribution  is  taxable  if  it
determines that any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are not correct or have been violated or if it disagrees with the
conclusions in the opinion. If the Distribution is determined to be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes, our stockholders that are subject to
U.S. federal income tax and we could incur significant U.S. federal income tax liabilities.
We may be exposed to claims and liabilities as a result of the Distribution.
We  entered  into  a  separation  and  distribution  agreement  and  various  other  agreements  with  PayPal  to  govern  the  Distribution  and  the
relationship of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us
and PayPal. The indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us. In addition, our indemnity
obligations to PayPal may be significant and these risks could negatively affect our results of operations and financial condition.
27

Table of Contents
ITEM 1B: UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not applicable.
ITEM 2: PROPERTIES    
We  own  and  lease  various  properties  in  the  U.S.  and  23  other  countries  around  the  world.  We  use  the  properties  for  executive  and
administrative offices, data centers, product development offices and customer service offices. Our headquarters are located in San Jose, California
and occupies approximately 0.5 million square feet. Our owned data centers are solely located in Utah. The following table presents the aggregate
square footage of our owned and leased properties for our continuing operations as of December 31, 2021 (in millions):
United States
Other Countries
Total
Owned facilities
1.3 
— 
1.3 
Leased facilities
0.8 
1.0 
1.8 
Total facilities
2.1 
1.0 
3.1 
From time to time we consider various alternatives related to our long-term facilities needs. While we believe that our existing facilities are
adequate to meet our immediate needs, it may become necessary to develop and improve land that we own or lease or acquire additional or
alternative space to accommodate any future growth.
ITEM 3: LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
This information is set forth under “Note 12 — Commitments and Contingencies – Litigation and Other Legal Matters” to the consolidated
financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 4: MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
28

Table of Contents
PART II
ITEM 5: MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES        
Common Stock
Our  common  stock  has  been  traded  on  The  Nasdaq  Global  Select  Market  under  the  symbol  “EBAY”  since  September  24,  1998.  As  of
February 21, 2022, there were approximately 3,393 holders of record of our common stock, although we believe that there are a significantly larger
number of beneficial owners of our common stock.
Dividend Policy
The company paid a total of $466 million and $447 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31,
2020, respectively. In February 2022, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.22 per share of common stock to be paid on March 18, 2022 to
stockholders of record as of March 10, 2022. The timing, declaration, amount and payment of any future cash dividends are at the discretion of the
Board of Directors and will depend on many factors, including our available cash, working capital, financial condition, results of operations, capital
requirements, covenants in our credit agreement, applicable law and other business considerations that our Board of Directors considers relevant.
Performance Measurement Comparison
The graph below shows the cumulative total stockholder return of an investment of $100 (and the reinvestment of any dividends thereafter) on
December 31, 2016 (the last trading day for the year ended December 31, 2016) in (i) our common stock, (ii) the Nasdaq Composite Index, (iii) the
S&P 500 Index and (iv) the S&P 500 Information Technology Index.
Our stock price performance shown in the graph below is not indicative of future stock price performance. The graph and related information
shall not be deemed “soliciting material” or be deemed to be “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be incorporated by reference into any
past or future filing with the SEC, except to the extent that such filing specifically states that such graph and related information are incorporated by
reference into such filing.
29

Table of Contents
Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
The following table presents stock repurchase activity during the three months ended December 31, 2021:
Period Ended
Total Number of Shares
Purchased
Average Price Paid
per Share 
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
as Part of Publicly
Announced
Programs
Maximum Dollar Value
that May Yet be
Purchased Under the
Programs 
October 31, 2021
Open market purchases
6,703,900 
$
74.58 
6,703,900 
$
4,491,176,019 
Accelerated share repurchase
29,346,774 
$
— 
29,346,774 
$
1,991,176,019 
November 30, 2021
Open market purchases
— 
$
— 
— 
$
1,991,176,019 
December 31, 2021
Accelerated share repurchase
3,326,883 
$
— 
3,326,883 
$
1,991,176,019 
39,377,557 
39,377,557 
(1)
In  October  2021,  we  entered  into  accelerated  share  repurchase  agreements  (the  “2021  ASR  Agreements”)  with  two  financial  institutions  (each,  a  “2021  ASR
Counterparty”), as part of our share repurchase program. Under the 2021 ASR Agreements, we paid an aggregate amount of $2.5 billion to the 2021 ASR Counterparties
and received  an initial delivery of approximately  29.3  million shares  of our common stock.  In December 2021,  the 2021  ASR Agreement  with one of the  2021 ASR
Counterparties settled and resulted in a delivery of approximately 3.4 million additional shares of our common stock. In January 2022, the 2021 ASR Agreement with the
remaining 2021 ASR Counterparty settled and resulted in a delivery of approximately 3.3 million additional shares. In total under the 2021 ASR Repurchase Agreements,
approximately 36.0 million shares were repurchased at an average price per share of $69.43.
(2)
In  January  2020  our  Board  authorized  an  additional  $5  billion  stock  repurchase  program,  in  February  2021  our  Board  authorized  an  additional  $4.0  billion  stock
repurchase program and in August 2021 our Board authorized an additional $3.0 billion stock repurchase program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration
from the date of authorization. In February 2022 our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase program.
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and, subject to market conditions
and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding share count. Any share repurchases under our
stock  repurchase  programs may be  made  through  open  market  transactions,  block  trades,  privately negotiated  transactions  (including accelerated  share  repurchase
transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
During  the  three  months  ended  December  31,  2021,  we  (i) entered  into  the  2021  ASR  Agreements  and  paid  an  aggregate  amount  of  $2.5  billion  to  the  2021  ASR
Counterparties and (ii) additionally repurchased approximately $500 million of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. As of December 31, 2021, a total
of approximately $2.0 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase program.
We expect, subject to market conditions and other uncertainties, to continue making opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock. However, our
stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of
factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
(3)
Excludes broker commissions.
ITEM 6: [RESERVED]
(3)
(2)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
30

Table of Contents
ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to
future  business,  future  results  of  operations  or  financial  condition,  including  with  respect  to  the  ongoing  effects  of  COVID-19,  new  or  planned
features  or  services,  or  management  strategies).  You  can  identify  these  forward-looking  statements  by  words  such  as  “may,”  “will,”  “would,”
“should,”  “could,”  “expect,”  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “estimate,”  “intend,”  “plan”  and  other  similar  expressions.  These  forward-looking  statements
involve  risks  and  uncertainties  that  could  cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied  in  our  forward-looking
statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as
well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with
the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-looking statements after the
date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. You should read the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report. This section of this
Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-
to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form 10-K, and can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December
31, 2020.
OVERVIEW
 
Business
eBay Inc., is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace platforms. Founded in 1995 in San Jose, California, eBay is one of
the world’s largest and most vibrant marketplaces for discovering great value and unique selection. Collectively, we connect millions of buyers and
sellers around the world, empowering people and creating opportunity. Our technologies and services are designed to provide buyers choice and a
breadth of relevant inventory and to enable sellers worldwide to organize and offer their inventory for sale, virtually anytime and anywhere. In 2021,
eBay enabled $87 billion of Gross Merchandise Volume.
In 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a coronavirus (“COVID-19”) and its variants as a pandemic which continues
to  be  widespread  with  uncertainty  around  its  duration.  As  a  result  of  COVID-19  mobility  restrictions  globally,  there  were  changes  in  consumer
behavior that have resulted in more online shopping beginning in 2020 and extending into 2021. Our Marketplace platforms experienced improved
traffic, acquisition of small business sellers and buyer acquisition due to the impacts of measures taken globally to contain the spread of COVID-19.
These  changes  in  behavior  began  to  normalize  as  mobility  trended  toward  pre-pandemic  levels  through  the  remainder  of  2021,  and  we  have
experienced lower traffic in most markets which we expect to continue into 2022. The impacts seen to date continue to create volatility in our results
and a wider range of potential outcomes as consumer behaviors and mobility restrictions continue to evolve. See “Results of Operations” below for
impacts  of  COVID-19  on  our  results  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2021  compared  to  the  year  ended  December  31,  2020.  For  additional
information,  see “–  Liquidity  and  Capital  Resource  Requirements” below  and  “Item  1A:  Risk  Factors”  under  the  caption  “The  global  COVID-19
pandemic could harm our business and results of operations” in Part II of this report.
On November 14, 2021, we completed the previously announced sale of 80.01% of the outstanding equity interests of eBay Korea LLC, a
limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Korea and a wholly owned subsidiary of eBay KTA (“eBay Korea”) to E-mart Inc. and one of
its  wholly  owned  subsidiaries  (together,  “Emart”),  pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  securities  purchase  agreement,  in  exchange  for
approximately $3.0 billion of gross cash proceeds as of the transaction close date, subject to certain adjustments specified for indebtedness, cash,
working  capital,  transaction  expenses  and  certain  taxes.  The  sale  resulted  in  a  pre-tax  gain  of  $3.2  billion  inclusive  of  a  $81  million  currency
translation adjustment and a $44 million gain net of tax on the net investment hedge settled in the fourth quarter of 2021, and related income tax
expense of $369 million. Upon
31

Table of Contents
completion of the sale, we retained 19.99% of the outstanding equity interests of the new entity, Gmarket Global LLC (“Gmarket”) formerly known as
Apollo Korea, which is accounted for under the fair value option.
On June 24, 2021, we completed the previously announced transfer of our Classifieds business to Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”) for $2.5 billion in
cash  proceeds,  subject  to  certain  adjustments,  and  approximately  540  million  shares  in  Adevinta  which  represent  an  equity  interest  of  44%,
comprised of approximately 33% of voting shares and 11% of non-voting shares. Together, the total consideration received under the definitive
agreement  was  valued  at  approximately  $13.3  billion,  based  on  the  closing  trading  price  of  Adevinta’s  outstanding  shares  on  the  Oslo  Stock
Exchange on June 24, 2021. The equity interest received is accounted for under the fair value option. On November 18, 2021, we completed the
previously announced sale of approximately 135 million of our voting shares in Adevinta to Astinlux Finco S.à r.l. (“Permira”), inclusive of the option
exercised by Permira to purchase additional voting shares, for approximately $2.3 billion in cash proceeds. At the close of the sale inclusive of the
option exercised, our ownership in Adevinta was reduced to 33%.
On February 13, 2020, we closed the previously announced sale of our StubHub business to an affiliate of viagogo. Beginning in the first
quarter of 2020, StubHub’s financial results for periods prior to the sale have been reflected in our consolidated statement of income as discontinued
operations.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  the  discontinued  operations  in  the  prior  periods  are  classified  as
discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet.
We have classified the related assets and liabilities associated with our eBay Korea and Classifieds businesses as discontinued operations in
our  consolidated  balance  sheet.  The  results  of  our  eBay  Korea,  Classifieds  and  StubHub  businesses  have  been  presented  as  discontinued
operations in our consolidated statement of income for all periods presented through the respective transaction close dates as the transactions
represented a strategic shift in our business that had a major effect on our operations and financial results.
See “Note 3 — Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Presentation
In addition to the corresponding measures under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), management uses non-GAAP measures
in reviewing our financial results. The foreign exchange neutral (“FX-Neutral”), or constant currency, net revenue amounts discussed below are non-
GAAP financial measures and are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Accordingly, the FX-
Neutral information appearing in the following discussion of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information provided
below  in  “Non-GAAP  Measures  of  Financial  Performance,”  which  includes  reconciliations  of  FX-Neutral  financial  measures  to  the  most  directly
comparable  GAAP  measures.  We  calculate  the  year-over-year  impact  of  foreign  currency  movements  using  prior  period  foreign  currency  rates
applied to current year transactional currency amounts.
32

Table of Contents
Fiscal Year Highlights
During 2021, we completed the migration of eBay’s managed payments in all markets, delivering buyers and sellers a simplified end-to-end
payments experience. Net revenues increased 17% to $10.4 billion in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the migration of managed payments
on a global basis and the associated higher take rate. Transaction take rate was higher in 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of revenue initiatives
such  as  global  payments  and  Promoted  Listings,  which  along  with  final  value  fees  are  calculated  as  a  percentage  of  an  item’s  sale  price  and
category mix. FX-Neutral net revenue (as defined above) increased 15% in 2021 compared to 2020. Operating margin decreased to 28.1% in 2021
compared to 29.6% in 2020.
On  November  14,  2021,  we  completed  the  sale  of  80.01%  of  the  outstanding  equity  interests  of  eBay  Korea  to  Emart  for  approximately
$3.0 billion of gross cash proceeds. We retained 19.99% of the outstanding equity interests of the new entity, Gmarket, which is accounted for under
the fair value option.
On June 24, 2021, the transfer of our Classifieds business was completed for $13.3 billion of consideration which comprised of $2.5 billion in
proceeds and shares of Adevinta valued at $10.8 billion. On November 18, 2021, we completed the sale of approximately 135 million of our voting
shares in Adevinta to Permira for approximately $2.3 billion in proceeds. At the close of the sale our ownership in Adevinta was reduced to 33%.
We generated cash flow from continuing operating activities of $3.1 billion in 2021 compared to $3.0 billion in 2020, ending the year with cash,
cash equivalents and non-equity investments from continuing operations of $7.3 billion.
In May 2021, we issued senior notes of $2.5 billion aggregate principal amount, which consisted of $750 million of 1.400% fixed rate notes
due 2026, $750 million of 2.600% fixed rate notes due to 2031 and $1.0 billion of 3.650% fixed rate notes due 2051.
In 2021, we repaid approximately $1.2 billion of debt primarily comprised of $750 million for the 6.000% senior fixed rate notes due 2056 and
$395 million of the 2.600% senior fixed rate notes due 2022. We also paid $7.1 billion for repurchases of common stock, of which $2.5 billion related
to repurchases of common stock under an accelerated share repurchase program, and paid $466 million in cash dividends.
In February 2022, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.22 per share of common stock to be paid on March 18, 2022 to stockholders of
record as of March 10, 2022.
33

Table of Contents
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We  have  one  reportable  segment  to  reflect  the  way  management  and  our  chief  operating  decision  maker  (“CODM”)  review  and  assess
performance of the business. Our reportable segment is Marketplace, which includes our online marketplace located at www.ebay.com, its localized
counterparts  and  the  eBay  suite  of  mobile  apps.  The  accounting  policies  of  our  segment  are  the  same  as  those  described  in  “Note  1  —  The
Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Net Revenues
Seasonality
We expect transaction activity patterns on our platforms to trend with general consumer buying patterns and expect that these trends will
continue.  As  we  introduce  new  products  and  platforms,  such  as  managed  payments,  we  expect  net  revenues  to  fluctuate.  In  addition,
macroeconomic conditions, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, may also contribute to fluctuations in revenues and margins. The following
table presents our total net revenues and the sequential quarterly movements of these net revenues for the periods indicated (in millions, except
percentages):
 
Quarter Ended
 
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2019
Net revenues
$
1,867 
$
1,859 
$
1,799 
$
1,904 
% change from prior quarter
**
— %
(3) %
6 %
2020
Net revenues
$
1,821 
$
2,337 
$
2,258 
$
2,478 
% change from prior quarter
(4)%
28 %
(3) %
10 %
2021
Net revenues
$
2,638 
$
2,668 
$
2,501 
$
2,613 
% change from prior quarter
6 %
1 %
(6) %
4 %
** Growth for the period excluded as 2018 revenue numbers have not been recast and provided.
Net Revenues by Geography
Revenues are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays
advertising, other service provider or customer, as the case may be, is located. The following table presents net revenues by geography for the
periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
% Change
2020
% Change
2019
U.S.
$
5,048 
  
22 %
4,151 
  
26 % $
3,303 
% of net revenues
48 %
47 %
44 %
International
5,372 
13 %
4,743 
15 %
4,126 
% of net revenues
52 %
53 %
56 %
Total net revenues
$
10,420 
17 % $
8,894 
20 % $
7,429 
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the British pound
and euro. In addition, as shown in the table above, we generate approximately half of our net revenues internationally. Because of these factors, we
are subject to the risks related to doing business in foreign countries as discussed under “Item 1A: Risk Factors” in Part I of this report.
Net revenues included $65 million of hedging losses during 2021 and $15 million and $81 million of hedging gains during 2020 and 2019,
respectively. The hedging activity in net revenues specifically relates to hedges of net transaction revenues. Foreign currency movements relative to
the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact of $188 million
34

Table of Contents
and $26 million on net revenues in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and an unfavorable impact of $85 million on net revenues in 2019. The effect of
foreign currency exchange rate movements in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the
British pound and euro.
Net Revenues by Type
We generate two types of net revenues:
Net transaction revenues primarily include final value fees, feature fees, including fees to promote listings and listing fees from
sellers on our platforms. Our net transaction revenues also include store subscription and other fees often from large enterprise
sellers.  Our  net  transaction  revenues  are  reduced  by  incentives,  including  discounts,  coupons  and  rewards,  provided  to  our
customers.
Marketing  services  and  other  ("MS&O") revenues consist  of  revenues  principally  from  the  sale  of  revenue  sharing
arrangements and advertisements.
The following table presents net revenues by type for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
% Change
2020
% Change
2019
Net transaction revenues
$
9,772 
19 % $
8,243 
25 % $
6,581 
Marketing services and other revenues
648 
— %
651 
(23) %
848 
Total net revenues
$
10,420 
17 % $
8,894 
20 % $
7,429 
Net Transaction Revenues
Key Operating Metrics
Gross Merchandise Volume (“GMV”) and take rate are significant factors that we believe affect our net transaction revenues.
GMV consists of the total value of all paid transactions between users on our platforms during the applicable period inclusive of
shipping fees and taxes. Despite GMV’s divergence from revenue, we still believe that GMV provides a useful measure of the
overall volume of paid transactions that flow through our platforms in a given period.
Take rate is defined as net transaction revenues divided by GMV and represents net transaction revenue as a percentage of
overall volume on our platforms. We believe that take rate provides a useful measure of our ability to monetize volume through
marketplace services on our platforms in a given period. We use take rate to identify key revenue drivers on our marketplace.
Net Transaction Revenues
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2021
2020
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2020
2019
As Reported
FX-Neutral
Net transaction revenues $
9,772 
$
8,243 
19 %
17 % $
8,243 
$
6,581 
25 %
26 %
Supplemental data:
GMV 
$
87,365 
$
87,608 
— %
(3) % $
87,608 
$
72,134 
21 %
21 %
Take rate
11.19 %
9.41 %
1.78 %
9.41 %
9.12 %
0.29 %
(1)
Marketplace net transaction revenues were net of $65 million, $15 million and $81 million hedging activity during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
respectively.
(2)
GMV has been retrospectively recast to reflect the new definition of GMV announced in December 2021.
(1)
(2)
35

Table of Contents
During 2021, we completed the migration of eBay’s managed payments in all markets, delivering buyers and sellers a simplified end-to-end
payments  experience.  Net  transaction  revenues  increased  $1.5  billion  in  2021  compared  to  2020  primarily  due  to  the  migration  of  managed
payments  on  a  global  basis  and  the  associated  higher  take  rate  as  well  as  the  growth  of  Promoted  Listings.  GMV  was  relatively  flat  in  2021
compared to 2020 due to improved traffic and buyer acquisition during the first quarter of 2021 offset by a decline in traffic experienced for the
remainder of 2021. Traffic has fluctuated throughout 2021 and 2020 in response to the pervasive macroeconomic impacts of COVID-19, including
mobility restrictions which influence consumer engagement in online shopping. GMV in both 2021 and 2020 was elevated compared to 2019 as
improved  business  dynamics  influenced  growth  across  all  major  product  categories.  While  GMV  growth  rates  were  relatively  flat  across  many
categories in 2021 compared to 2020, market trends influenced stronger contributions from the collectibles category in 2021 compared to 2020,
particularly in the U.S.
Transaction take rate was higher in 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of revenue initiatives such as global payments which resulted in the
majority of global on-platform volume processed through managed payments and Promoted Listings, which along with final value fees are calculated
as a percentage of an item’s sale price and category mix.
The increase in net transaction revenues in 2021 compared to 2020 was due to take rate considerations discussed above, despite relatively
flat GMV. We expect that the divergence between net transaction revenues and GMV to continue into 2022. Despite GMV’s divergence from net
transaction revenues, we still believe the metric provides a useful measure of overall volume of paid transactions that flow through the platform in a
given period.
Marketing Services and Other Revenues
The following table presents MS&O revenues for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
Year Ended December 31,
% Change
 
2021
2020
As Reported
FX-Neutral
2020
2019
As Reported
FX-Neutral
MS&O revenues
$
648 
$
651 
— 
%
(2) % $
651 
$
848 
(23) %
(23) %
% of net revenues
6 %
7 %
7 %
11 %
MS&O revenues were relatively flat in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to a decrease in advertising revenues offset by an increase in
revenues from revenue sharing arrangements for shipping agreements.
Cost of Net Revenues
Cost of net revenues represents costs associated with customer support, site operations and payment processing. Significant components of
these  costs  primarily  consist  of  employee  compensation  including  stock-based  compensation,  contractor  costs,  facilities  costs,  depreciation  of
equipment and amortization expense, bank transaction fees, credit card interchange and assessment fees, authentication costs and digital services
tax. The following table presents cost of net revenues for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
% Change
  
2020
% Change
  
2019
Cost of net revenues
$
2,650 
47 %   $
1,797 
13 %   $
1,585 
% of net revenues
25 %
20 %
21 %
Cost  of  net  revenues,  net  of  immaterial  hedging  activities,  was  unfavorably  impacted  by  $30  million  attributable  to  foreign  currency
movements relative to the U.S. dollar in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in cost of net revenues in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due
to an increase in payment processing costs as we transitioned customers to our payments platform throughout 2021 and an unfavorable impact
from foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar.
36

Table of Contents
Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
% Change
2020
% Change
2019
Sales and marketing
$
2,170 
4 % $
2,091 
12 % $
1,866 
% of net revenues
21 %
24 %
25 %
Product development
1,325 
29 %
1,028 
11 %
930 
% of net revenues
13 %
12 %
13 %
General and administrative
921 
(6) %
985 
— %
988 
% of net revenues
9 %
11 %
13 %
Provision for transaction losses
422 
28 %
330 
26 %
262 
% of net revenues
4 %
4 %
4 %
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
9 
(67) %
27 
(6) %
28 
Total operating expenses
$
4,847 
9 % $
4,461 
10 % $
4,074 
Foreign currency movements relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact of $80 million on operating expenses in 2021 compared to
2020. There was no hedging activity within operating expenses.
Sales and Marketing
 
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of advertising and marketing program costs (both online and offline), employee compensation
including stock-based compensation, certain user coupons and rewards, contractor costs, facilities costs and depreciation on equipment. Online
marketing expenses represent traffic acquisition costs in various channels such as paid search, affiliates marketing and display advertising. Offline
advertising primarily includes brand campaigns and buyer/seller communications.
The increase in sales and marketing expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases of $84 million in online advertising
expenses,  $37  million  in  employee  compensation  and  $25  million  in  executive  severance  costs.  These  increases  were  offset  by  a  decrease  of
$78 million in certain coupons and rewards.
Product Development
 
Product development expenses primarily consist of employee compensation including stock-based compensation, contractor costs, facilities
costs  and  depreciation  on  equipment.  Product  development  expenses  are  net  of  required  capitalization  of  major  platform  and  other  product
development  efforts,  including  the  development  and  maintenance  of  our  technology  platform.  Our  top  technology  priorities  include  payment
intermediation capabilities, products to grow the seller tools ecosystem and product experiences that delight our customers and enhance the buying
experience for our enthusiasts.
The increase in product development expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases of $227 million in employee related
costs. Capitalized internal use and platform development costs were $127 million and $129 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and are primarily
reflected as a cost of net revenues when amortized in future periods.
General and Administrative
 
General  and  administrative  expenses  primarily  consist  of  employee  compensation  including  stock-based  compensation,  contractor  costs,
facilities costs, depreciation of equipment, employer payroll taxes on stock-based compensation, legal expenses, restructuring, insurance premiums
and professional fees. Our legal expenses, including those related to various ongoing legal proceedings, may fluctuate substantially from period to
period.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to the absence of costs related to our CEO
transition in 2020 of $33 million and a decrease in charitable contributions of approximately $36 million.
37

Table of Contents
Provision for Transaction Losses
Provision for transaction losses primarily consists of transaction loss expense associated with our buyer protection programs, losses from our
managed payments services, fraud and bad debt expense associated with our accounts receivable balance. We expect our provision for transaction
losses to fluctuate depending on many factors, including changes to our protection programs and the impact of regulatory changes.
The increase in provision for transaction losses in 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to higher chargeback losses
of  $81  million  incurred  for  managed  payments  as  we  scaled  the  platform  and  higher  customer  protection  program  costs  of  $63  million.  These
increases  were  partially  offset  by  a  decrease  in  bad  debt  expense  of  $52  million  as  a  result  of  fees  collected  through  the  managed  payments
platform.
Gain (Loss) on Equity Investments and Warrant, net
 
Gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net primarily consists of gains and losses related to our various types of equity investments,
including our equity investments in Adevinta, KakaoBank and Adyen, and gains and losses due to changes in fair value of the warrant received from
Adyen. The following table presents gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
% Change
  
2020
% Change
  
2019
Change in fair value of equity investment in Adevinta
$
(3,070)
**
$
— 
— %
$
— 
Gain (loss) on sale of shares in Adevinta 
9 
**
— 
— %
— 
Change in fair value of warrant
354 
(54) %
770 
**
133 
Change in fair value of equity investment in Adyen
(10)
**
— 
— %
— 
Change in fair value of equity investment in KakaoBank
403 
69 %
239 
**
— 
Gain (loss) on sale of shares in KakaoBank
83 
**
— 
— %
— 
Impairment of equity investment in Paytm Mall
(160)
**
— 
— %
— 
Gain (loss) on other investments 
26 
**
(2)
**
— 
Total gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net
$
(2,365)
**   $
1,007 
**   $
133 
(1)
Gain (loss) on sale of shares in Adevinta included an $88 million gain recognized on the sale of the shares offset by a $79 million loss from the change in fair value of the
shares sold through the date of sale.
(2)
Gain (loss) on other investments primarily included: (i) in 2021, primarily a $41 million upward adjustment and a $10 million impairment recorded on equity investments
without readily determinable fair values; (ii) in 2020, primarily a $40 million impairment recorded on an investment and a $37 million gain for the receipt of proceeds that
were held in escrow related to a long-term investment that was sold in 2018.
**    Not meaningful
The decrease in gain (loss) on equity method investments and warrant, net in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by a $3.1 billion
loss from the change in fair value of our equity investment in Adevinta, a $160 million impairment recorded on our equity investment in Paytm Mall
and a $416 million change in the gain related to the Adyen warrant. These decreases were partially offset by a $164 million change in unrealized
gain related to our equity investment in KakaoBank and a $83 million gain on sale of a portion of our shares in KakaoBank.
(1)
(2)
38

Table of Contents
Interest and Other, Net
 
Interest and other, net primarily consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments, as well as foreign
exchange transaction gains and losses and interest expense, consisting of interest charges on any amounts borrowed and commitment fees on
unborrowed  amounts  under  our  credit  agreement  and  interest  expense  on  our  outstanding  debt  securities  and  commercial  paper,  if  any.  The
following table presents interest and other, net for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
% Change
  
2020
% Change
  
2019
Interest income
$
19 
(50) %   $
38 
(66) %   $
112 
Interest expense
(269)
(12) %
(304)
(2) %
(311)
Foreign exchange and other
90 
**   
(32)
(38) %   
(52)
Total interest and other, net
$
(160)
(46) %   $
(298)
19 %   $
(251)
** Not meaningful
Interest and other, net expense decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to foreign exchange transaction gains and lower interest
expense.
Income Tax Provision
The following table presents provision for income taxes for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
146 
$
858 
$
219 
Effective tax rate
36.6 %   
25.6 %   
13.2 %
The increase in our effective tax rate in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to non-deductible losses on investments, partially offset by
a benefit from the release of a valuation allowance. The effective tax rate in 2020 included the effects of a retroactive California law change including
incremental taxes on the gain on the sale of StubHub, partially offset by an increased tax benefit from stock-based compensation.
We are regularly under examination by tax authorities both domestically and internationally. We believe that adequate amounts have been
reserved for any adjustments that may ultimately result from these examinations, although we cannot assure you that this will be the case given the
inherent uncertainties in these examinations. Due to the ongoing tax examinations, it is generally impractical to determine the amount and timing of
these adjustments. However, we expect several tax examinations to close within the next twelve months. See “Note 15 — Income Taxes” to the
consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on estimated settlements within the next twelve months.
Discontinued Operations
On November 14, 2021, we completed the previously announced sale of 80.01% of the outstanding equity interests of eBay Korea to Emart.
We have classified the results of our eBay Korea business as discontinued operations  in our consolidated  statement  of income for  the periods
presented through November 14, 2021. Additionally, the related assets and liabilities associated with the discontinued operations are classified as
discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet.
On June 24, 2021, we completed the previously announced transfer of our Classifieds business to Adevinta. We have classified the results of
our  Classifieds  business  as discontinued operations  in our  consolidated  statement  of  income  for the  periods presented  through  June 24,  2021.
Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  the  discontinued  operations  are  classified  as  discontinued  operations  in  our
consolidated balance sheet.
39

Table of Contents
On February 13, 2020, we completed the previously announced sale of our StubHub business to an affiliate of viagogo. Beginning in the first
quarter of 2020, StubHub’s financial results for periods prior to the sale have been reflected in our consolidated statement of income as discontinued
operations.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities  associated  with  the  discontinued  operations  in  the  prior  periods  are  classified  as
discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet.
See “Note 3 — Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Non-GAAP Measures of Financial Performance
To supplement  our consolidated financial statements  presented  in accordance  with generally accepted  accounting  principles,  we use FX-
Neutral net revenues, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses the foregoing non-GAAP measures in reviewing our financial
results. We define FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the exchange rate effect. We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year
impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional currency amounts, excluding
hedging activity.
These  non-GAAP  measures  are  not  in  accordance  with,  or  an  alternative  to,  measures  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP  and  may  be
different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not based on any comprehensive set of
accounting rules or principles. Non-GAAP measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of
operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. These measures should only be used to evaluate our results of operations in conjunction with
the corresponding GAAP measures.
These non-GAAP measures are provided to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our current financial performance and its prospects
for the future. Specifically, we believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to both management and investors by excluding the
foreign currency exchange rate impact that may not be indicative of our core operating results and business outlook. In addition, because we have
historically reported certain non-GAAP results to investors, we believe that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures provide consistency in our
financial reporting.
40

Table of Contents
The following tables present a reconciliation of FX-Neutral GMV and FX-Neutral net revenues (each as defined below) to our reported GMV
and net revenues for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
Year Ended Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate
Effect 
FX-Neutral 
As Reported
As Reported %
Change
FX-Neutral %
Change
GMV
$
87,365 
$
2,362 
$
85,003 
$
87,608 
— %
(3) %
Net Revenues:
Net transaction revenues 
$
9,772 
$
180 
$
9,592 
$
8,243 
19 %
17 %
Marketing services and other revenues
648 
8 
640 
651 
— %
(2) %
Total net revenues
$
10,420 
$
188 
$
10,232 
$
8,894 
17 %
15 %
Year Ended Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
 
As Reported
Exchange Rate
Effect 
FX-Neutral 
As Reported
As Reported %
Change
FX-Neutral %
Change
GMV
$
87,608 
$
46 
$
87,562 
$
72,134 
21 %
21 %
Net Revenues:
Net transaction revenues 
$
8,243 
$
25 
$
8,218 
$
6,581 
25 %
26 %
Marketing services and other revenues
651 
1 
650 
848 
(23) %
(23) %
Total net revenues
$
8,894 
$
26 
$
8,868 
$
7,429 
20 %
21 %
(1)
We define exchange rate effect as the year-over-year impact of foreign currency movements using prior period foreign currency rates applied to current year transactional
currency amounts, excluding hedging activity.
(2)
We define FX-Neutral GMV as GMV minus the exchange rate effect. We define the non-GAAP financial measures of FX-Neutral net revenues as net revenues minus the
exchange rate effect.
(3)
Net transaction revenues were net of $65 million, $15 million and $81 million of hedging activity in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.     
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
41

Table of Contents
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In millions)
Net cash provided by (used in):
 
 
Continuing operating activities
$
3,093 
$
3,004 
$
2,416 
Continuing investing activities
(1,417)
(179)
2,900 
Continuing financing activities
(6,557)
(5,680)
(7,087)
Effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
24 
77 
(33)
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash - discontinued operations
4,669 
3,376 
581 
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
$
(188)
$
598 
$
(1,223)
 
Continuing Operating Activities
Our  operating  cash  flows  arise  primarily  from  cash  received  from  our customers  on our platforms  offset  by cash  payments  for  sales  and
marketing, employee compensation and payment processing expenses.
Cash  provided  by  continuing  operating  activities  of  $3.1  billion  in  2021  compared  to  $3.0  billion  in  2020  was  primarily  attributable  to  an
increase in operating income from continuing operations of $287 million. The increase in operating income from continuing operations was primarily
due to an increase in revenues, primarily as a result of the migration of managed payments on a global basis and the associated higher take rate as
noted in our comments in “Net Transaction Revenues.” The remaining changes in continuing operating cash flows were attributable to changes in
non-cash items and favorable working capital movements due to lower accounts receivable from the migration to managed payments and lower
accrued liabilities.
Continuing Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $1.4 billion in 2021 was primarily attributable to purchases of investments of $22.2 billion and property and
equipment of $444 million. These purchases were partially offset by proceeds of $18.9 billion from the maturities and sales of investments and
$2.3 billion from the sale of approximately 135 million of our voting shares in Adevinta.
Cash used in investing activities of $0.2 billion in 2020 was primarily attributable to cash paid for purchases of investments of $32.9 billion and
property and equipment of $463 million, offset by proceeds of $33.1 billion from the maturities and sales of investments.
The  largely  offsetting  effects  of  purchases  of  investments  and  maturities  and  sale  of  investments  results  from  the  management  of  our
investments. As our immediate cash needs change, purchase and sale activity will fluctuate.
Continuing Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities of $6.6 billion in 2021 was primarily driven by common stock repurchases of $7.1 billion, of which $2.5 billion
related to repurchases under an accelerated share repurchase program. Cash used in financing activities also included debt repayments of $1.2
billion, which was comprised of $750 million related to our 6.000% senior fixed rate notes due 2056 that were redeemed and $405 million related to
our 2.600% senior fixed rate notes due 2022 that were repurchased pursuant to a tender offer, and $466 million of cash dividends paid, partially
offset by proceeds from debt issuances of $2.5 billion.
Cash used in financing activities of $5.7 billion in 2020 was primarily used to repurchase $5.1 billion of common stock, repay outstanding debt
of $1.8 billion and pay $447 million of cash dividends, partially offset by proceeds from debt issuances of $1.8 billion.
The positive effect of exchange rate movements on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar
against other currencies, primarily the euro, during 2021 and 2020.
42

Table of Contents
Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had assets classified as cash and cash equivalents, as well as short-term and long-
term non-equity investments from continuing operations, in an aggregate amount of $7.3 billion and $3.8 billion, respectively. We believe that our
cash,  cash  equivalents  and  short-term  and  long-term  investments,  together  with  cash  expected  to  be  generated  from  operations,  borrowings
available under our credit agreement and commercial paper program, and our access to capital markets, will be sufficient to satisfy our material
cash requirements over the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future.
However, COVID-19 and related measures to contain its impact have caused material disruptions in both national and global financial markets
and  economies.  The  future  impact  of  COVID-19  and  these  containment  measures  cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty  and  may  increase  our
borrowing costs and other costs of capital and otherwise adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and we
cannot assure that we will have access to external financing at times and on terms we consider acceptable, or at all, or that we will not experience
other liquidity issues going forward.
Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we had floating- and fixed-rate senior notes outstanding with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount
of $9.1 billion, with $1.4 billion payable within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with the senior notes total $2.5 billion, with $0.2 billion
payable within 12 months. The net proceeds from the issuances of these senior notes are used for general corporate purposes, including, among
other things, capital expenditures, share repurchases, repayment of indebtedness and possible acquisitions.
In  February  2022,  we  redeemed  the  $750  million  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the  3.800%  senior  notes  due  March  2022.  Total  cash
consideration paid was $750 million as the redemption price was equal to 100% of the principal amount. In addition, we paid accrued and unpaid
interest on the principal amount.
Commercial Paper
We have a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes in an aggregate principal amount at maturity
of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time with maturities of up to 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2021, there were no
commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In March 2020, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year credit facility. We may also, subject to
the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase commitments under the revolving credit facility by up to $1 billion. Funds borrowed under the
credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes. As of December 31,
2021, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. 
Credit Ratings
As of December 31, 2021, we were rated investment grade by Standard and Poor’s Financial Services, LLC (long-term rated BBB+, short-
term rated A-2, with a stable outlook) and Moody’s Investor Service (long-term rated Baa1, short-term rated P-2, with a stable outlook). We disclose
these ratings to enhance the understanding of our sources of liquidity and the effects of our ratings on our costs of funds. Our borrowing costs
depend,  in  part,  on  our  credit  ratings  and  any  actions  taken  by  these  credit  rating  agencies  to  lower  our  credit  ratings  will  likely  increase  our
borrowing costs. 
We  were  in  compliance  with  all  financial  covenants  in  our  outstanding  debt  instruments  for  the  period  ended  December  31,  2021.  For
additional details related to our debt, please see “Note 10 — Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
43

Table of Contents
Leases
We have operating leases for office space, data centers, as well as other corporate assets that we utilize under lease arrangements. As of
December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $366 million, with $156 million payable within 12 months. For additional details
related to our leases, please see “Note 11 — Leases” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Purchase Obligations
Purchase obligation amounts include minimum purchase commitments for advertising, capital expenditures (computer equipment, software
applications,  engineering  development  services,  construction  contracts)  and  other  goods  and  services  entered  into  in  the  ordinary  course  of
business. As of December 31, 2021, we had purchase obligations of $151 million, with $125 million payable within 12 months.
Income Taxes
We are unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits of $318 million included in other
liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. The timing of the resolution and/or closure of audits is highly uncertain, and it
is reasonably possible that the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change in the next 12 months. However, given the
number of years remaining subject to examination and the number of matters being examined, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible
adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits.
As of December 31, 2021, our assets classified as cash and cash equivalents, and short-term and long-term non-equity investments from
continuing operations included assets held in certain of our foreign operations totaling approximately $5.0 billion. As we repatriate these funds to the
U.S., we will be required to pay income taxes in certain U.S. states and applicable foreign withholding taxes on those amounts during the period
when such repatriation occurs. We have accrued deferred taxes for the tax effect of repatriating the funds to the U.S.
See “Note 15 — Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information on unrecognized tax
benefits and deferred taxes.
Stock Repurchases
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and,
subject to market conditions and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding
share count. Any share repurchases under our stock repurchase programs will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives.
We  expect,  subject  to  market  conditions  and  other  uncertainties,  to  continue  making  opportunistic  and  programmatic  repurchases  of  our
common  stock.  However,  our  stock  repurchase  programs  may  be  limited  or  terminated  at  any  time  without  prior  notice.  The  timing  and  actual
number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and regulatory requirements, the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
During 2021, we repurchased approximately $7.0 billion of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs, including the accelerated
repurchase agreement we entered into during the fourth quarter of 2021. As of December 31, 2021, a total of approximately $2.0 billion remained
available for future repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs. In February 2022 our Board authorized an additional
$4.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization. See “Note 13 — Stockholders’ Equity” to the consolidated
financial statements included in this report for more information about our stock repurchase programs.
Dividends
The company paid a total of $466 million and $447 million in cash dividends in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In February 2022, we declared a
cash dividend of $0.22 per share of common stock to be paid on March 18, 2022 to stockholders of record as of March 10, 2022.
44

Table of Contents
Other Capital Resource Requirements
We actively monitor all counterparties that hold our cash and cash equivalents and non-equity investments, focusing primarily on the safety of
principal  and  secondarily  on  improving  yield  on  these  assets.  We  diversify  our  cash  and  cash  equivalents  and  investments  among  various
counterparties  in  order  to  reduce  our  exposure  should  any  one  of  these  counterparties  fail  or  encounter  difficulties.  To  date,  we  have  not
experienced any material loss or lack of access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments; however, we can provide no
assurances that access to our invested cash, cash equivalents or short-term investments will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial
markets, including, without limitation, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. At any point in time we have funds in our operating
accounts and customer accounts that are deposited and invested with third party financial institutions.
We have a cash pooling arrangement with a financial institution for cash management purposes. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total of
$3.7 billion in aggregate cash deposits, partially offset by $3.5 billion in cash withdrawals, held within the financial institution under the cash pooling
arrangement. See “Note 12 — Commitments and Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information
about our cash pooling arrangement.
We have entered into various indemnification agreements and, in the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification
provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we have commercial relations. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential
loss under these various indemnification provisions due to our limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances
involved  in  each  particular  provision.  To  date,  losses  recorded  in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  in  connection  with  our  indemnification
provisions  have  not  been  significant,  either  individually  or  collectively.  See  “Note  12  —  Commitments  and  Contingencies”  to  the  consolidated
financial statements included in this report for more information about our indemnification provisions.
45

Table of Contents
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
General
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based
our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of
which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our
senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are
highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting
estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. We believe the following
critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The following  descriptions  of critical  accounting  policies,  judgments  and estimates  should be read  in conjunction  with our consolidated  financial
statements and related notes and other disclosures included in this report.
Revenue Recognition
We  may  enter  into  certain  revenue  contracts  that  include  promises  to  transfer  multiple  goods  or  services  including  discounts  on  future
services. We also may enter into arrangements to purchase services from certain customers. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is
sometimes  required  to  determine  the  appropriate  accounting  for  these  transactions  including:  (1)  whether  services  are  considered  distinct
performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price of each
distinct performance obligation; (3) whether revenue should be reported gross (as eBay is acting as a principal), or net (as eBay is acting as an
agent); (4) evaluating whether a promotion or incentive is a payment to a customer; and (5) whether the arrangement would be characterized as
revenue or reimbursement of costs incurred. Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or
amount of revenue recognition.
Income Taxes
Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in
which  we  operate.  Tax  laws  are  complex  and  subject  to  different  interpretations  by  the  taxpayer  and  respective  government  taxing  authorities.
Significant  judgment  is  required  in  determining  our  tax  expense  and  in  evaluating  our  tax  positions,  including  evaluating  uncertainties  and  the
complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Tax
positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. Our
income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of our intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. Management has no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest the
undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries at the balance sheet date.
Deferred  tax  assets  represent  amounts  available  to  reduce  income  taxes  payable  on  taxable  income  in  future  years.  Such  assets  arise
because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax
credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable
income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies.
These sources of income rely heavily on estimates that are based on a number of factors, including our historical experience and short-range and
long-range business forecasts. As of December 31, 2021, we had a valuation allowance on certain net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards
based on our assessment that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
46

Table of Contents
We  recognize  and  measure  uncertain  tax  positions  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  the  U.S.,  or  GAAP,
pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from
such  positions  are  then  measured  based  on  the  largest  benefit  that  has  a  greater  than  50  percent  likelihood  of  being  realized  upon  ultimate
settlement. We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
GAAP further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in
the quarter in which such change occurs. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. A number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax
position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution
of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these reserves, as
well as the related interest, where appropriate in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position could require the
use of cash.
The following table presents our effective tax rates for the periods indicated (in millions, except percentages):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
 
2019
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
146 
 $
858 
 $
219 
Effective tax rate
36.6 %  
25.6 %  
13.2 %
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory
rates  and  higher  than  anticipated  in  countries  where  we  have  higher  statutory  rates,  by  changes  in  the  valuation  of  our  deferred  tax  assets  or
liabilities, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination
of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service, as well as various state and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of
adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
Based  on  our  results  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2021,  a  one-percentage  point  change  in  our  provision  for  income  taxes  as  a
percentage of income before taxes would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the provision of approximately $4 million, resulting in an
approximate $0.01 change in diluted earnings per share.
Goodwill
The purchase price of an acquired company is allocated between intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with
the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill.
As of December 31, 2021, our goodwill totaled $4.2 billion. We assess the impairment of goodwill of our reporting unit annually, or more often
if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit
level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its
carrying  value.  If  the  reporting  unit  does  not  pass  the  qualitative  assessment,  then  the  reporting  unit’s  carrying  value  is  compared  to  its  fair
value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market and discounted cash flow approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the
carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The discounted cash flow approach uses expected future operating results. The market
approach uses comparable company information to determine revenue and earnings multiples to value our reporting unit. Failure to achieve these
expected results or market multiples may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of
goodwill  as  of  August  31,  2021  and  2020.  As  of  December  31,  2021,  we determined  that  no  impairment  of  the  carrying  value  of  goodwill  was
required. See “Note 4 — Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
47

Table of Contents
Legal Contingencies
In connection with certain pending litigation and other claims, we have estimated the range of probable loss, net of expected recoveries, and
provided for such losses through charges to our consolidated statement of income. These estimates have been based on our assessment of the
facts and circumstances at each balance sheet date and are subject to change based upon new information and future events.
From time to time, we are involved in disputes and regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business. We are currently involved
in legal proceedings,  some of which are discussed  in “Item  1A: Risk Factors,”  “Item  3: Legal Proceedings”  and “Note  12 — Commitments  and
Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report. We believe that we have meritorious defenses to the claims against
us, and we intend to defend ourselves vigorously. However, even if successful, our defense against certain actions will be costly and could require
significant amounts of management’s time and result in the diversion of significant operational resources. If the plaintiffs were to prevail on certain
claims, we might be forced to pay significant damages and licensing fees, modify our business practices or even be prohibited from conducting a
significant part of our business. Any such results could materially harm our business and could result in a material adverse impact on the financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "Note 1 — The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements included in this report,
regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
48

Table of Contents
ITEM 7A: QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Interest Rate Risk
We are exposed to interest rate risk relating to our investments and outstanding debt. In addition, adverse economic conditions and events
(including  volatility  or  distress  in the  equity  and/or  debt  or  credit  markets)  may  impact  regional  and  global  financial  markets.  These  events  and
conditions could cause us to write down our assets or investments. We seek to reduce earnings volatility that may result from adverse economic
conditions and events or changes in interest rates.
The  primary  objective  of  our  investment  activities  is  to  preserve  principal  while  at  the  same  time  improving  yields  without  significantly
increasing risk. To achieve this objective, we maintain our cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments in a variety of asset types,
including  bank  deposits,  government  bonds  and  corporate  debt  securities.  As  of  December  31,  2021,  approximately  9%  of  our  total  cash  and
investments was held in cash and cash equivalents. As such, changes in interest rates will impact interest income. As discussed below, the fair
market values of our fixed rate securities may be adversely affected due to a rise in interest rates, and we may suffer losses in principal if we are
forced to sell securities that have declined in market value due to changes in interest rates.
 
As  of  December  31,  2021,  the  balance  of  our  corporate  debt  and  government  bond  securities  was  $5.9  billion,  which  represented
approximately 39% of our total cash and investments. Investments in both fixed-rate and floating-rate interest-earning instruments carry varying
degrees of interest rate risk. The fair market value of our fixed-rate investment securities may be adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates.
In general, fixed-rate securities with longer maturities are subject to greater interest rate risk than those with shorter maturities. While floating rate
securities generally are subject to less interest rate risk than fixed-rate securities, floating-rate securities may produce less income than expected if
interest rates decrease and may also suffer a decline in market value if interest rates increase. Due in part to these factors, our investment income
may fall short of expectations or we may suffer losses in principal if we sell securities that have declined in market value due to changes in interest
rates. A hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates would have resulted in a decrease in the fair value of our investments of $4 million
and $5 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an aggregate principal amount of $9.1 billion of outstanding senior notes, of which 96% bore interest at
fixed rates. During 2020, we began to hedge the variability of the cash flows in interest payments associated with our floating-rate debt using interest
rate swaps. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert our LIBOR-based floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis, reducing the impact of
interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The total notional amount of these interest swaps was $400 million as of December 31, 2021 with
terms calling for us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest at a fixed rate. Our interest rate swap contracts have maturity dates in
2023. At December 31, 2021, we did not have an unhedged balance on our floating-rate debt. We considered the historical volatility of short-term
interest rates and determined that it was reasonably possible that an adverse change of 100 basis points could be experienced in the near term. A
hypothetical 1% (100 basis points) decrease in interest rates would have resulted in a decrease in the fair values of our floating to fixed rate interest
swaps of approximately $4 million at December 31, 2021.
Further changes in interest rates will impact interest expense on any borrowings under our revolving credit facility, which bear interest at
floating  rates,  and  the  interest  rate  on  any  commercial  paper  borrowings  we  make  and  any  debt  securities  we  may  issue  in  the  future  and,
accordingly, will impact interest expense. For additional details related to our debt, see “Note 10 — Debt” to the consolidated financial statements
included in this report.
 
Equity Price Risk
Equity Investments
On June 24, 2021, we completed the transfer of our Classifieds business to Adevinta. Upon completion of the transfer we received an equity
interest in Adevinta. The equity investment is accounted for under the fair value option and changes in Adevinta’s stock price and equity volatility
may have a significant  impact  on the value of our equity investment  in Adevinta.  As of December  31, 2021, a one dollar change in Adevinta’s
common stock, holding other factors constant, would increase or decrease the fair value of the investment by approximately $405 million.
49

Table of Contents
In August 2021 KakaoBank completed its initial public offering, which resulted in this investment having a readily determinable fair value.
Previously this investment was accounted for as an equity investment without a readily determinable fair value. Valuation of equity investments with
readily determinable fair values can be obtained from real time quotes in active markets. Changes in KakaoBank’s stock price and equity volatility
may have a significant impact on the value of our equity investment in KakaoBank. As of December 31, 2021, a one dollar change in KakaoBank’s
common stock, holding other factors constant, would increase or decrease the fair value of the investment by approximately $14 million.
As further described in the “Warrant” section below, we entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with
Adyen that,  subject  to meeting  certain  conditions,  entitles  us to  acquire  a fixed  number  of  shares  up  to  5% of  Adyen’s  fully  diluted  issued  and
outstanding share capital at a specific date. In 2021, we met the processing volume milestone target to vest the first tranche of the warrant. Upon
vesting of the first tranche, we exercised the option to purchase shares of Adyen valued at $1.1 billion in exchange for approximately $110 million.
Our equity investment in Adyen is accounted for as an equity investment with a readily determinable fair value. Changes in Adyen’s common stock
price and equity volatility may have a significant impact on the value of the investment. As of December 31, 2021, a one dollar change in Adyen’s
common stock, holding other factors constant, would increase or decrease the fair value of the investment by approximately $0.4 million.
Our remaining equity investments are primarily investments in privately-held companies. Our consolidated results of operations include, as a
component of gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net, our share of the net income or loss of the equity investments accounted for under
the equity method of accounting, or the change in fair value of the equity method investments accounted for under the fair value option. Equity
investments  without  readily  determinable  fair  values  are  accounted  for  at  cost,  less  impairment  and  adjusted  for  subsequent  observable  price
changes obtained from orderly transactions for identical or similar investments issued by the same investee. Such changes in the basis of the equity
investment are recognized in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net. Equity investments under the fair value option are measured at fair
value based on a quarterly valuation analysis and are classified within Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation reflects management’s
estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the equity investment. Subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in
gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net.
As  of  December  31,  2021,  our  equity  investments  totaled  $8.0  billion,  which  represented  approximately  52%  of  our  total  cash  and
investments, and primarily related to our equity investment in Adevinta.
For additional details related to our investments, please see “Note 6 — Investments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this
report.
Warrant
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles  us  to  acquire  a  fixed  number  of  shares  up  to  5%  of  Adyen’s  fully  diluted  issued  and  outstanding  share  capital  at  a  specific  date.  As
discussed above, in 2021 we met the processing volume milestone target to vest the first tranche of the warrant, and we exercised the option to
purchase shares of Adyen valued at $1.1 billion in exchange for approximately $110 million. The remaining tranches of the warrant are accounted
for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Changes in Adyen’s common stock price and equity volatility may
have a significant impact on the value of the warrant. As of December 31, 2021, a one dollar change in Adyen’s common stock, holding other factors
constant, would increase or decrease the fair value of the warrant by $0.2 million. For additional details related to the warrant, please see “Note 7 —
Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our commerce platforms operate globally, resulting in certain revenues and costs that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the
British pound and euro, subjecting us to foreign currency risk, which may adversely impact our financial results. We transact business in various
foreign currencies and have significant international revenues as well as costs. In addition, we charge our international subsidiaries for their use of
intellectual property and technology and for certain corporate services we provide. Our cash flow, results of operations that are exposed to foreign
exchange rate fluctuations may differ materially from expectations and we may record significant gains or losses due to foreign currency fluctuations
and related hedging activities.
50

Table of Contents
We  have  a  foreign  exchange  exposure  management  program  designed  to  identify  material  foreign  currency  exposures,  manage  these
exposures and reduce the potential effects of currency fluctuations on our reported consolidated cash flows and results of operations through the
purchase of foreign currency exchange contracts. The effectiveness of the program and resulting usage of foreign exchange derivative contracts is
at times limited by our ability to achieve cash flow hedge accounting. For additional details related to our derivative instruments, please see “Note 7
— Derivative Instruments” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
We use foreign exchange derivative contracts to help protect our forecasted U.S. dollar-equivalent earnings from adverse changes in foreign
currency exchange rates. These hedging contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of adverse currency exchange rate movements.
Most of these contracts are designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes. For qualifying cash flow hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss
is initially reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) and subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same
period the forecasted transaction affects earnings. For contracts not designated as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, the derivative’s gain
or loss is recognized immediately in earnings in our consolidated statement of income. However, only certain revenue and costs are eligible for cash
flow hedge accounting.
The following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges and the before-tax
effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change in the foreign exchange rates that existed as of December 31, 2021. The sensitivity for foreign
currency contracts is based on a 20% adverse change in foreign exchange rates, against relevant functional currencies.
 
Fair Value
Asset/(Liability)
Fair Value Sensitivity
(In millions)
Foreign exchange contracts - Cash flow hedges
$
87 
$
(113)
Since our risk management programs are highly effective, the potential loss in value described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
We also use foreign exchange contracts to offset the foreign exchange risk on our assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than
the functional currency of our subsidiaries. These contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of currency exchange rate movements
on our assets and liabilities. The foreign currency gains and losses on the assets and liabilities are recorded in interest and other, net, which are
offset by the gains and losses on the foreign exchange contracts.
We  considered  the  historical  trends  in  currency  exchange  rates  and  determined  that  it  was  reasonably  possible  that  adverse  changes  in
exchange rates of 20% for all currencies could be experienced in the near term. These changes would have resulted in an adverse impact on
income before income taxes of approximately $13 million as of December 31, 2021 taking into consideration the offsetting effect of foreign exchange
forwards in place as of December 31, 2021.
51

Table of Contents
ITEM 8: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
The  consolidated  financial  statements  and  accompanying  notes  listed  in  Part  IV,  Item  15(a)(1)  of  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  are
included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9: CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A: CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation  of  disclosure  controls  and  procedures: Based  on  the  evaluation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  the
Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e)  under  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  or  the  Exchange  Act)  required  by  Exchange  Act
Rules  13a-15(b)  or  15d-15(b),  our  principal  executive  officer  and  our  principal  financial  officer  have  concluded  that  our  disclosure  controls  and
procedures were effective as of December 31, 2021.
Changes in internal controls: There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting as defined in Exchange Act Rule 13a-15(f)
that occurred during our most recently completed fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal
control over financial reporting.
Management’s  annual report  on internal  control  over financial reporting: Our management  is responsible for establishing and maintaining
adequate internal control over financial reporting. Our management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, conducted
an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control - Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on its evaluation under the framework in Internal
Control - Integrated Framework, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2021.
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP,
an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which appears in Item 15(a)1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 9B: OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
ITEM 9C: DISCLOSURE REGARDING FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS THAT PREVENT INSPECTIONS
Not applicable.
52

Table of Contents
PART III
ITEM 10: DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2021.
Code of Ethics, Governance Guidelines and Committee Charters
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to all eBay employees and directors. The Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics is posted on our website at https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance/governance-documents/. We will post any amendments
to or waivers from the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics at that location.
We have also adopted Governance Guidelines for the Board of Directors and a written committee charter for each of our Audit Committee,
Compensation and Human Capital Committee and Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee. Each of these documents is available on our
website at https://investors.ebayinc.com/corporate-governance/governance-documents/.
ITEM 11: EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2021.
ITEM 12: SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2021.
ITEM 13: CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2021.
ITEM 14: PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Incorporated by reference from our Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after
the end of the year ended December 31, 2021.
53

Table of Contents
PART IV
ITEM 15: EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
a.
The following documents are filed as part of this report: 
Page Number
1. Consolidated Financial Statements:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID 238)
55
Consolidated Balance Sheet
57
Consolidated Statement of Income
58
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
59
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
60
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
61
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
63
2. Financial Statement Schedule
Schedule II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
115
All other schedules have been omitted because the information required to be set forth therein is not
applicable or is shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.
3. Exhibits Required by Item 601 of Regulation S-K
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index to Exhibits that precedes the signature page
of this Annual Report.
116
b.
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index to Exhibits that precedes the signature page of this Annual Report.
c.
Financial Statement Schedule and Separate Financial Statements of Subsidiaries Not Consolidated and
Fifty Percent or Less Owned Persons
Adevinta was deemed a significant equity investee under Rule 3-09 of Regulation S-X for the fiscal year ended December 30, 2021. As such,
financial statements of Adevinta are required to be filed by amendment to this Annual Report on Form 10-K within six months of Adevinta’s
fiscal year end. Accordingly, Adevinta’s financial statements for its fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 will be filed via an amendment to this
Annual Report on Form 10-K on or before June 30, 2022.
ITEM 16: FORM 10-K SUMMARY
None.
54

Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of eBay Inc.
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of eBay Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the
related consolidated statements of income, of comprehensive income, of stockholders’ equity and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2021, including the related notes and schedule of valuation and qualifying accounts for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2021 appearing under Item 15a.2. (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the Company's internal control over
financial  reporting  as  of  December  31,  2021,  based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  -  Integrated  Framework (2013) issued  by  the  Committee  of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of  the  Company  as  of
December 31, 2021 and 2020, and  the  results  of  its operations and its cash  flows  for  each  of  the  three  years  in  the  period  ended  December  31,  2021 in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued
by the COSO.
Basis for Opinions
The Company's management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for
its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in Management’s annual report on internal control over financial reporting
appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company's internal control
over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States)
(PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements,  whether  due  to  error  or  fraud,  and  performing  procedures  that  respond  to  those  risks.  Such  procedures  included  examining,  on  a  test  basis,
evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used
and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal
control  over  financial  reporting  included  obtaining  an  understanding  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  assessing  the  risk that  a  material  weakness
exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing
such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A  company’s  internal  control  over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any  evaluation  of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
55

Table of Contents
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that was communicated or
required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and
(ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on
the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the
critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Income Taxes – Unrecognized Tax Benefits and Taxes on Foreign Earnings
As described in Notes 1 and 15 to the consolidated financial statements, significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s tax expense and in
evaluating management’s tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties and the complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. As disclosed by management, the
Company’s income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to their foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of the Company’s intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. Management recognizes and measures uncertain tax positions in accordance
with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  in  the  U.S.,  or  GAAP,  pursuant  to  which  management  only  recognizes  the  tax  benefit  from  an  uncertain  tax
position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position.
Tax positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. The total
income  tax  provision  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2021  was $146  million and  gross  amounts  of  unrecognized  tax  benefits  were $461  million  as  of
December 31, 2021.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to income taxes - unrecognized tax benefits and taxes on foreign earnings
is a critical audit matter are the significant judgment by management when evaluating tax positions relating to unrecognized tax benefits and taxes on foreign
earnings, which in turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, effort, and subjectivity in performing audit procedures and evaluating audit evidence relating to
unrecognized tax benefits and taxes on foreign earnings. The audit effort also involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated financial
statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to income taxes, including controls over unrecognized tax benefits and
taxes  on  foreign  earnings.  These  procedures  also  included,  among  others,  evaluating  tax  positions  taken  by  management,  including  evaluating  the
reasonableness of management’s determination of the probability of sustaining the position under tax examination and identification of changes to tax positions,
evaluating communications with the relevant tax authorities, testing applicable tax rates applied by management, and evaluating the impact of taxes on foreign
earnings, including the calculation of U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings and the deferred tax benefit derived from the amortization of the Company’s
intellectual property. Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in testing the calculation of taxes on foreign earnings.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
February 24, 2022
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1997.
56

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
 
(In millions, except par value)
ASSETS
Current assets:
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,379 
$
1,101 
Short-term investments
5,944 
2,392 
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $42 and $97
98 
362 
Customer accounts and funds receivable
681 
290 
Other current assets
1,009 
780 
Current assets of discontinued operations
— 
2,265 
Total current assets
9,111 
7,190 
Long-term investments
2,575 
833 
Property and equipment, net
1,236 
1,292 
Goodwill
4,178 
4,285 
Intangible assets, net
8 
12 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
289 
430 
Deferred tax assets
3,255 
3,537 
Equity investment in Adevinta
5,391 
— 
Warrant asset
444 
1,051 
Other assets
139 
131 
Long-term assets of discontinued operations
— 
549 
Total assets
$
26,626 
$
19,310 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities:
 
 
Short-term debt
$
1,355 
$
6 
Accounts payable
262 
278 
Customer accounts and funds payable
707 
379 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
1,848 
1,767 
Deferred revenue
79 
98 
Income taxes payable
371 
167 
Current liabilities of discontinued operations
— 
1,307 
Total current liabilities
4,622 
4,002 
Operating lease liabilities
200 
316 
Deferred tax liabilities
3,116 
2,368 
Long-term debt
7,727 
7,740 
Other liabilities
1,183 
1,260 
Long-term liabilities of discontinued operations
— 
63 
Total liabilities
16,848 
15,749 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
Stockholders’ equity:
Common stock, $0.001 par value; 3,580 shares authorized; 594 and 684 shares outstanding
2 
2 
Additional paid-in capital
16,659 
16,497 
Treasury stock at cost, 1,121 and 1,021 shares
(43,371)
(36,515)
Retained earnings
36,090 
22,961 
Accumulated other comprehensive income
398 
616 
Total stockholders’ equity
9,778 
3,561 
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$
26,626 
$
19,310 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
57

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In millions, except per share amounts)
Net revenues
$
10,420 
$
8,894 
$
7,429 
Cost of net revenues
2,650 
1,797 
1,585 
Gross profit
7,770 
7,097 
5,844 
Operating expenses:
 
Sales and marketing
2,170 
2,091 
1,866 
Product development
1,325 
1,028 
930 
General and administrative
921 
985 
988 
Provision for transaction losses
422 
330 
262 
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
9 
27 
28 
Total operating expenses
4,847 
4,461 
4,074 
Income from operations
2,923 
2,636 
1,770 
Gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net
(2,365)
1,007 
133 
Interest and other, net
(160)
(298)
(251)
Income from continuing operations before income taxes
398 
3,345 
1,652 
Income tax provision
(146)
(858)
(219)
Income from continuing operations
$
252 
$
2,487 
$
1,433 
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
13,356 
3,180 
353 
Net income
$
13,608 
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
Income per share - basic:
 
 
Continuing operations
$
0.39 
$
3.50 
$
1.69 
Discontinued operations
20.48 
4.48 
0.41 
Net income per share - basic
$
20.87 
$
7.98 
$
2.10 
Income per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.38 
$
3.46 
$
1.68 
Discontinued operations
20.16 
4.43 
0.41 
Net income per share - diluted
$
20.54 
$
7.89 
$
2.09 
Weighted average shares:
 
 
Basic
652 
710 
849 
Diluted
663 
718 
856 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
58

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In millions)
Net income
$
13,608 
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of reclassification adjustments:
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(326)
291 
(99)
Unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
(12)
— 
61 
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on investments, net
3 
— 
(16)
Unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
150 
(76)
(77)
Tax benefit (expense) on unrealized gains (losses) on hedging activities, net
(33)
17 
17 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
(218)
232 
(114)
Comprehensive income
$
13,390 
$
5,899 
$
1,672 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
59

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
 
2019
 
(In millions)
Common stock:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
$
2  $
2  $
2 
Common stock issued
—  
—  
— 
Common stock repurchased
— 
— 
— 
Balance, end of year
2  
2  
2 
Additional paid-in-capital:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
16,497  
16,126  
15,716 
Common stock and stock-based awards issued
93  
89  
104 
Tax withholdings related to net share settlements of restricted stock awards and units
(236)
(175)
(202)
Stock-based compensation
497  
463  
505 
Forward contract for share repurchase
(188)
— 
— 
Other
(4)
(6)
3 
Balance, end of year
16,659  
16,497  
16,126 
Treasury stock at cost:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
(36,515)  
(31,396)  
(26,394)
Common stock repurchased
(6,856)  
(5,119)  
(5,002)
Balance, end of year
(43,371)  
(36,515)  
(31,396)
Retained earnings:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
22,961  
17,754  
16,459 
Net income
13,608  
5,667  
1,786 
Dividends and dividend equivalents declared
(479)
(460)
(491)
Balance, end of year
36,090  
22,961  
17,754 
Accumulated other comprehensive income:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
616  
384  
498 
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on investments
(12)  
—  
61 
Change in unrealized gains (losses) on derivative instruments
150  
(76)  
(77)
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(326)  
291  
(99)
Tax benefit (provision) on above items
(30)
17 
1 
Balance, end of year
398  
616  
384 
Total stockholders’ equity
$
9,778 
$
3,561  $
2,870 
Number of shares:
 
 
Common stock - shares outstanding:
 
 
Balance, beginning of year
684  
796  
915 
Common stock issued
10  
12  
15 
Common stock repurchased
(100)  
(124)  
(134)
Balance, end of year
594  
684  
796 
Dividends and dividend equivalents declared per share or restricted stock unit
$
0.72 
$
0.64 
$
0.56 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
60

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In millions)
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
 
Net income
$
13,608 
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
(Income) loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
(13,356)
(3,180)
(353)
Adjustments:
 
 
Provision for transaction losses
422 
330 
262 
Depreciation and amortization
502 
583 
600 
Stock-based compensation
477 
417 
415 
(Gain) loss on investments, net
(143)
2 
— 
(Gain) loss on sale of business
— 
— 
52 
Deferred income taxes
(680)
414 
7 
Change in fair value of warrant
(357)
(770)
(133)
Change in fair value of equity investment in Adevinta
3,070 
— 
— 
Gain on equity investment in KakaoBank
(486)
(239)
— 
Loss on impairment of equity investment in Paytm Mall
160 
— 
— 
(Gain) loss on extinguishment of debt
10 
— 
— 
Changes in assets and liabilities, net of acquisition effects
Accounts receivable
195 
31 
(93)
Other current assets
41 
(677)
91 
Other non-current assets
188 
141 
190 
Accounts payable
9 
69 
(11)
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
(535)
209 
(306)
Deferred revenue
(17)
(20)
(1)
Income taxes payable and other tax liabilities
(15)
27 
(90)
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities
3,093 
3,004 
2,416 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
(436)
(585)
698 
Net cash provided by operating activities
2,657 
2,419 
3,114 
Cash flows from investing activities:
 
 
 
Purchases of property and equipment
(444)
(463)
(508)
Purchases of investments
(22,161)
(32,887)
(46,966)
Maturities and sales of investments
18,884 
33,129 
50,548 
Proceeds from sale of shares in Adevinta
2,325 
— 
— 
Settlement of foreign exchange derivative instruments in equity investments
85 
— 
— 
Exercise of options under warrant
(110)
— 
— 
Equity investment in Paytm Mall
— 
— 
(160)
Other
4 
42 
(14)
Net cash provided by (used in) continuing investing activities
(1,417)
(179)
2,900 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
5,080 
3,973 
(113)
Net cash provided by investing activities
3,663 
3,794 
2,787 
Cash flows from financing activities:
 
 
 
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
93 
90 
106 
Repurchases of common stock
(7,055)
(5,137)
(4,973)
Payments for taxes related to net share settlements of restricted stock units and awards
(236)
(175)
(202)
Payments for dividends
(466)
(447)
(473)
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net
2,478 
1,765 
— 
Repayment of debt
(1,156)
(1,771)
(1,550)
Net funds receivable and payable activity
(208)
— 
— 
Other
(7)
(5)
5 
Net cash (used in) continuing financing activities
(6,557)
(5,680)
(7,087)
61

Table of Contents
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In millions)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
25 
(12)
(4)
Net cash (used in) financing activities
(6,532)
(5,692)
(7,091)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
24 
77 
(33)
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
(188)
598 
(1,223)
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at beginning of period
1,594 
996 
2,219 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at end of period
$
1,406 
$
1,594 
$
996 
Less: Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of discontinued operations
— 
356 
337 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of continuing operations at end of period
$
1,406 
$
1,238 
$
659 
Supplemental cash flow disclosures of continuing operations:
 
 
 
Cash paid for:
Interest
$
253 
$
271 
$
304 
Income taxes
$
929 
$
493 
$
249 
Noncash investing activities:
Equity investment in Adevinta
$
10,776 
$
— 
$
— 
Equity investment in Gmarket
$
728 
$
— 
$
— 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
62

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1 — The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The Company
eBay Inc. is a global commerce leader, which includes our Marketplace platforms. Founded in 1995 in San Jose, California, eBay is one of the
world’s largest and most vibrant marketplaces  for discovering great value and unique selection. Collectively,  we connect millions of buyers and
sellers around the world, empowering people and creating opportunity for all. Our technologies and services are designed to give buyers choice and
a breadth of relevant inventory and to enable sellers worldwide to organize and offer their inventory for sale, virtually anytime and anywhere. 
When we refer to “we,” “our,” “us,” the “Company” or “eBay” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we mean the current Delaware corporation
(eBay Inc.) and its consolidated subsidiaries, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires.
On November 14, 2021, we completed the previously announced sale of 80.01% of the outstanding equity interests of eBay Korea LLC, a
limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Korea and a wholly owned subsidiary of eBay KTA (“eBay Korea”) to E-mart Inc. and one of
its  wholly  owned  subsidiaries  (together,  “Emart”),  pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  securities  purchase  agreement,  in  exchange  for
approximately $3.0 billion of gross cash proceeds as of the transaction close date, subject to certain adjustments specified for indebtedness, cash,
working  capital,  transaction  expenses  and  certain  taxes.  The  sale  resulted  in  a  pre-tax  gain  of  $3.2  billion  inclusive  of  a  $81  million  currency
translation adjustment and a $44 million gain on the net investment hedge settled in the fourth quarter of 2021, as well as income tax expense of
$369 million. Upon completion of the sale, we retained 19.99% of the outstanding equity interests of the new entity, Gmarket Global LLC (“Gmarket”)
formerly known as Apollo Korea, which is accounted for under the fair value option. Our equity investment in Gmarket was valued at $728 million as
of the transaction close date.
We have classified the related assets and liabilities associated with our eBay Korea business as discontinued operations in our consolidated
balance sheet. The results of our eBay Korea business have been presented as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for
all  periods  presented  through  November  14,  2021  as  the  transfer  represented  a  strategic  shift  in  our  business  that  had  a  major  effect  on  our
operations and financial results. See “Note 3 — Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
On June 24, 2021, we completed the previously announced transfer of our Classifieds business to Adevinta ASA (“Adevinta”) for $2.5 billion in
cash, subject to certain adjustments, and approximately 540 million shares in Adevinta which represent an equity interest of 44%, comprised of
approximately 33% of voting shares and 11% of non-voting shares. Together, the total consideration received under the definitive agreement was
valued at approximately $13.3 billion, based on the closing trading price of Adevinta’s outstanding shares on the Oslo Stock Exchange on June 24,
2021. The equity interest received is accounted for under the fair value option. Our equity investment in Adevinta was valued at $10.8 billion as of
the transaction close date.
On November 18, 2021, we completed the previously announced sale of approximately 135 million of our voting shares in Adevinta to Astinlux
Finco  S.à  r.l.  (“Permira”),  inclusive  of  the  option  exercised  by  Permira  to  purchase  additional  voting  shares,  for  total  cash  consideration  of
approximately  $2.3  billion.  At the close of  the  sale inclusive  of  the  option  exercised,  our ownership  in  Adevinta  was reduced  to  33%.  The sale
resulted in a pre-tax gain of $9 million which included an $88 million gain recognized on the sale of the shares offset by a $79 million loss from the
change in fair value of the shares sold through the date of sale, and resulted in no additional income tax. Following the sale in November 2021, our
equity investment in Adevinta is presented in the long-term assets section on the consolidated balance sheet to reflect our contractual requirement
to retain at least 25% of the total number of issued and outstanding equity securities of Adevinta until October 14, 2023.
We have classified the related assets and liabilities associated with our Classifieds business as discontinued operations in our consolidated
balance sheet. The results of our Classifieds business have been presented as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for
all periods presented through June 24, 2021 as
63

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
the transfer represented a strategic shift in our business that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. See “Note 3 — Discontinued
Operations” for additional information.
On November 24, 2019, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of viagogo to sell our StubHub business. The sale of our
StubHub business was completed on February 13, 2020. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, StubHub’s financial results for periods prior to the
sale  have  been  reflected  in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  as  discontinued  operations.  Additionally,  the  related  assets  and  liabilities
associated with the discontinued operations in the prior periods are classified as discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet. See
“Note 3 — Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (“GAAP”)  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an
ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to provisions for transaction losses, legal contingencies, income taxes, revenue
recognition,  stock-based  compensation,  investments,  goodwill  and  the  recoverability  of  intangible  assets.  We  base  our  estimates  on  historical
experience and on various other assumptions  that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.  Actual results could differ from those
estimates.
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements are consolidated and include the financial statements of eBay Inc., our wholly and majority-owned
subsidiaries  and  variable  interest  entities  (“VIE”)  where  we  are  the  primary  beneficiary.  All  intercompany  balances  and  transactions  have  been
eliminated in consolidation. Minority interests are recorded as a noncontrolling interest. A qualitative approach is applied to assess the consolidation
requirement for VIEs. Generally, investments in entities where we hold at least a 20% ownership interest and have the ability to exercise significant
influence, but not control, over the investee are accounted for using the equity method of accounting, including those in which the fair value option
has been elected. For equity method investments, our share of the investees’ results of operations is included in gain (loss) on equity investments
and warrant, net and this investment balance is included in long-term investments. For equity investments under the fair value option, the change in
fair value of the investment is included in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net and this investment balance is included in long-term
investments. Investments in entities where we hold less than a 20% ownership interest are generally accounted for as equity investments to be
measured at fair value or, under an election, at cost if it does not have readily determinable fair value, in which case the carrying value would be
adjusted upon the occurrence of an observable price change in an orderly transaction for identical or similar instruments or impairment.
Significant Accounting Policies
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to
which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected, which are subsequently
remitted to governmental authorities.
Net transaction revenues
Our net transaction revenues primarily include final value fees, feature fees, including fees to promote listings, and listing fees from sellers in
our Marketplace. Our net transaction revenues also include store subscription and other fees often from large enterprise sellers. Our net transaction
revenues are reduced by incentives provided to our customers.
64

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
We identified one performance obligation to sellers on our Marketplace platform, which is to connect buyers and sellers on our secure and
trusted  Marketplace  platforms,  including  payment  processing  activities.  Final  value  fees  are  recognized  when  an  item  is  sold  on  a Marketplace
platform, satisfying this performance obligation. There may be additional services available to Marketplace sellers, mainly to promote or feature
listings,  that  are  not  distinct  within  the  context  of  the  contract.  Accordingly,  fees  for  these  additional  services  are  recognized  when  the  single
performance obligation is satisfied. Promoted listing fees are recognized when the item is sold and feature and listing fees are recognized when an
item is sold, or when the contract expires.
Store  subscription  and  other  nonstandard  listing  contracts  may  contain  multiple  performance  obligations,  including  discounts  on  future
services.  Determining  whether  performance  obligations  should  be  accounted  for  separately  or  combined  may  require  significant  judgment.  The
transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on its stand-alone selling price (“SSP”). In instances where SSP is not directly
observable, we generally estimate selling prices based on when they are sold to customers of a similar nature and geography. These estimates are
generally based on pricing strategies, market factors, strategic objectives and observable inputs. Store subscription revenues are recognized over
the  subscription  period,  and  discounts  offered  through  store  subscription  or  nonstandard  listing  contracts  are  recognized  when  the  options  are
exercised or when the options expire.
Further, to drive traffic to our platforms, we provide incentives to buyers and sellers in various forms including discounts on fees, discounts on
items  sold,  coupons  and  rewards.  Evaluating  whether  a  promotion  or  incentive  is  a  payment  to  a  customer  may  require  significant  judgment.
Promotions and incentives which are consideration payable to a customer are recognized as a reduction of revenue at the later of when revenue is
recognized or when we pay or promise to pay the incentive. Promotions and incentives to most buyers on our Marketplace platforms, to whom we
have no performance obligation, are recognized as sales and marketing expense. In addition, we may provide credits to customers when we refund
certain fees. Credits are accounted for as variable consideration at contract inception when estimating the amount of revenue to be recognized
when  a  performance  obligation  is  satisfied  to  the  extent  that  it  is  probable  that  a  significant  reversal  of  revenue  will  not  occur  and  updated  as
additional information becomes available.
Marketing services and other revenues
Our  marketing  services  and  other  revenues  are  derived  principally  from  the  sale  of  advertisements  and  revenue  sharing  arrangements.
Advertising revenue is derived principally from the sale of online advertisements which are based on “impressions” (i.e., the number of times that an
advertisement appears in pages viewed by users of our platforms) or “clicks” (which are generated each time users on our platforms click through
our advertisements to an advertiser’s designated website) delivered to advertisers. We use the output method and apply the practical expedient to
recognize advertising revenue in the amount to which we have a right to invoice. For contracts with target advertising commitments with rebates,
estimated payout is accounted for as a variable consideration to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur.
Revenues related to revenue sharing arrangements are recognized based on whether we are the principal and are responsible for fulfilling the
promise to provide the specified services or whether we are an agent arranging for those services to be provided by our partners. Determining
whether we are a principal or agent in these contracts may require significant judgment. If we are the principal, we recognize revenue in the gross
amount of consideration received from the customer, whereas if we are an agent, we recognize revenue net of the consideration due to our partners
at a point in time when the services are provided. Our most significant revenue share arrangements are with shipping service providers. We are
primarily acting as an agent in these contracts and revenues are recognized at a point in time when we have satisfied our promise of connecting the
shipping service provider to our customer.
65

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Internal use software and platform development costs
Direct costs incurred to develop software for internal use and platform development costs are capitalized and amortized over an estimated
useful life of one to five years. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we capitalized costs, primarily related to labor and stock-
based compensation, of $127 million and $129 million, respectively. Amortization of previously capitalized amounts was $133 million, $139 million
and  $150  million  for  2021,  2020  and  2019,  respectively.  Costs  related  to  the  design  or  maintenance  of  internal  use  software  and  platform
development are expensed as incurred.
Advertising expense
We expense the costs of producing advertisements at the time production occurs and expense the cost of communicating advertisements in
the period during which the advertising space or airtime is used, in each case as sales and marketing expense. Internet advertising expenses are
recognized based on the terms of the individual agreements, which are generally over the greater of the ratio of the number of impressions delivered
over  the  total  number  of  contracted  impressions,  on  a  pay-per-click  basis,  or  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  term  of  the  contract.  Advertising
expense totaled $1.1 billion, $1.1 billion and $0.8 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock-based compensation
We have equity incentive plans under which we grant equity awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), total shareholder
return performance stock units (“TSR PSUs”), performance-based restricted stock units, and performance share units, to our directors, officers and
employees. We primarily issue RSUs. We determine compensation expense associated with RSUs based on the fair value of our common stock on
the date of grant. We determine compensation expense associated with stock options based on the estimated grant date fair value method using the
Black-Scholes valuation model. We generally recognize compensation expense using a straight-line amortization method over the respective vesting
period for awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Accordingly, stock-based compensation expense for 2021, 2020 and 2019 has been reduced
for estimated forfeitures. When estimating forfeitures, we consider voluntary termination behaviors as well as trends of actual option forfeitures. We
recognize  a  benefit  or  provision  from  stock-based  compensation  in  earnings  as  a  component  of  income  tax  expense  to  the  extent  that  an
incremental tax benefit or deficiency is realized by following the ordering provisions of the tax law.
Provision for transaction losses
Provision  for  transaction  losses  consists  primarily  of  losses  resulting  from  our  buyer  protection  programs,  payment  misuse  including
chargebacks for unauthorized credit card use and merchant related chargebacks due to non-delivery of goods or services and account takeovers.
Provision for transaction losses represent our estimate of actual losses based on our historical experience and many other factors including
changes to our protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes as well as economic conditions such as COVID-19.
Provision for credit losses
Provision  for  credit  losses  consist  of  bad  debt  expense  associated  with  our  accounts  receivable  balance.  These  losses  are  recorded  in
provision for transaction losses in our consolidated statement of income.
We are exposed to credit losses primarily through our receivables from sellers or advertisers. We develop estimates to reflect the risk of credit
loss which are based on historical loss trends adjusted for asset specific attributes, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of
the economic conditions that will exist through the contractual life of the financial asset. Our receivables are recovered over a period of 0-180 days,
therefore, forecasted changes to economic conditions are not expected to have a significant effect on the estimate of the allowance for doubtful
accounts, except in extraordinary circumstances. We write off the asset when it is no longer deemed collectible or when it goes past due 180 days
whichever is earlier, with certain limited exceptions.
66

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
We monitor our ongoing credit exposure through an active review of collection trends. Our activities include monitoring the timeliness of payment
collection, managing dispute resolution and performing timely account reconciliations. We may employ collection agencies to pursue recovery of
defaulted receivables.
Customer accounts and funds receivable
These balances represent payments in transit and cash received and held by financial institutions and payment processors associated with
marketplace activity and awaiting settlement or are installment collections from financial institutions.
We are exposed to credit losses from customer accounts and funds receivable balances held by third party financial institutions. We assess
these balances for credit loss based on a review of the average period for which the funds are held, credit ratings of the financial institutions and by
assessing the probability of default and loss given default models. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not record any credit-related loss.
Payment processor advances
Payment processor advances represent amounts prefunded to and held by payment processors in order to fund outflows in the normal course
of the transaction lifecycle, including but not limited to payment processor fees, seller account payouts, and incentives such as coupons or gift cards.
Payment processor advances are recorded within other current assets in our consolidated balance sheet. Other accounts are used to collect and
remit indirect taxes from the buyer to the local tax authorities and to transfer shipping label proceeds from the seller to the relevant shipping service
providers.  Generally,  changes  in  balances  that  impact  the  determination  of  net  income,  such  as  payment  processor  fees  and  incentives  are
presented within operating activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows. Changes in balances that pertain solely to payment intermediation
activities (e.g. seller pay-out services) are presented within financing activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
Customer accounts and funds payable
These balances primarily represent the Company’s liability towards its customers to settle the funds from the completed transactions on the
platform associated with marketplace activity.
Income taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties and the
complexity of taxes on foreign earnings. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Tax
positions are evaluated for potential reserves for uncertainty based on the estimated probability of sustaining the position under examination. Our
income tax rate is affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings including U.S. minimum taxes on foreign earnings. The deferred tax
benefit derived from the amortization of our intellectual property is based on the fair value, which has been agreed with foreign tax authorities. The
deferred tax benefit may from time to time change based on changes in tax rates. 
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach, which requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the
current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements
or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of enacted tax laws; the effects of future
changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated. If necessary, the measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by the amount of any tax benefits
that are not expected to be realized based on available evidence.
We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We
recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
67

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
Cash and cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less when purchased, which
may include bank deposits, U.S. Treasury securities, time deposits, and certificates of deposit.
We consider cash to be restricted when withdrawal or general use is legally restricted. Our restricted cash balance is primarily comprised of
cash on deposit with banks restricted to safeguard seller payables.
Investments
Short-term investments are primarily comprised of corporate debt securities, commercial paper and government and agency securities. Short-
term investments are investments with original maturities of less than one year when purchased, are classified as available-for-sale and are reported
at fair value using the specific identification method. Short-term investments also include equity securities with readily determinable fair values that
can be sold in active markets.
Long-term investments are primarily comprised of corporate debt securities, government and agency securities, equity investment under the
fair value option, equity investments under the equity method of accounting and equity investments without readily determinable fair values. Debt
securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value using the specific identification method.
Unrealized  gains  and  losses  on  our  available-for-sale  debt  securities  are  excluded  from  earnings  and  reported  as  a  component  of  other
comprehensive income (loss), net of related estimated income tax provisions or benefits. We periodically assess our portfolio of debt investments for
impairment. For debt securities in an unrealized loss position, this assessment first takes into account our intent to sell, or whether it is more likely
than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. If either of these criteria are met, the debt security’s
amortized cost basis is written down to fair value through interest and other, net. For debt securities in an unrealized loss position that do not meet
the aforementioned criteria, we assess whether the decline in fair value has resulted from credit losses or other factors. In making this assessment,
we consider the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost, any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, and any adverse
conditions specifically related to the security, among other factors. If this assessment indicates that a credit loss may exist, the present value of cash
flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected
to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit loss exists and an allowance for credit losses will be recorded through interest and
other,  net,  limited  by  the  amount  that  the  fair  value  is  less  than  the  amortized  cost  basis.  Any  additional  impairment  not  recorded  through  an
allowance for credit losses is recognized in other comprehensive income. Changes in the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for
(or reversal of) credit loss expense. Losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectability of an available-for-
sale security is confirmed or when either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met. These changes are recorded in gain (loss) on
equity investments and warrant, net.
Our equity investments include equity investments with readily determinable fair values, equity investments without readily determinable fair
values and equity investments under the equity method of accounting, including those in which the fair value option has been elected. Our equity
investment in Adevinta is described in a separate section under “Equity investment in Adevinta” in this Note.
Equity investments with readily determinable fair values are investments in publicly-traded companies for which we do not exercise significant
influence and are measured at fair value based on the respective closing stock price and prevailing foreign exchange rate, as applicable, at the
period end date. Equity investments with readily determinable fair values are classified within Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation can
be obtained from real time quotes in active markets. Subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in gain (loss) on equity investments and
warrant, net.
Equity  investments without  readily  determinable  fair  values are  non-marketable  equity  securities,  which  are  investments  in  privately-held
companies for which we do not exercise significant influence and are accounted for under the measurement alternative. Under the measurement
alternative, the carrying value is measured at cost
68

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
minus  impairment,  if  any,  plus  or  minus  changes  resulting  from  observable  price  changes  in  orderly  transactions  for  the  identical  or  a  similar
investment of the same issuer. We perform a qualitative fair value assessment on a quarterly basis over our equity investments without readily
determinable fair values to identify any changes in basis or impairments. Equity investments without readily determinable fair values are considered
impaired when there is an indication that the fair value of our interest is less than the carrying amount. Changes in value and impairments of equity
investments without readily determinable fair values are recognized in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net.
We account for equity investments through which we exercise significant influence but do not have control over the investee under the equity
method or under the fair value option. For equity method investments, our consolidated results of operations include, as a component of gain (loss)
on equity investments and warrant, net, our share of the net income or loss of the equity investments accounted for under the equity method of
accounting.  Our  share  of  equity  method  investees’  results  of  operations  was  not  material  for  any  period  presented.  We  perform  a  qualitative
impairment assessment on a quarterly basis over our equity method investments. Equity method investments are considered impaired when there is
an indication of an other-than-temporary decline in value below the carrying amount. Impairments and any other adjustments to equity method
investments are recorded in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net.
Equity investment under the fair value option is measured at fair value based on a quarterly valuation analysis and is classified within Level 3
in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation reflects management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the equity
investment. Subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net.
We describe our accounting policy for our equity investment in Adevinta in a separate section under “Equity investment in Adevinta.”
Refer to “Note 6 — Investments” and “Note 8 — Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities” for additional details.
Equity investment in Adevinta
At the initial recognition of our equity investment in Adevinta on June 24, 2021, we elected the fair value option where subsequent changes in
fair value are recognized in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net in the consolidated statement of income. We report the investment at
fair  value  within  equity  investment  in  Adevinta  in  our  consolidated  balance  sheet.  The  investment  is  classified  within  Level  1  in  the  fair  value
hierarchy as the valuation can be obtained from real time quotes in active markets. The fair value of the equity investment is measured based on
Adevinta’s  closing stock  price  and prevailing  foreign  exchange rate.  We  believe the  fair value option  election  creates  more  transparency  of  the
current value of our shares in the equity investment for Adevinta.
Refer to “Note 6 — Investments” and “Note 8 — Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities” for additional details.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease or contains a lease at inception. Operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present
value of the remaining lease payments, discounted using the discount rate for the lease at the commencement date. As the rate implicit in the lease
is  not  readily  determinable  for  our  operating  leases,  we  generally  use  an  incremental  borrowing  rate  based  on  information  available  at  the
commencement  date  to  determine  the  present  value  of  future  lease  payments.  Operating  right-of-use  (“ROU”)  assets  are  generally  recognized
based on the amount of the initial measurement of the lease liability. Our leases have remaining lease terms of up to eight years, some of which
include options to extend the leases for up to five years, and some of which include options to terminate the leases within one year. Lease expense
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for our
data center leases. Lease and non-lease components for all other leases are accounted for separately.
Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use assets, other current liabilities and operating lease liabilities on our consolidated
balance sheets.
69

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Property and equipment
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  historical  cost  less  accumulated  depreciation.  Depreciation  for  equipment,  buildings  and  leasehold
improvements commences once they are ready for our intended use. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated
useful  lives  of  the  assets,  generally, one to  three  years  for  computer  equipment  and  software,  up  to  thirty  years  for  buildings  and  building
improvements, the shorter of five years or the term of the lease for leasehold improvements and three years for furniture, fixtures and vehicles. Land
is not depreciated.
Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a minimum on an annual basis at the reporting unit level. A qualitative assessment can be performed to
determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass
the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using
income and market approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The discounted
cash  flow  method,  a  form  of  the  income  approach,  uses  expected  future  operating  results  and  a  market  participant  discount  rate.  The  market
approach  uses  comparable  company  prices  and  other  relevant  information  generated  by  market  transactions  (either  publicly  traded  entities  or
mergers and acquisitions) to develop pricing metrics to be applied to historical and expected future operating results of our reporting unit. Failure to
achieve these expected results, changes in the discount rate or market pricing metrics may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting
unit. We conducted our annual impairment test of goodwill as of August 31, 2021 and 2020 and determined that no adjustment to the carrying value
of goodwill for any reporting unit was required. 
Intangible assets consist of purchased customer lists and user base, marketing related, developed technologies and other intangible assets,
including patents and contractual agreements. Intangible assets are amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method
and estimated useful lives ranging from one to three years. No significant residual value is estimated for intangible assets.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We evaluate long-lived assets (including leases and intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that  the  carrying  amount  of  a  long-lived  asset  may  not  be  recoverable.  An  asset  is  considered  impaired  if  its  carrying  amount  exceeds  the
undiscounted future net cash flow the asset is expected to generate. In 2021 and 2020, we recorded immaterial impairment charges and in 2019, no
impairment was recorded.
Foreign currency
Most  of our foreign  subsidiaries  use the local currency  of  their  respective  countries  as their  functional  currency.  Assets  and liabilities  are
translated  into U.S. dollars  using exchange  rates  prevailing at  the balance sheet  date,  while revenues  and expenses  are translated  at  average
exchange rates during the year. Gains and losses resulting from the translation of our consolidated balance sheet are recorded as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income.
Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are recognized as interest and other, net.
Derivative instruments
We use derivative financial instruments, primarily forwards, options and swaps, to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures.
We may also use other derivative instruments not designated as hedges, such as forwards to hedge foreign currency balance sheet exposures. We
do not use derivative financial instruments for trading purposes. 
We also entered into a warrant agreement in addition to a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued
70

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant is accounted for as a derivative instrument under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and
Hedging.
See “Note 7 — Derivative Instruments” for a full description of our derivative instrument activities and related accounting policies.
Concentration of credit risk
Our cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable, customer accounts and funds receivable, available-for-sale debt securities and derivative
instruments are potentially subject to concentration of credit risk. Cash and cash equivalents are placed with financial institutions that management
believes are of high credit quality. Our accounts receivable are derived from revenue earned from customers. In each of the years ended December
31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, no customer accounted for more than 10% of net revenues. Our derivative instruments expose us to credit risk to the
extent that our counterparties may be unable to meet the terms of the agreements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued new guidance to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing
certain exceptions to the general principles and also simplification of areas such as franchise taxes, step-up in tax basis goodwill, separate entity
financial  statements  and  interim  recognition  of  enactment  of  tax  laws  or  rate  changes.  The  standard  is  effective  for  annual  reporting  periods
beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim reporting periods within those fiscal years. We adopted this guidance in the first quarter of
2021 with no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In  2020,  the  FASB  issued  new  guidance  to  decrease  diversity  in practice  and  increase  comparability  for  the  accounting  of  certain  equity
securities and investments under the equity method of accounting. The standard is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal
years,  beginning  after  December  15,  2020.  We  adopted  this  guidance  in  the  first  quarter  of  2021  with  no  material  impact  on  our  consolidated
financial statements.
71

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 2 — Net Income Per Share
Basic  net  income  per  share  is  computed  by  dividing  net  income  for  the  period  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  common  shares
outstanding during the period. Diluted net income per share is computed by dividing net income for the period by the weighted average number of
shares of common stock and potentially dilutive common stock outstanding during the period. The dilutive effect of outstanding options and equity
incentive awards is reflected in diluted net income per share by application of the treasury stock method. The calculation of diluted net income per
share excludes all anti-dilutive common shares.
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted net income per share (in millions, except per share amounts):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Numerator:
Income from continuing operations
$
252 
$
2,487 
$
1,433 
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
13,356 
3,180 
353 
Net income
$
13,608 
$
5,667 
$
1,786 
Denominator:
Weighted average shares of common stock - basic
652 
710 
849 
Dilutive effect of equity incentive awards
11 
8 
7 
Weighted average shares of common stock - diluted
663 
718 
856 
Income per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.39 
$
3.50 
$
1.69 
Discontinued operations
20.48 
4.48 
0.41 
Net income per share - basic
$
20.87 
$
7.98 
$
2.10 
Income per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.38 
$
3.46 
$
1.68 
Discontinued operations
20.16 
4.43 
0.41 
Net income per share - diluted
$
20.54 
$
7.89 
$
2.09 
Common stock equivalents excluded from income per diluted share because their effect would
have been anti-dilutive
1 
5 
18 
72

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 3 — Discontinued Operations
eBay Korea
On November 14, 2021, we completed the previously announced sale of 80.01% of the outstanding equity interests of eBay Korea to E-mart
for approximately $3.0 billion of gross cash proceeds as of the transaction close date, subject to certain adjustments specified for indebtedness,
cash, working capital, transaction expenses and certain taxes. The sale resulted in a pre-tax gain of $3.2 billion inclusive of a $81 million currency
translation adjustment and a $44 million gain net of tax on the net investment hedge settled in the fourth quarter of 2021, as well as income tax
expense of $369 million.
In addition, upon closing we entered into a transition service agreement with eBay Korea to support the operations of eBay Korea after the
divestiture for immaterial fees. This agreement commenced with the close of the transaction and has minimum initial terms of 6 months and can be
extended for a maximum of 3 months.
Classifieds
On  June  24,  2021,  we  completed  the  previously  announced  transfer  of  our  Classifieds  business  to  Adevinta  for  total  consideration  of
$13.3 billion which included $2.5 billion in cash proceeds and approximately 540 million shares of Adevinta valued at $10.8 billion on the date of
close and represented a 44% equity interest. The transfer resulted in a pre-tax gain of $12.5 billion and related income tax expense of $2.1 billion,
both within income from discontinued operations. The consideration is subject to adjustments specified in the definitive agreement.
In  addition,  upon  closing  we  entered  into  a  transition  service  agreement  with  Adevinta  to  support  the  operations  of  Classifieds  after  the
divestiture for fees of $29 million. This agreement commenced with the close of the transaction and have minimum initial terms ranging from 6 to 12
months and can be extended for a maximum of 6 months.
StubHub
On February 13, 2020, we completed the previously announced sale of our StubHub business to an affiliate of viagogo for $4.1 billion in
proceeds  ($3.2  billion,  net  of  income  taxes  of  approximately  $0.9  billion)  and  a  pre-tax  gain  of  $3.9  billion  within  income  from  discontinued
operations.
In connection with the sale of StubHub, we entered into a transition service agreement with viagogo pursuant to which we provided services,
including,  but  not  limited  to,  business  support  services  for  StubHub  after  the  divestiture.  These  agreements  commenced  with  the  close  of  the
transaction and terminated in the fourth quarter of 2021. The related fees in 2021 were $34 million for support services prior to termination.
Discontinued operations
The following table presents financial results from discontinued operations, net of income taxes in our consolidated statement of income for
the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021 
2020 
2019
eBay Korea income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
2,870 
$
55 
$
83 
Classifieds income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
10,485 
197 
217 
StubHub income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
1 
2,930 
59 
PayPal and Enterprise income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
— 
(2)
(6)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
13,356 
$
3,180 
$
353 
(1)
Includes eBay Korea financial results through the transaction close on November 14, 2021 and the related gain on sale.
(2)
Includes Classifieds financial results through the transaction close on June 24, 2021 and the related gain on sale.
(3)
Includes StubHub financial results from January 1, 2020 to February 13, 2020 and the related gain on sale.
(1)(2)
(3)
 
73

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table presents cash flows for discontinued operations for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021 
2020 
2019
eBay Korea net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
$
(25)
$
142 
$
167 
Classifieds net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
(411)
328 
378 
StubHub net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
— 
(1,055)
153 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
$
(436)
$
(585)
$
698 
eBay Korea net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
$
2,611 
$
(40)
$
22 
Classifieds net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
2,469 
(54)
(114)
StubHub net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
— 
4,067 
(21)
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued investing activities
$
5,080 
$
3,973 
$
(113)
eBay Korea net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
$
25 
$
(10)
$
(6)
Classifieds net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
— 
(2)
2 
Net cash provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
25 
(12)
$
(4)
(1)
Includes eBay Korea financial results through the transaction close on November 14, 2021 and the related gain on sale.
(2)
Includes Classifieds financial results through the transaction close on June 24, 2021 and the related gain on sale.
(3)
Includes StubHub financial results from January 1, 2020 to February 13, 2020 and the related gain on sale.
eBay Korea
The financial results of eBay Korea are presented as income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes on our consolidated statement
of income through November 14, 2021, when the sale of 80.01% of the outstanding equity interests of eBay Korea was completed. The following
table presents the financial results of eBay Korea (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021 
2020
2019
Net revenues
$
1,409 
$
1,377 
$
1,207 
Cost of net revenues
815 
676 
551 
Gross profit
594 
701 
656 
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
529 
548 
502 
Product development
64 
59 
46 
General and administrative
38 
18 
17 
Provision for transaction losses
— 
1 
— 
Total operating expenses
631 
626 
565 
Income (loss) from operations of discontinued operations
(37)
75 
91 
Interest and other, net
2 
— 
6 
Pre-tax gain on sale
3,240 
— 
— 
Income (loss) from discontinued operations before income taxes
3,205 
75 
97 
Income tax benefit (provision)
(335)
(20)
(14)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
2,870 
$
55 
$
83 
(1)
Includes eBay Korea financial results through the transaction close on November 14, 2021 and the related gain on sale.
(1)(2)
(3)
(1)
74

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The  following  table  presents  the  aggregate  carrying  amounts  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  discontinued  operations  for  eBay  Korea  in  the
consolidated balance sheet as of the date indicated (in millions):
 
December 31,
2020
Carrying amounts of assets included as part of discontinued operations:
Cash and cash equivalents
$
327 
Short-term investments
6 
Accounts receivable, net
50 
Customer accounts and funds receivable
649 
Other current assets
45 
Property and equipment, net
66 
Goodwill
390 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
79 
Other assets
14 
Total assets classified as discontinued operations in the consolidated balance sheet
$
1,626 
Carrying amounts of liabilities included as part of discontinued operations:
Short-term debt
$
12 
Accounts payable
54 
Customer accounts and funds payable
673 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
91 
Deferred revenue
12 
Income taxes payable
13 
Operating lease liabilities
64 
Deferred tax liabilities
(9)
Long-term debt
5 
Other liabilities
3 
Total liabilities classified as discontinued operations in the consolidated balance sheet
$
918 
Classifieds
The financial results of Classifieds are presented as income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes on our consolidated statement
of  income  through  June  24,  2021,  when  the  transfer  of  Classifieds  was  completed.  Each  period  presented  below  includes  the  impact  of
intercompany revenue agreements through June 24, 2021. The impact of these intercompany revenue agreements to net revenues and cost of net
revenues was $5 million for the period from January 1, 2021 through June 24, 2021, and $14 million and $20 million for the years ended December
31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The continuing revenue and cash flows are not considered to be material.
75

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table presents the financial results of Classifieds (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021 
2020
2019
Net revenues
$
565 
$
980 
$
1,043 
Cost of net revenues
63 
103 
82 
Gross profit
502 
877 
961 
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
183 
286 
335 
Product development
105 
161 
150 
General and administrative
76 
124 
59 
Provision for transaction losses
2 
17 
15 
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
— 
6 
11 
Total operating expenses
366 
594 
570 
Income from operations of discontinued operations
136 
283 
391 
Interest and other, net
— 
— 
(2)
Pre-tax gain on sale
12,534 
— 
— 
Income from discontinued operations before income taxes
12,670 
283 
389 
Income tax provision
(2,185)
(86)
(172)
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
10,485 
$
197 
$
217 
(1)
Includes Classifieds financial results through the transaction close on June 24, 2021 and the related gain on sale.
The  following  table  presents  the  aggregate  carrying  amounts  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  discontinued  operations  for  Classifieds  in  the
consolidated balance sheet as of the date indicated (in millions):
 
December 31, 2020
Carrying amounts of assets included as part of discontinued operations:
Cash and cash equivalents
$
23 
Accounts receivable, net
117 
Other current assets
30 
Long-term investments
32 
Property and equipment, net
31 
Goodwill
465 
Intangible assets, net
35 
Operating lease right-of-use assets
20 
Deferred tax assets
435 
Total assets classified as discontinued operations in the consolidated balance sheet
$
1,188 
Carrying amounts of liabilities included as part discontinued operations:
Accounts payable
$
18 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
104 
Deferred revenue
4 
Income taxes payable
35 
Operating lease liabilities
11 
Deferred tax liabilities
278 
Other liabilities
2 
Total liabilities classified as discontinued operations in the consolidated balance sheet
$
452 
(1)
76

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
StubHub
The financial results of StubHub are presented as income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes on our consolidated statement of
income. The following table presents the financial results of StubHub (in millions):
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020 
2019
Net revenues
$
— 
$
100 
$
1,121 
Cost of net revenues
— 
31 
290 
Gross profit
— 
69 
831 
Operating expenses:
Sales and marketing
— 
51 
491 
Product development
— 
26 
114 
General and administrative
1 
30 
125 
Provision for transaction losses
— 
3 
23 
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
— 
1 
9 
Total operating expenses
1 
111 
762 
Income (loss) from operations of discontinued operations
(1)
(42)
69 
Pre-tax gain on sale
12 
3,868 
— 
Income from discontinued operations before income taxes
11 
3,826 
69 
Income tax provision
(10)
(896)
(10)
Income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
1 
$
2,930 
$
59 
(1)
Includes StubHub financial results from January 1, 2020 to February 13, 2020, and includes the gain on sale recorded for the StubHub transaction.
Paypal and Enterprise
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the discontinued operations activity related to our former PayPal and Enterprise
businesses was immaterial.
(1)
77

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 4 — Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The following table presents goodwill activity for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
December 31,
2019
Goodwill
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31,
2020
Goodwill
Acquired
 
Adjustments
 
December 31,
2021
Goodwill
$
4,155 
$
— 
$
130 
$
4,285 
$
22 
$
(129)
$
4,178 
The adjustments to goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were primarily due to foreign currency translation. There
were no impairments to goodwill in 2021 and 2020.
 
Amortization expense for intangible assets was $9 million, $28 million and $35 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and
2019, respectively. Intangible asset balances were immaterial as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
78

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 5 — Segments
We have one operating and reportable segment. Our reportable segment is Marketplace, which includes our online marketplace located at
www.ebay.com,  its  localized  counterparts  and  the  eBay  suite  of  mobile  apps.  Our  management  and  our  CODM  review  financial  information
presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating performance and do not evaluate using asset information.
During the first quarter of 2020, we classified the results of our previous StubHub segment as discontinued operations in our consolidated
statement of income for all periods presented. In addition, during the third quarter of 2020, we classified the results of our Classifieds segment as
discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for the periods presented. During the second quarter of 2021, we classified the
results of our eBay Korea business which was part of our Marketplace segment as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income
for the periods presented. See “Note 3 — Discontinued Operations” for additional information.
The accounting policies of our segment are the same as those described in “Note 1 — The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting
Policies.”
The following table summarizes net revenues by type for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Net revenues by type:
Net transaction revenues
$
9,772 
$
8,243 
$
6,581 
Marketing services and other revenues
648 
651 
848 
Total net revenues
$
10,420 
$
8,894 
$
7,429 
The following table summarizes the allocation of net revenues based on geography for the periods indicated (in millions): 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
  
2020
  
2019
Net revenues by geography:
U.S.
$
5,048   $
4,151   $
3,303 
United Kingdom
1,913   
1,678   
1,323 
Germany
1,249   
1,106   
1,034 
Rest of world
2,210   
1,959   
1,769 
Total net revenues
$
10,420 
$
8,894 
$
7,429 
Net revenues, inclusive of the effects of foreign exchange during each period, are attributed to U.S. and international geographies primarily
based upon the country in which the seller, platform that displays advertising, other service provider, or customer, as the case may be, is located.
Long-lived assets attributed to the U.S. and international geographies are based upon the country in which the asset is located or owned.
The following table summarizes the allocation of long-lived tangible assets based on geography as of the dates indicated (in millions):
December 31,
2021
2020
Long-lived tangible assets by geography:
U.S.
$
1,400 
$
1,575 
International
125 
147 
Total long-lived tangible assets
$
1,525 
$
1,722 
79

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 6 — Investments
The following tables summarize the unrealized gains and losses and estimated fair value of our investments classified as available-for-sale
debt securities and restricted cash as of the dates indicated (in millions):
 
December 31, 2021
 
Gross
Amortized
Cost
  
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
  
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
 
Estimated
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
22   $
—   $
—  $
22 
Corporate debt securities
4,151   
1   
—  
4,152 
Government and agency securities
25   
—   
—  
25 
$
4,198   $
1   $
—  $
4,199 
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
$
954   $
1   $
(5)  $
950 
Government and agency securities
779   
—   
(2)  
777 
$
1,733   $
1   $
(7)  $
1,727 
 
 
December 31, 2020
 
Gross
Amortized
Cost
  
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
  
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
 
Estimated
Fair Value
Short-term investments:
  
  
 
Restricted cash
$
137   $
—   $
—  $
137 
Corporate debt securities
2,252   
3   
—  
2,255 
$
2,389 
$
3 
$
— 
$
2,392 
Long-term investments:
  
  
 
Corporate debt securities
$
284   $
2   $
—  $
286 
$
284   $
2   $
—  $
286 
We consider cash to be restricted when withdrawal or general use is legally restricted. Restricted cash is held primarily in interest bearing
accounts for letters of credit primarily related to our global sabbatical program. In 2020, our restricted cash balance also included cash on deposit
with  banks  restricted  to  safeguard  seller  payables.  Our  fixed-income  investments  consist  of  predominantly  investment  grade  corporate  debt
securities and government and agency securities. The corporate debt and government and agency securities that we invest in are generally deemed
to be low risk based on their credit ratings from the major rating agencies.
The longer the duration of these securities, the more susceptible they are to changes in market interest rates and bond yields. As interest
rates  increase,  those  securities  purchased  at  a  lower  yield  show  a  mark-to-market  unrealized  loss.  The  unrealized  losses  are  due  primarily  to
changes in credit spreads and interest rates. We regularly review investment securities for other-than-temporary impairment using both qualitative
and  quantitative  criteria. Investments  classified  as  available-for-sale  debt  securities  are  carried  at  fair  value  with  changes  reflected  in  other
comprehensive income. Where there is an intention or a requirement to sell an impaired available-for-sale debt security, the entire impairment is
recognized in earnings with a corresponding adjustment to the amortized cost basis of the security. We presently do not intend to sell any of the
available-for-sale debt securities in an unrealized loss position and expect to realize the full value of all these investments upon maturity or sale.
We regularly review investment securities for credit impairment using both qualitative and quantitative criteria. In making this assessment, we
consider  the  extent  to  which  fair  value  is  less  than  amortized  cost,  any  changes  to  the  rating  of  the  security  by  a  rating  agency,  any  adverse
conditions specifically related to the security, among other factors. If this assessment indicates that a credit loss exists, the present value of cash
flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected
to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit loss exists and an allowance for credit losses will be recorded through interest and
other, net for the credit loss, limited by the amount that the fair value is
80

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
less  than  the  amortized  cost  basis.  Any  impairment  that  has  not  been  recorded  through  an  allowance  for  credit  losses  is  recognized  in  other
comprehensive income. We did not recognize any credit-related impairment through an allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2021.
Investment  securities  in  a continuous  loss  position  for  less  than  12  months  had  an  estimated  fair  value  of  $3.1  billion  and  an  immaterial
amount of unrealized losses as of December 31, 2021, and an estimated fair value of $261 million and an immaterial amount of unrealized losses as
of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no investment securities in a continuous loss position for
greater than 12 months. Refer to “Note 17 — Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income” for amounts reclassified to earnings from unrealized
gains and losses.
 
The following table presents estimated fair values of our short-term and long-term investments classified as available-for-sale debt securities
and restricted cash by date of contractual maturity as of the date indicated (in millions): 
 
December 31, 2021
One year or less (including restricted cash of $22)
$
4,199 
One year through two years
442 
Two years through three years
752 
Three years through four years
391 
Four years through five years
124 
Thereafter
18 
Total
$
5,926 
Equity Investments
The following table summarizes our equity investments as of the dates indicated (in millions):
December 31,
 
Balance Sheet Location
2021
2020
Equity investments with readily determinable fair values
Short-term investments $
1,745 
$
— 
Equity investment in Adevinta
Equity investment in Adevinta
5,391 
— 
Equity investment under the fair value option
Long-term investments
725 
— 
Equity investments under the equity method of accounting
Long-term investments
38 
8 
Equity investments without readily determinable fair values
Long-term investments
85 
539 
Total equity investments
$
7,984 
$
547 
Equity investment in Adevinta
We account for equity investments through which we exercise significant influence but do not have control over the investee under the fair
value option or under the equity method. Our equity investment in Adevinta is accounted for under the fair value option.
Upon  completion  of  the  transfer  of  our  Classifieds  business  to  Adevinta  on  June  24,  2021,  we  received  an  equity  investment  of  44%  in
Adevinta valued at $10.8 billion at the close of the transfer. On November 18, 2021, we completed the sale of approximately 135 million of our voting
shares in Adevinta to Permira, inclusive of the option exercised by Permira to purchase additional voting shares, for total cash consideration of
approximately  $2.3  billion.  Additionally,  we  recognized  a  gain  on  the  settlement  of  a  related  non-designated  foreign  exchange  instrument  of
$84  million  in  interest  and  other,  net in  the  consolidated  statement  of  income.  At  the  close  of  the  sale  inclusive  of  the  option  exercised,  our
ownership in Adevinta was reduced to 33%. Following the sale in November 2021, our equity investment in Adevinta is reported in the long-term
assets section on the consolidated balance sheet to reflect our contractual requirement to retain at least 25% of the total number of issued and
outstanding equity securities of Adevinta until October 14, 2023, subject to certain exceptions specified in the agreement.
81

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
At the initial recognition of the equity investment, we elected the fair value option where subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in
earnings. The investment is classified within Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation can be obtained from real time quotes in active
markets. The fair value of the equity investment is measured based on Adevinta’s closing stock price and prevailing foreign exchange rate at each
balance sheet date and the changes in fair value are reflected in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net in the consolidated statement of
income. We believe the fair value option election creates more transparency of the current value in the equity investment in Adevinta. Our non-
voting shares are convertible to voting shares on a one-to-one basis, subject to a limitation of 33% voting interest. For the year ended December 31,
2021, an unrealized loss of $3,070 million and a realized gain on sale of $9 million were recorded in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant,
net  on  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  related  to  the  investment.  The  realized  gain  on  sale  of  $9  million  included  an  $88  million  gain
recognized on the sale of the shares offset by a $79 million loss from the change in fair value of the shares sold through the date of sale.
The following tables present Adevinta’s summarized financial information on a one-quarter lag. Adevinta’s financial information is prepared on
the  basis  of  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”).  We  have  made  certain  adjustments  to  Adevinta’s  summarized  financial
information to address differences between IFRS and GAAP that materially impact the summarized financial information presented below. Any other
differences between IFRS and GAAP did not have a material impact on Adevinta’s summarized financial information. The period presented in the
table below commenced on June 24, 2021 when we retained an equity investment in Adevinta upon completion of the transfer of our Classifieds
business (in millions):
July 1, 2021
through
September 30, 2021
Revenue
$
450 
Gross profit
$
147 
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
3 
Net income (loss)
$
4 
Net income (loss) attributable to Adevinta
$
3 
(1)
Adevinta’s income statement activity for the stub period of June 24, 2021 to June 30, 2021 was excluded from the summarized financial information as the impact was
considered to be immaterial.
September 30, 2021
Current assets
$
613 
Noncurrent assets
$
16,424 
Current liabilities
$
679 
Noncurrent liabilities
$
4,044 
Noncontrolling interests
$
20 
Equity investments with readily determinable fair values
Equity  investments  with  readily  determinable  fair  values  are  classified  within  Level  1  in  the  fair  value  hierarchy  as  the  valuation  can  be
obtained from real time quotes in active markets. Subsequent changes in fair value are reflected in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant,
net in the consolidated statement of income.
(1) 
82

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In August 2021, one of our equity investments, KakaoBank Corp. (“KakaoBank”), which previously did not have a readily determinable fair
value, completed its initial public offering which resulted in this investment having a readily determinable fair value. The fair value of the equity
investment is measured based on KakaoBank’s closing stock price and prevailing foreign exchange rate at each balance sheet date. For the year
ended December 31, 2021 an unrealized gain of $403 million was recorded in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net related to the
change  in  fair  value  of  the  investment.  For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2021  a  gain  of  $83  million  was  recorded  in  gain  (loss)  on  equity
investments and warrant, net related to the sale of a portion of the shares of the investment for $114 million. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value
of the investment was $684 million and is reported within short-term investments in our consolidated balance sheet.
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that vests in a series of four tranches, at a
specified price per share upon meeting processing volume milestone targets on a calendar year basis. When a relevant milestone is reached, the
warrant becomes exercisable with respect to the corresponding tranche of warrant shares up until the warrant expiration date of January 31, 2025.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we met the processing volume milestone target to vest the first tranche of the warrant. Upon vesting of the first tranche,
we exercised the option to purchase shares of Adyen valued at $1.1 billion in exchange for approximately $110 million in cash. The fair value of the
equity  investment  is  measured  based  on  Adyen’s  closing  stock  price  and  prevailing  foreign  exchange  rate  at  each  balance  sheet  date.  As  of
December 31, 2021, the fair value of the investment was $1,061 million and is reported within short-term investments in our consolidated balance
sheet. Refer to “Note 7 — Derivative Instruments” for more information about the warrant.
Equity investment under the fair value option
We account for equity investments through which we exercise significant influence but do not have control over the investee under the fair
value option or under the equity method. Our equity investment in Gmarket is accounted for under the fair value option.
On November 14, 2021, we completed the previously announced sale of 80.01% of the outstanding equity interests of eBay Korea to Emart.
Upon completion of the sale, we retained 19.99% of the outstanding equity interest of the new entity, Gmarket, over whom we are able to exercise
significant influence based on the terms of the securities purchase agreement, including through our board representation. Our equity investment in
Gmarket was valued at $728 million as of the transaction close date. At the initial recognition of this equity investment, we elected the fair value
option where subsequent changes in fair value are recognized in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net in the consolidated statement of
income. We believe the fair value option election creates more transparency of the current value in the equity investment in Gmarket. Our retained
investment  in  Gmarket  is  subject  to  a  two  year  right  held  by  Emart  to  purchase  the  remaining  interest  at  the  close  price  of  the  sale.  As  of
December 31, 2021, the fair value of the investment was $725 million and is reported within long-term investments in our consolidated balance
sheet.
The investment is classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation reflects management’s estimate of assumptions that market
participants would use in pricing the equity investment. Refer to “Note 8 — Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities” for more information.
Other equity method investments
We account for equity investments through which we exercise significant influence but do not have control over the investee under the fair
value option or under the equity method. For equity investments  accounted for under the equity method, our consolidated results of operations
include,  as  a  component  of gain  (loss)  on  equity  investments  and  warrant,  net,  our  share  of  the  net  income  or  loss  of  the  equity  investments
accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
83

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The  following  tables  present  summarized  financial  information  of  our  equity  investments  accounted  for  under  the  equity  method  in  the
aggregate  on  a  one-quarter  lag.  Financial  information  of  certain  of  our  equity  method  investments  is  prepared  on  the  basis  of  local  generally
accepted  accounting  principles.  We  have  made  certain  adjustments  as  applicable  to  address  differences  between  local  generally  accepted
accounting principles and US GAAP that materially impact the summarized financial information. Any other differences between US GAAP and local
generally accepted accounting principles did not have any material impact on the summarized financial information of the equity method investments
presented below in the aggregate.
During the period in which we recognize an equity method investment, the summarized financial information reflects activity from the date of
recognition.  The  tables  below  exclude  the  summarized  financial  information  of  our  equity  investment  in  Gmarket  as  the  summarized  financial
information  is  presented  on  a  one-quarter  lag.  The  tables  below  also  exclude  the  summarized  financial  information  of  our  equity  investment  in
Adevinta which is separately disclosed above under the heading “Equity investment in Adevinta.”
Twelve months ended September 30,
2021
2020
2019
(In millions)
Revenue
$
41 
$
31 
$
30 
Gross profit
$
12 
$
10 
$
9 
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
2 
$
3 
$
2 
Net income (loss)
$
2 
$
3 
$
2 
Net income (loss) attributable to the equity method investments
$
1 
$
1 
$
1 
September 30,
2021
2020
(In millions)
Current assets
$
76 
$
31 
Noncurrent assets
$
20 
$
21 
Current liabilities
$
26 
$
8 
Noncurrent liabilities
$
4 
$
— 
Noncontrolling interests
$
6 
$
1 
Equity investments without readily determinable fair values
The following table summarizes the total carrying value related to equity investments without readily determinable fair values still held for the
periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2021
2020
Carrying value, beginning of period
$
539 
$
307 
Additions
5 
22 
Upward adjustments for observable price changes
41 
239 
Downward adjustments for observable price changes and impairment
(170)
(40)
Transfers out from investments without readily determinable fair values
(312)
— 
Foreign currency translation and other
(18)
11 
Carrying value, end of period
$
85 
$
539 
84

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In  2021,  we  recorded  an  upward  adjustment  for  observable  price  change  of  $41  million  and  downward  adjustments  for  impairment  of
$170  million  to  the  carrying  values  of  strategic  investments  accounted  for  as  equity  investments  without  readily  determinable  fair  values.  The
downward adjustments for impairment included a $160 million impairment charge related to our equity investment in Paytm Mall, which resulted in
no remaining carrying value for this equity investment. The upward and downward adjustments were recorded in gain (loss) on equity investments
and warrant, net on our consolidated statement of income.
For such equity investments without readily determinable fair values still held at December 31, 2021, the cumulative upward adjustment for
observable price changes was $41 million and cumulative downward adjustment for observable price changes and impairments was $291 million.
In 2020, when our investment in KakaoBank was accounted for as an equity investment without a readily determinable fair value, we recorded
an  upward  adjustment  for  an  observable  price  change  of  $239  million  to  the  carrying  value  and  invested  an  additional  $18  million  in  cash  in
exchange for equity in KakaoBank. The upward adjustment was recorded in gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net on our consolidated
statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes unrealized gains and losses related to equity investments held at December 31, 2021 and presented within
gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
Net gains/(losses) recognized during the period on equity investments
$
(2,716)
$
200 
Less: Net gains/(losses) recognized during the period on equity investments sold during the period 
92 
— 
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on equity investments still held at December 31, 2021
$
(2,808)
$
200 
(1)
Includes gains/(losses) realized on the change in fair value of the shares sold on the respective dates of sale.
(1)
85

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 7 — Derivative Instruments
Our primary objective in holding derivatives is to reduce the volatility of earnings and cash flows associated with changes in foreign currency
exchange rates and interest rates. These hedging contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of adverse foreign exchange rate and
interest rate movements. We do not use any of our derivative instruments for trading purposes.
We  use  foreign  currency  exchange  contracts  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  cash  flows  related  to  forecasted  revenues,  expenses,  assets  and
liabilities, including intercompany balances denominated in foreign currencies. These contracts are generally one month to one year in duration, but
with maturities up to 24 months. The objective of the foreign exchange contracts is to ensure that ultimately the U.S. dollar-equivalent cash flows are
not  adversely  affected  by  changes  in  the  applicable  U.S.  dollar/foreign  currency  exchange  rate.  We  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  our  foreign
exchange contracts designated as cash flow or net investment hedges on a quarterly basis.
In 2020, we began to hedge the variability of forecasted interest payments on anticipated debt issuance using forward-starting interest rate
swaps. These interest rate swaps effectively fix the benchmark interest rate and have the economic effect of hedging the variability of forecasted
interest payments for up to 10 years on an anticipated debt issuance. Similar to other cash flow hedges, we recorded changes in the fair value of
these interest rate swaps in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (“AOCI”) until the anticipated debt issuance. In May 2021, we issued
$2.5 billion of senior unsecured notes, which consisted of notes maturing in 2026, 2031 and 2051. As a result, we terminated the interest rate swaps
and the gain associated with the termination of approximately $45 million is amortized to interest expense over the terms of our notes due in May
2026 and May 2031.
During 2020, we began to hedge the variability of the cash flows in interest payments associated with our floating-rate debt using interest rate
swaps. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert our floating-rate debt that is based on London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) to
a fixed-rate basis, reducing the impact of interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The total notional amount of these interest swaps was
$400 million as of December 31, 2021 with terms calling for us to receive interest at a variable rate and to pay interest at a fixed rate. Our interest
rate swap contracts have maturity dates in 2023. Similar to other cash flow hedges, we record changes in the fair value of these interest rate swaps
in AOCI and their fair value will be amortized over the term of the debt to interest expense.
We used interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on our fixed rate notes issued in July 2014 and maturing in 2019, 2021 and 2024.
These interest rate swaps had the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with $2.4 billion of these notes so that the
interest payable on these senior notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR plus a spread. These interest rate swaps were terminated in
2019.
Cash Flow Hedges
For derivative instruments that are designated as cash flow hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported as a component of AOCI
and  subsequently  reclassified  into  earnings  in  the  same  period  the  forecasted  hedged  transaction  affects  earnings.  Derivative  instruments
designated as cash flow hedges must be de-designated as hedges when it is probable the forecasted hedged transaction will not occur in the initially
identified  time  period  or  within  a  subsequent  two-month  time  period.  Unrealized  gains  and  losses  in  AOCI  associated  with  such  derivative
instruments are immediately reclassified into earnings. As of December 31, 2021, we have estimated that approximately $16 million of net derivative
gains  related  to  our  foreign  exchange  cash  flow  hedges  and  no  net  derivative  losses  related  to  our  interest  rate  cash  flow  hedges  included  in
accumulated other comprehensive income will be reclassified into earnings within the next 12 months. We classify cash flows related to our cash
flow hedges as operating activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
86

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Fair Value Hedges
We designated the interest rate swaps used to manage interest rate risk on our fixed rate notes issued in July 2014 and maturing in 2019,
2021 and 2024 as qualifying hedging instruments and accounted for them as fair value hedges. These transactions were designated as fair value
hedges for financial accounting purposes because they protected us against changes in the fair value of certain of our fixed rate borrowings due to
benchmark  interest  rate  movements.  In  2019,  $1.15  billion  related  to  our  2.200%  senior  notes  due  2019  of  the  $2.4  billion  aggregate  notional
amount matured. In addition, during 2019, we terminated the interest rate swaps related to $750 million of our 2.875% senior notes due July 2021
and $500 million of our 3.450% senior notes due July 2024. As a result of the early termination, hedge accounting was discontinued prospectively
and the gain on termination was recorded as an increase to the long-term  debt balance and is being recognized over the remaining life of the
underlying debt as a reduction to interest expense. The gain recognized was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31,
2019.
Non-Designated Hedges
Our derivatives not designated as hedging instruments consist of foreign currency forward contracts that we primarily use to hedge monetary
assets or liabilities, including intercompany balances and equity investments denominated in non-functional currencies. The gains and losses on our
derivatives not designated as hedging instruments are recorded in interest and other, net, which are offset by the foreign currency gains and losses
on the related assets and liabilities that are also recorded in interest and other, net. We classify cash flows related to our non-designated hedging
instruments in the same line item as the cash flows of the related assets or liabilities, which is generally within operating activities in our consolidated
statement of cash flows. Cash flows related to the settlement of non-designated hedging instruments related to equity investments are classified
within investing activities in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
Warrant
We entered into a warrant agreement in conjunction with a commercial agreement with Adyen that, subject to meeting certain conditions,
entitles us to acquire a fixed number of shares up to 5% of Adyen’s fully diluted issued and outstanding share capital at a specific date. The warrant
has a term of seven years and vests in a series of four tranches, at a specified price per share (fixed for the first two tranches) upon meeting
processing volume milestone targets on a calendar year basis. When or if a relevant milestone is reached, the warrant becomes exercisable with
respect to the corresponding tranche of warrant shares up until the warrant expiration date of January 31, 2025. The maximum number of tranches
that can vest in one calendar year is two.
In 2021, we met the processing volume milestone target to vest the first tranche of the warrant. Upon vesting of the first tranche, we exercised
the  option  to  purchase  shares  of  Adyen  valued  at  approximately  $1.1  billion  in  exchange  for  approximately  $110  million  in  cash.  Our  equity
investment in Adyen is accounted for as an equity investment with a readily determinable fair value. Refer to “Note 6 — Investments” for more
information about our equity investments.
 
The warrant is accounted for as a derivative under ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. We report the warrant at fair value within warrant
asset  in our consolidated  balance sheets and changes in the fair  value of the warrant are recognized  in gain (loss)  on equity investments  and
warrant, net in our consolidated statement of income. The day-one value attributable to the other side of the warrant, which was recorded as a
deferred credit, is reported within other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets and is amortized over the life of the commercial arrangement.
See “Note 8 — Fair Value Measurements” for information about the fair value measurement of the warrant.
87

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Fair Value of Derivative Contracts
The following table presents the fair values of our outstanding derivative instruments as of the dates indicated (in millions):
December 31,
 
Balance Sheet Location
2021
2020
Derivative Assets:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other current assets $
63 
$
12 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other current assets
22 
23 
Warrant
Warrant asset
444 
1,051 
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other assets
24 
14 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other assets
— 
13 
Total derivative assets
$
553 
$
1,113 
Derivative Liabilities:
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other current liabilities $
— 
$
17 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
Other current liabilities
17 
25 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other current liabilities
— 
1 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
Other liabilities
— 
1 
Total derivative liabilities
$
17 
$
44 
Total fair value of derivative instruments
$
536 
$
1,069 
Under the master netting agreements with the respective counterparties to our derivative contracts, subject to applicable requirements, we are
allowed to net settle transactions of the same type with a single net amount payable by one party to the other. However, we have elected to present
the derivative assets and derivative liabilities on a gross basis on our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2021, the potential effect of
rights  of  set-off  associated  with  the  foreign  exchange  contracts  would  be  an  offset  to  both  assets  and  liabilities  by  $18  million,  resulting  in  net
derivative assets of $92 million and no net derivative liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, there is no effect of rights of set-off associated with the
interest rate contracts.
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables present the activity of derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and
the impact of these derivative contracts on AOCI for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
December 31, 2020
Amount of Gain (Loss) Recognized
in Other Comprehensive Income
Less: Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From AOCI to
Earnings
December 31, 2021
Foreign exchange contracts designated
as cash flow hedges
$
(95)
$
59 
$
(61)
$
25 
Interest rate contracts designated as
cash flow hedges
10 
22 
2 
30 
Total
$
(85)
$
81 
$
(59)
$
55 
 
December 31, 2019
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Recognized in Other
Comprehensive Income
Less: Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified From AOCI to
Earnings
December 31, 2020
Foreign exchange contracts designated
as cash flow hedges
$
(9)
$
(71)
$
15 
$
(95)
Interest rate contracts designated as
cash flow hedges
— 
10 
— 
10 
Total
$
(9)
$
(61)
$
15 
$
(85)
88

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Effect of Derivative Contracts on Consolidated Statement of Income
The following table summarizes the total gain (loss) recognized in the consolidated statement of income from our foreign exchange derivative
contracts by location for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in net revenues
$
(65)
$
15 
$
81 
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in cost of net revenues
4 
— 
— 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments recognized in interest and
other, net
11 
(18)
(8)
Total gain (loss) recognized from foreign exchange derivative contracts in the consolidated
statement of income
$
(50)
$
(3)
$
73 
The  following  table  summarizes  the  total  gain  (loss)  recognized  in  the  consolidated  statement  of  income  from  our  interest  rate  derivative
contracts by location for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Gain (loss) from interest rate contracts designated as fair value hedges recognized in interest and
other, net
$
— 
$
— 
$
34 
Gain (loss) from hedged items attributable to hedged risk recognized in interest and other, net
— 
— 
(34)
Gain (loss) from interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges recognized in interest and
other, net
2 
— 
— 
Total gain (loss) recognized from interest rate derivative contracts in the consolidated statement
of income
$
2 
$
— 
$
— 
The following table summarizes the total gain recognized in the consolidated statement of income due to changes in the fair value of the
warrant for the periods indicated (in millions): 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Gain attributable to changes in the fair value of warrant recognized in gain (loss) on equity
investments and warrant, net
$
354 
$
770 
$
133 
Notional Amounts of Derivative Contracts
Derivative transactions are measured in terms of the notional amount, but this amount is not recorded on the balance sheet and is not, when
viewed in isolation, a meaningful measure of the risk profile of the instruments. The notional amount is generally not exchanged, but is used only as
the  basis  on  which  the  value  of  foreign  exchange  payments  under  these  contracts  are  determined.  The  following  table  presents  the  notional
amounts of our outstanding derivatives as of the dates indicated (in millions):
December 31,
2021
2020
Foreign exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges
$
2,066 
$
2,305 
Foreign exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments
3,159 
3,016 
Interest rate contracts designated as cash flow hedges
400 
1,100 
Total
$
5,625 
$
6,421 
89

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Credit Risk
Our derivatives expose us to credit risk to the extent that the counterparties may be unable to meet the terms of the arrangement. We seek to
mitigate such risk by limiting our counterparties to, and by spreading the risk across, major financial institutions. In addition, the potential risk of loss
with any one counterparty resulting from this type of credit risk is monitored on an ongoing basis. To further limit credit risk, we also enter into
collateral security arrangements related to certain interest rate derivative instruments whereby collateral is posted between counterparties if the fair
value of the derivative instrument exceeds certain thresholds. Additional collateral would be required in the event of a significant credit downgrade
by either party. We are not required to pledge, nor are we entitled to receive, collateral related to our foreign exchange derivative transactions.
90

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 8 — Fair Value Measurement of Assets and Liabilities
The  following  tables  present  our  financial  assets  and  liabilities  measured  at  fair  value  on  a  recurring  basis  as  of  the  dates  indicated  (in
millions):
December 31, 2021
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1)
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant Unobservable
Inputs
(Level 3)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,379 
$
1,379 
$
— 
$
— 
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
22 
22 
— 
— 
Corporate debt securities
4,152 
— 
4,152 
— 
Government and agency securities
25 
— 
25 
— 
Equity investments with readily determinable
fair values
1,745 
1,745 
— 
— 
Total short-term investments
5,944 
1,767 
4,177 
— 
Equity investment in Adevinta
5,391 
5,391 
— 
— 
Derivatives
553 
— 
109 
444 
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
950 
— 
950 
— 
Government and agency securities
777 
— 
777 
— 
Equity investment under the fair value option
725 
— 
— 
725 
Total long-term investments
2,452 
— 
1,727 
725 
Total financial assets
$
15,719 
$
8,537 
$
6,013 
$
1,169 
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
17 
$
— 
$
17 
$
— 
December 31, 2020
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
(Level 1)
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant Unobservable
Inputs
(Level 3)
Assets:
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,101 
$
890 
$
211 
$
— 
Short-term investments:
Restricted cash
137 
137 
— 
— 
Corporate debt securities
2,255 
— 
2,255 
— 
Total short-term investments
2,392 
137 
2,255 
— 
Derivatives
1,113 
— 
62 
1,051 
Long-term investments:
Corporate debt securities
286 
— 
286 
— 
Total long-term investments
286 
— 
286 
— 
Total financial assets
$
4,892 
$
1,027 
$
2,814 
$
1,051 
Liabilities:
Derivatives
$
44 
$
— 
$
44 
$
— 
91

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Our financial assets and liabilities are valued using market prices on both active markets (Level 1), less active markets (Level 2) and little or
no market activity (Level 3). Level 1 instrument valuations are obtained from real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets involving
identical assets. Level 2 instrument valuations are obtained from readily available pricing sources for comparable instruments, identical instruments
in  less  active  markets,  or  models  using  market  observable  inputs.  Level  3  instrument  valuations  typically  reflect  management’s  estimate  of
assumptions  that  market  participants  would use in pricing  the  asset  or liability.  We  did not  have any transfers  of  financial  instruments  between
valuation levels during 2021 or 2020.
Other  financial  instruments,  including  accounts  receivable  and  accounts  payable,  are  carried  at  cost,  which  approximates  their  fair  value
because of the short-term nature of these instruments.
Fair value measurement of derivative instruments
The majority of our derivative instruments are valued using pricing models that take into account the contract terms as well as multiple inputs
where applicable, such as equity prices, interest rate yield curves, option volatility and currency rates. Our warrant, which is accounted for as a
derivative  instrument,  is  valued  using  a  Black-Scholes  model.  Key  assumptions  used  in  the  valuation  include  risk-free  interest  rates;  Adyen’s
common stock price, equity volatility and common stock outstanding; exercise price; and details specific to the warrant. The value is also probability
adjusted  for  management’s  assumptions  with  respect  to  vesting  of  the  remaining  three  tranches  which  are  each  subject  to  meeting  processing
volume milestone targets. These assumptions and the probability of meeting processing volume milestone targets may have a significant impact on
the value of the warrant. Refer to “Note 7 — Derivative Instruments” for further details on our derivative instruments.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the opening to closing balance of the warrant measured using significant unobservable inputs
(Level 3) as of the dates indicated (in millions):
December 31,
2021
2020
Opening balance at beginning of period
$
1,051 
$
281 
Exercise of options under warrant
(961)
— 
Change in fair value
354 
770 
Closing balance at end of period
$
444 
$
1,051 
The following table presents quantitative information about Level 3 significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurement of the
warrant as of December 31, 2021 (in millions, except percentages):
Fair value
Valuation technique
Unobservable Input
Range (weighted average)
Warrant
$
444 
Black-Scholes and Monte
Carlo
Probability of vesting
0.0% - 55.0% (50.0%)
Equity volatility
(39%)
(1)
Probability of vesting were weighted by the unadjusted value of the tranches. For volatility, the average represents the arithmetic average of the points within the range
and is not weighted by the relative fair value or notional amount.
Fair value measurement of equity investments
Certain  of  our  equity  investments  are  measured  at  fair  value  on  a  recurring  basis,  including  our  equity  investment  in  Adevinta,  equity
investments with readily determinable fair values and equity investment under the fair value option.
Our equity investment in Adevinta is accounted for under the fair value option and classified within Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy as the
fair  value  is  measured  based  on  Adevinta’s  closing  stock  price  and  prevailing  foreign  exchange  rate  at  each  balance  sheet  date.  Our  equity
investments with readily determinable fair values are also classified within Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation can be obtained from
real time quotes in active markets.
(1)
92

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Our equity investment in Gmarket was initially recognized on November 14, 2021 in connection with the sale of 80.01% of the outstanding
equity interests of eBay Korea to Emart. This equity investment is accounted for under the fair value option and its initial valuation of $728 million
was based on the sale price of eBay Korea. There were no indicators of a potential material change in fair value of the investment between the date
of  recognition  and  December  31,  2021.  The  fair  value  of  the  investment  was  $725  million  as  of  December  31,  2021  due  to  foreign  currency
adjustments.  This  investment  is  classified  within  Level  3  in  the  fair  value  hierarchy  as  valuation  of  the  investment  going  forward  will  reflect
management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset.
Refer to “Note 6 — Investments” for further details about our equity investments.
93

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 9 — Balance Sheet Components
Contract Balances
Timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. Accounts receivable represents amounts invoiced and
revenue  recognized  prior  to  invoicing  when  we  have  satisfied  our  performance  obligation  and  have  the  unconditional  right  to  payment.  The
allowance for doubtful accounts and authorized credits is estimated based upon our assessment of various factors including historical experience,
the age of the accounts receivable balances, current economic conditions reasonable and supportable forecasts and other factors that may affect
our customers’ ability to pay. The allowance for doubtful accounts and authorized credits was $74 million and $136 million as of December 31, 2021
and December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we reported allowances for doubtful accounts of $42 million reflecting a decrease
of $55 million, net of write-offs of $134 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Deferred revenue consists of fees received related to unsatisfied performance obligations at the end of the period. Due to the generally short-
term  duration  of  contracts,  the  majority  of  the  performance  obligations  are  satisfied  in  the  following  reporting  period.  The  amount  of  revenue
recognized  during  the  year  ended  December  31,  2021  that  was  included  in  the  deferred  revenue  balance  at  the  beginning  of  the  period  was
$47 million. The amount of revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 that was included in the deferred revenue balance at the
beginning of the period was $64 million.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
 
December 31,
2021
 
2020
(In millions)
Cash and cash equivalents
$
1,379 
$
1,101 
Customer accounts
5 
— 
Restricted cash included in short-term investments
22 
137 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
$
1,406 
$
1,238 
Customer accounts and funds receivable
December 31,
2021
2020
(In millions)
Cash and cash equivalents
$
5 
$
— 
Funds receivable
676 
290 
Customer accounts and funds receivable
$
681 
$
290 
Other Current Assets
 
December 31,
2021
 
2020
(In millions)
Payment processor advances
$
453 
$
363 
Prepaid expenses
114 
109 
Other
442 
308 
Other current assets
$
1,009 
$
780 
94

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Property and Equipment, Net
 
December 31,
2021
 
2020
(In millions)
Computer equipment and software
$
4,747  $
4,585 
Land and buildings, including building improvements
779  
744 
Leasehold improvements
356  
320 
Furniture and fixtures
140  
141 
Construction in progress and other
77  
155 
Property and equipment, gross
6,099  
5,945 
Accumulated depreciation
(4,863)  
(4,653)
Property and equipment, net
$
1,236  $
1,292 
Total depreciation expense on our property and equipment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 totaled $485 million, $560
million and $572 million, respectively.
Accrued Expenses and Other Current Liabilities
 
December 31,
2021
 
2020
(In millions)
Compensation and related benefits
$
517 
$
523 
Sales and use tax and VAT accruals
396 
323 
Advertising accruals
172 
207 
Operating lease liabilities
150 
153 
Other
613 
561 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
$
1,848 
$
1,767 
95

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 10 — Debt
The following table summarizes the carrying value of our outstanding debt (in millions, except percentages):
Coupon
As of
Effective
As of
Effective
 Rate
December 31, 2021
 Interest Rate
December 31, 2020
 Interest Rate
Long-Term Debt
Floating Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2023
LIBOR plus 0.87%
$
400 
1.100 %
$
400 
1.187 %
Fixed Rate Notes:
Senior notes due 2022
3.800 %
750 
3.989 %
750 
3.989 %
Senior notes due 2022
2.600 %
605 
2.678 %
1,000 
2.678 %
Senior notes due 2023
2.750 %
750 
2.866 %
750 
2.866 %
Senior notes due 2024
3.450 %
750 
3.531 %
750 
3.531 %
Senior notes due 2025
1.900 %
800 
1.803 %
800 
1.803 %
Senior notes due 2026
1.400 %
750 
1.252 %
— 
— %
Senior notes due 2027
3.600 %
850 
3.689 %
850 
3.689 %
Senior notes due 2030
2.700 %
950 
2.623 %
950 
2.623 %
Senior notes due 2031
2.600 %
750 
2.186 %
— 
— %
Senior notes due 2042
4.000 %
750 
4.114 %
750 
4.114 %
Senior notes due 2051
3.650 %
1,000 
2.517 %
— 
— %
Senior notes due 2056
6.000 %
— 
— %
750 
6.547 %
Total senior notes
9,105 
7,750 
Hedge accounting fair value adjustments 
7 
10 
Unamortized premium/(discount) and debt issuance
costs
(30)
(20)
Less: Current portion of long-term debt
(1,355)
— 
Total long-term debt
7,727 
7,740 
Short-Term Debt
Current portion of long-term debt
1,355 
— 
Other short-term borrowings
— 
6 
Total short-term debt
1,355 
6 
Total Debt
$
9,082 
$
7,746 
(1)    Includes the fair value adjustments to debt associated with terminated interest rate swaps which are being recorded as a reduction to interest expense over the remaining
term of the related notes.
Senior Notes
Effective March 1, 2021, the company redeemed the $750 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.000% senior notes due 2056. Total
cash consideration paid was $750 million, as the redemption price was equal to 100% of the principal amount. In addition, we paid accrued and
unpaid interest on the principal amount.
In March 2021, we settled cash tender offers with holders of approximately 39% of the total outstanding $1 billion aggregate principal amount
of the 2.600% senior fixed rate notes due 2022. Total cash consideration paid for these purchases was $405 million and the carrying amount of the
notes was $395 million, resulting in a loss on extinguishment of $10 million (including immaterial fees and other costs associated with the tender),
which was recorded in interest and other, net in our consolidated statement of income. In addition, we paid any accrued interest on the tendered
notes up to, but not including the date of settlement.
In May 2021, we issued senior notes, in an aggregate principal amount of $2.5 billion, which consisted of $750 million of 1.400% fixed rate
notes due 2026, $750 million of 2.600% fixed rate notes due to 2031 and $1.0 billion of 3.650% fixed rate notes due 2051.
(1)
96

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In March 2020, we issued $500 million of 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025 and $500 million of 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030. In June
2020, we issued $300 million of additional 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025 and $450 million of additional 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030.
We used a portion of these proceeds to complete a tender offer to purchase any and all of the $750 million aggregate principal amount of our
2.875%  senior  fixed  rate  notes  due  in  2021  for  aggregate  cash  consideration  paid  of  $771  million.  The  loss  on  extinguishment  of  $10  million
(including an immaterial amount of fees and other costs associated with the tender) and the premium of $11 million were recorded in interest and
other, net in our consolidated statement of income. In addition, we paid accrued interest up to the settlement date.
In June 2020, $500 million of our 2.150% senior fixed rate notes matured and were repaid.
In July 2020, we exercised our option to redeem in whole the 3.250% senior fixed rate notes due in 2020 at a price equal to 100% of the
principal amount of $500 million, plus accrued interest.
In 2019, $400 million of floating rate notes and $1.15 billion of 2.200% fixed rate notes matured and were repaid.
None of the floating rate notes are redeemable prior to maturity. We may redeem some or all of the other fixed rate notes of each series at
any time and from time to time prior to their maturity, generally at a make-whole redemption price, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
If a change of control triggering event (as defined in the applicable senior notes) occurs with respect to the 3.800% fixed rate notes due 2022,
the floating rate notes due 2023, the 2.750% fixed rate notes due 2023, the 1.900% fixed rate notes due 2025, the 1.400% fixed rate notes due
2026, the 3.600% fixed rate notes due 2027, the 2.700% fixed rate notes due 2030, the 2.600% fixed rate notes due 2031 or the 3.650% fixed rate
notes due 2051, we must, subject to certain exceptions, offer to repurchase all of the notes of the applicable series at a price equal to 101% of the
principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The  indenture  pursuant  to  which  the  senior  notes  were  issued  includes  customary  covenants  that,  among  other  things  and  subject  to
exceptions, limit our ability to incur, assume or guarantee debt secured by liens on specified assets or enter into sale and lease-back transactions
with respect to specified properties, and also includes customary events of default with customary grace periods in certain circumstances, including
payment defaults and bankruptcy-related defaults.
To  help  achieve  our  interest  rate  risk  management  objectives,  during  the  second  quarter  of  2020,  we  entered  into  interest  rate  swap
agreements that effectively converted $400 million of our LIBOR-based floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis. These swaps were designated as
cash flow hedges and have maturity dates in 2023.
The effective interest rates for our senior notes include the interest payable, the amortization of debt issuance costs and the amortization of
any original issue discount and premium on these senior notes. Interest on these senior notes is payable either quarterly or semiannually. Interest
expense associated with these senior notes, including amortization of debt issuance costs, during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and
2019 was approximately $257 million, $284 million and $301 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the estimated fair value of
these senior notes, using Level 2 inputs, was approximately $9.5 billion and $8.3 billion, respectively.
Commercial Paper
We have a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue commercial paper notes in an aggregate principal amount at maturity
of up to $1.5 billion outstanding at any time with maturities of up to 397 days from the date of issue. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were
no commercial paper notes outstanding.
Credit Agreement
In March 2020, we entered into a credit agreement that provides for an unsecured $2 billion five-year credit facility. We may also, subject to
the agreement of the applicable lenders, increase commitments under the revolving
97

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
credit facility by up to $1 billion. Funds borrowed under the credit agreement may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and
other general corporate purposes. The credit agreement replaced our prior $2 billion unsecured revolving credit agreement dated November 2015,
which was terminated effective March 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, no borrowings were outstanding under our $2 billion credit agreement. However, as described above, we have an
up to $1.5 billion commercial paper program and are required to maintain available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement in order to repay
commercial paper borrowings in the event we are unable to repay those borrowings from other sources when they become due, in an aggregate
amount of $1.5 billion. As of December 31, 2021, no borrowings were outstanding under our commercial paper program; therefore, $2 billion of
borrowing capacity was available for other purposes permitted by the credit agreement, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. The credit
agreement  includes  a  covenant  limiting  our  consolidated  leverage  ratio  to  no  more  than  4.0:1.0,  subject  to,  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  qualified
material acquisition, if so elected by us, a step-up to 4.5:1.0 for the four fiscal quarters completed following such qualified material acquisition. The
credit  agreement  includes  customary  events  of  default,  with  corresponding  grace  periods  in  certain  circumstances,  including  payment  defaults,
cross-defaults and bankruptcy-related defaults. In addition, the credit agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including
restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and subsidiary indebtedness, in each case, subject to customary exceptions. The credit agreement also
contains customary representations and warranties. 
We were in compliance with all financial covenants in our outstanding debt instruments for the period ended December 31, 2021.
Future Maturities
The following table presents expected future principal maturities as of the date indicated (in millions):
December 31, 2021
Fiscal Years:
2022
$
1,355 
2023
1,150 
2024
750 
2025
800 
2026
750 
Thereafter
4,300 
Total future maturities
$
9,105 
In February 2022, the company redeemed the $750 million aggregate principal amount of the 3.800% senior notes due March 2022. Total
cash consideration paid was $750 million, as the redemption price was equal to 100% of the principal amount. In addition, we paid accrued and
unpaid interest on the principal amount.
98

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 11 — Leases
We have operating leases for office space, data centers and other corporate assets that we utilize under lease arrangements.
The following table presents a summary of leases by balance sheet location as of the dates indicated (in millions):
 
December 31,
Balance Sheet Location
2021
2020
Assets
Operating
Operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets
$
289 
$
430 
Liabilities
Operating - current
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities
$
150 
$
153 
Operating - noncurrent
Operating lease liabilities
200 
316 
Total lease liabilities
$
350 
$
469 
The following table presents components of lease expense for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
Statement of Income Location
2021
2020
2019
Operating lease costs 
Cost of net revenues, Sales and marketing, Product
development and General and administrative expenses
$
178 
$
160 
$
168 
(1)
Includes variable lease payments and sublease income that were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
The following table presents the maturity of lease liabilities under our non-cancelable operating leases as of the date indicated (in millions):
December 31, 2021
2022
$
156 
2023
110 
2024
38 
2025
27 
2026
14 
Thereafter
21 
Total lease payments
366 
Less interest
(16)
Present value of lease liabilities
$
350 
Rent expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 totaled $192 million, $176 million and $179 million, respectively. Rent
expense includes operating lease costs as well as expense for non-lease components such as common area maintenance.
(1)
99

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The  following  table  presents  supplemental  information  related  to  our  leases  included  in  the  consolidated  balance  sheet  as  of  the  dates
indicated:
December 31,
2021
2020
Weighted average remaining lease term
Operating leases
3.11 years
3.74 years
Weighted average discount rate
Operating leases
2.06 %
2.04 %
The following table presents supplemental information related to our leases for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities:
Operating cash flows from operating leases
$
165 
$
145 
$
152 
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new lease obligations:
Operating leases
$
38 
$
84 
$
87 
100

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 12 — Commitments and Contingencies
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
We  have  a  cash  pooling  arrangement  with  a  financial  institution  for  cash  management  purposes.  This  arrangement  allows  for  cash
withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the same financial institution (“Aggregate
Cash Deposits”). This arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the Aggregate Cash Deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. The net
balance of the withdrawals and the Aggregate Cash Deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense
or income under the arrangement. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total of $3.7 billion in aggregate cash deposits, partially offset by $3.5 billion
in cash withdrawals, held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement.
Litigation and Other Legal Matters
 
Overview
We are involved in legal and regulatory proceedings on an ongoing basis. Many of these proceedings are in early stages and may seek an
indeterminate amount of damages. If we believe that a loss arising from such matters is probable and can be reasonably estimated, we accrue the
estimated liability in our financial statements. If only a range of estimated losses can be determined, we accrue an amount within the range that, in
our judgment, reflects the most likely outcome; if none of the estimates within that range is a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the
low  end  of  the  range.  For  those  proceedings  in  which  an  unfavorable  outcome  is  reasonably  possible  but  not  probable,  we  have  disclosed  an
estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses or we have concluded that an estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of losses
arising directly from the proceeding (i.e., monetary damages or amounts paid in judgment or settlement) is not material. If we cannot estimate the
probable or reasonably possible loss or range of losses arising from a proceeding, we have disclosed that fact. In assessing the materiality of a
proceeding, we evaluate, among other factors, the amount of monetary damages claimed, as well as the potential impact of non-monetary remedies
sought by plaintiffs (e.g., injunctive relief) that may require us to change our business practices in a manner that could have a material adverse
impact on our business. With respect to the matters disclosed in this Overview, we are unable to estimate the possible loss or range of losses that
could potentially result from the application of such non-monetary remedies.
Amounts  accrued  for  legal  and  regulatory  proceedings  for  which  we  believe  a  loss  is  probable  were  not  material  for  the  year  ended
December  31,  2021.  We  have  concluded,  based  on  currently  available  information,  that  reasonably  possible  losses  arising  directly  from  the
proceedings (i.e., monetary damages or amounts paid in judgment or settlement) in excess of our recorded accruals are also not material. However,
legal and regulatory proceedings are inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties. If one or more matters were resolved against
us in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the impact on our operating results or financial condition for that
reporting period could be material. Legal fees are expensed as incurred.
101

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
General Matters
Third parties have from time to time claimed, and others may claim in the future, that we have infringed their intellectual property rights. We
are subject to patent disputes, and expect that we could be subject to additional patent infringement claims involving various aspects of our business
as our products  and services continue to expand in scope and complexity.  Such claims may be brought  directly or indirectly  against us and/or
against our customers (who may be entitled to contractual indemnification under their contracts with us), and we are subject to increased exposure
to such claims as a result of our acquisitions and divestitures and in cases where we are entering new lines of business. We have in the past been
forced to litigate such claims. We may also become more vulnerable to third-party claims as laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, the
Lanham Act and the Communications Decency Act are interpreted by the courts, and as we expand the scope of our business (both in terms of the
range of products and services that we offer and our geographical operations) and become subject to laws in jurisdictions where the underlying laws
with respect to the potential liability of online intermediaries like ourselves are either unclear or less favorable. We believe that additional lawsuits
alleging that we have violated patent, copyright or trademark laws will be filed against us. Intellectual property claims, whether meritorious or not, are
time consuming and costly to defend and resolve, could require expensive changes in our methods of doing business or could require us to enter
into costly royalty or licensing agreements on unfavorable terms.
From time to time, we are involved in other disputes or regulatory inquiries that arise in the ordinary course of business, including suits by our
users (individually or as class actions) alleging, among other things, improper disclosure of our prices, rules or policies, that our practices, prices,
rules, policies or customer/user agreements violate applicable law or that we have acted unfairly and/or not acted in conformity with such practices,
prices,  rules,  policies  or  agreements.  Further,  the  number  and  significance  of  these  disputes  and  inquiries  are  increasing  as  the  political  and
regulatory landscape changes and, as we have grown larger, our businesses have expanded in scope (both in terms of the range of products and
services  that  we  offer  and  our  geographical  operations)  and  our  products  and  services  have  increased  in  complexity.  Any  claims  or  regulatory
actions against us, whether meritorious or not, could be time consuming, result in costly litigation, damage awards (including statutory damages for
certain  causes  of  action  in  certain  jurisdictions),  injunctive  relief  or  increased  costs  of  doing  business  through  adverse  judgment  or  settlement,
require us to change our business practices in expensive ways, require significant amounts of management time, result in the diversion of significant
operational resources or otherwise harm our business.
From time to time, the Company receives subpoenas or requests for information from various government agencies, typically for potential
misconduct by sellers on the Company’s Marketplace platforms. More recently, the Company has received subpoenas or requests for information
from government agencies related to potential liability of the Company for products sold by sellers on the Marketplace platforms. The Company
generally responds to government subpoenas and requests in the ordinary course of business and in a cooperative, thorough and timely manner.
These responses sometimes require time and effort and can result in considerable costs being incurred by the Company.
In this regard, the Company has responded to inquiries from the U.S. Department of Justice regarding products sold on the Marketplace
platforms alleged to violate certain laws and regulations, including regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency and, separately, regulations
of  the  Drug  Enforcement  Agency.  If  the  Company  is  found  to  be  liable  for  such  activities  on  the  Marketplace,  it  could  be  subject  to  monetary
damages, changes in our business practices, or other remedies that could have a material adverse impact on our business. At this time, we are
unable to estimate the possible loss because the matters are still under investigation and involve novel legal questions relevant to the Company’s
potential liability. Given the uncertainties involved, the ultimate resolution of these matters may be material to our operating results for a particular
period, depending on, among other factors, the size of the loss or liability imposed and the level of our net income or loss for that period.
Indemnification Provisions
We entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements with PayPal to govern the separation and relationship
of the two companies. These agreements provide for specific indemnity and liability obligations and could lead to disputes between us and PayPal,
which may be significant. In addition, the indemnity rights we have against PayPal under the agreements may not be sufficient to protect us and our
indemnity obligations to PayPal may be significant.
102

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with each of our directors, executive officers and certain other officers. These
agreements require us to indemnify such individuals, to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law, for certain liabilities to which they may become
subject as a result of their affiliation with us.
In the ordinary course of business, we have included limited indemnification provisions in certain of our agreements with parties with which we
have commercial relations, including our standard marketing, promotions and application programming interface license agreements. Under these
contracts, we generally indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified party for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified
party in connection with claims by a third party with respect to our domain names, trademarks, logos and other branding elements to the extent that
such  marks  are  applicable  to  our  performance  under  the  subject  agreement.  In  certain  cases,  we  have  agreed  to  provide  indemnification  for
intellectual  property  infringement.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  maximum  potential  loss  under  these  indemnification  provisions  due  to  our
limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision. To date, losses recorded
in  our  consolidated  statement  of  income  in  connection  with  our  indemnification  provisions  have  not  been  significant,  either  individually  or
collectively. 
103

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 13 — Stockholders’ Equity
Preferred Stock
We are authorized, subject to limitations prescribed by Delaware law, to issue preferred stock in one or more series; to establish the number
of shares included within each series; to fix the rights, preferences and privileges of the shares of each wholly unissued series and any related
qualifications, limitations or restrictions; and to increase or decrease the number of shares of any series (but not below the number of shares of a
series then outstanding) without any further vote or action by our stockholders. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were 10 million shares of
$0.001 par value preferred stock authorized for issuance, and no shares issued or outstanding.
Common Stock
Our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation authorizes us to issue 3.6 billion shares of common stock.
Stock Repurchase Programs
Our stock repurchase programs are intended to programmatically offset the impact of dilution from our equity compensation programs and,
subject to market conditions and other factors, to make opportunistic and programmatic repurchases of our common stock to reduce our outstanding
share count. Any share repurchases under our stock repurchase programs may be made through open market transactions, block trades, privately
negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase transactions) or other means at times and in such amounts as management deems
appropriate and will be funded from our working capital or other financing alternatives. Our stock repurchase programs may be limited or terminated
at any time without prior notice. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including corporate and
regulatory requirements, price and other market conditions and management’s determination as to the appropriate use of our cash. 
In January 2019, our Board authorized a $4.0 billion stock repurchase program, in January 2020 our Board authorized an additional $5.0
billion stock repurchase program, in February 2021 our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase program and in August 2021
our Board authorized an additional $3.0 billion stock repurchase program. These stock repurchase programs have no expiration from the date of
authorization.
In February 2022, our Board authorized an additional $4.0 billion stock repurchase program, with no expiration from the date of authorization.
On October 29, 2021, we entered into accelerated share repurchase agreements (the “2021 ASR Agreements”) with two financial institutions
(each a “2021 ASR Counterparty”), as part of our share repurchase program. Under the 2021 ASR Agreements, we paid an aggregate amount of
$2.5 billion to the 2021 ASR Counterparties and received an initial delivery of approximately 29.3 million shares of our common stock, which were
recorded as a $2,125 million increase to treasury stock. In December 2021, the 2021 ASR Agreement with one of the 2021 ASR Counterparties
settled and resulted in a delivery of approximately 3.4 million additional shares of our common stock, which were recorded as a $187.5 million
increase to treasury stock. The remaining $187.5 million was evaluated as an unsettled forward contract indexed to our own stock, classified within
stockholders’ equity.
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, the 2021 ASR Agreement with the remaining 2021 ASR Counterparty settled and resulted in a delivery of
approximately 3.3 million additional shares of our common stock. The related forward contract was settled and recorded as a $187.5 million increase
to treasury stock. In total under the 2021 ASR Agreements, approximately 36.0 million shares were repurchased at an average price per share of
$69.43.
104

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
On  February  13,  2020,  we  entered  into  accelerated  share  repurchase  agreements  (the  “2020  ASR  Agreements”)  with  three  financial
institutions (each a “2020 ASR Counterparty”), as part of our share repurchase program. Under the 2020 ASR Agreements, we paid an aggregate
amount of $3.0 billion to the 2020 ASR Counterparties and received an initial delivery of approximately 69 million shares of our common stock,
which  shares  were  recorded  as  a  $2.55  billion  increase  to  treasury  stock.  The  remaining  $450  million  was  evaluated  as  an  unsettled  forward
contract  indexed  to  our  own  stock,  classified  within  stockholders’  equity.  In  July  2020,  the  2020  ASR  Agreements  settled  and  resulted  in
approximately 74 million shares repurchased at an average price per share of $40.77 and the forward contract was settled and recorded as an
increase to treasury stock.
The stock repurchase activity under our stock repurchase programs during 2021 was as follows (in millions, except per share amounts):
Shares Repurchased 
Average Price per
Share 
Value of Shares
Repurchased 
Remaining Amount
Authorized
Balance as of January 1, 2021
$
2,033 
Authorization of additional plan in February 2021
4,000 
Authorization of additional plan in August 2021
3,000 
Repurchase of shares of common stock
67 
$
67.86 
$
4,542 
(4,542)
Accelerated share repurchases 
33 
$
2,312 
$
(2,312)
Unsettled forward contract for share repurchase
— 
$
188 
$
(188)
Balance as of December 31, 2021
$
1,991 
(1)
These repurchased shares of common stock were recorded as treasury stock and were accounted for under the cost method. None of the repurchased shares of common
stock have been retired.
(2)
Excludes broker commissions.
(3)
As indicated above, under the 2021 ASR Agreements, we paid an aggregate amount of $2.5 billion to the 2021 ASR Counterparties and received an initial delivery of
29.3 million shares of our common stock. In December 2021, we settled a 2021 ASR Agreement with one of the 2021 ASR Counterparties and received 3.4 million
additional shares. In January 2022, the 2021 ASR Agreement with the remaining ASR Counterparty settled and resulted in delivery of approximately 3.3 million additional
shares.
Dividends
The company paid a total of $466 million, $447 million and $473 million in cash dividends during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020
and 2019, respectively.  In February  2022, we declared a cash  dividend of $0.22 per share of  common  stock  to be paid on March  18, 2022 to
stockholders of record as of March 10, 2022.
(1)
(2)
(2)
(3)
105

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 14 — Employee Benefit Plans
Equity Incentive Plans
We have equity incentive plans under which we grant equity awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-
based restricted  stock  units (“PBRSUs”),  stock  payment  awards,  performance  share units  and total  shareholder  return  performance  share units
(“TSR PSUs”), to our directors, officers and employees. As of December 31, 2021, 755 million shares were authorized under our equity incentive
plans and 40 million shares were available for future grant.
RSU awards granted to eligible employees under our equity incentive plans generally vest in annual or quarterly installments over a period of
three to five years, are subject to the employees’ continuing service to us and do not have an expiration date.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, certain executives were eligible to receive PBRSUs. PBRSU awards are subject to performance and time-based
vesting  requirements.  The  target  number  of  shares  subject  to  the  PBRSU  award  are  adjusted  based  on  our  business  performance  measured
against  the  performance  goals  approved  by  the  Compensation  and  Human  Capital  Committee  at  the  beginning  of  the  performance  period.
Generally, if the performance criteria are satisfied, one-half of the award vests in March following the end of the performance period and the other
half of the award vests in March of the following year.
During 2020, our Chief Executive Officer was granted TSR PSUs with performance and time-based vesting requirements. The number of
stock  units  ultimately  received  will  depend  on  our  total  shareholder  return  relative  to  that  of  the  S&P  500  index  over two and  three  year
measurement periods. The target number of shares will be divided into two tranches, with each tranche corresponding to 50% of the target shares.
The first tranche will vest in full on the second anniversary of the grant date and second tranche will vest on the third anniversary of the grant date.
Deferred Stock Units
Prior  to  December  31, 2016, we  granted  deferred  stock  units  to  each non-employee  director  (other  than  Mr.  Omidyar)  at  the  time  of  our
annual meeting of stockholders and to new non-employee directors upon their election to the Board. Each deferred stock unit award granted to a
new non-employee director upon election to the Board vests 25% one year from the date of grant, and at a rate of 2.08% per month thereafter. In
addition, directors were permitted to elect to receive, in lieu of annual retainer and committee chair fees and at the time these fees would otherwise
be payable, fully vested deferred stock units with an initial value equal to the amount based on the fair market value of common stock at the date of
grant. Following termination of a non-employee director’s service on the Board, deferred stock units granted prior to August 1, 2013 are payable in
stock or cash (at our election), while deferred stock units granted on or after August 1, 2013 are payable solely in stock. As of December 31, 2021,
there  were  approximately  109,993  deferred  stock  units  outstanding,  which  are  included  in  our  restricted  stock  unit  activity  below.  As  of
December 31, 2016, we no longer grant deferred stock units.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
We  have  an  Employee  Stock  Purchase  Plan  (“ESPP”)  for  all  eligible  employees.  Under  the  plan,  shares  of  our  common  stock  may  be
purchased  over  an  offering  period  with  a  maximum  duration  of  two  years  at  85%  of  the  lower  of  the  fair  market  value  on  the  first  day  of  the
applicable offering period or on the last day of the six-month purchase period. Employees may purchase shares having a value not exceeding 10%
of their eligible compensation during an offering period. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, employees purchased approximately 2 million, 3 million and 3
million shares under this plan at average prices of $38.93, $25.93 and $25.24 per share, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 3
million shares of common stock were reserved for future issuance.
Stock Option Activity
No stock options were granted in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
106

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the aggregate intrinsic value of options exercised under our equity incentive plans was $2 million, $15 million
and $20 million, respectively, determined as of the date of option exercise.
Restricted Stock Unit Activity
The following table presents RSU activity (including PBRSUs that have been earned) under our equity incentive plans as of and for the year
ended December 31, 2021 (in millions, except per share amounts):
 
Units
Weighted Average Grant-
Date Fair Value
(per share)
Outstanding as of January 1, 2021
25 
$
35.85 
Awarded and assumed
12 
$
63.98 
Vested
(11)
$
39.93 
Forfeited
(6)
$
40.56 
Outstanding as of December 31, 2021
20 
$
48.73 
Expected to vest as of December 31, 2021
17 
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the aggregate intrinsic value of RSUs vested under our equity incentive plans was $697 million, $552 million and
$609 million, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The following table presents stock-based compensation expense from continuing operations for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Cost of net revenues
$
47 
$
40 
$
44 
Sales and marketing
83 
85 
69 
Product development
196 
154 
164 
General and administrative
151 
138 
138 
Total stock-based compensation expense
$
477 
$
417 
$
415 
Capitalized in product development
$
12 
$
14 
$
14 
As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $735 million of unearned stock-based compensation that will be expensed from 2022
through 2026. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or
cancel all or a portion of the remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense. Future unearned stock-based compensation will increase to
the extent we grant additional equity awards, change the mix of grants between stock options and restricted stock units or assume unvested equity
awards in connection with acquisitions.
Employee Savings Plans
We have a defined contribution plan, which is qualified under Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Participating employees may
contribute up to 50% of their eligible compensation, but not more than statutory limits. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019,
we contributed one dollar for each dollar a participant contributed, with a maximum contribution of 4% of each employee’s eligible compensation,
subject to a maximum employer contribution of $11,600, $11,400 and $11,200 per employee for each period, respectively. Our non-U.S. employees
are  covered  by  various  other  savings  plans.  Total  expense  for  these  plans  was  $54  million,  $46  million  and  $45  million  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
107

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 15 — Income Taxes
The following table presents the components of income from continuing operations before taxes for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
  
2020
  
2019
United States
$
1,608   $
1,167   $
179 
International
(1,210)   
2,178   
1,473 
$
398 
$
3,345 
$
1,652 
The following table summarizes the income tax provision (benefit) for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
 
2019
Current:
 
 
Federal
$
472  $
266  $
48 
State and local
128  
87  
23 
Foreign
228  
91  
149 
$
828  $
444  $
220 
Deferred:
 
 
Federal
$
(755)  $
(73)  $
(159)
State and local
(125)  
(8)  
(44)
Foreign
198  
495  
202 
(682)  
414  
(1)
$
146  $
858  $
219 
The following table presents a reconciliation of the difference between the actual provision for income taxes and the provision computed by
applying the federal statutory rate of 21% to income before income taxes for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
 
2019
Provision at statutory rate
$
84  $
703  $
347 
Foreign income taxed at different rates
19  
19  
13 
Other taxes on foreign operations
89 
19 
(19)
Stock-based compensation
(26)  
(4)  
(4)
State taxes, net of federal benefit
3  
80  
(24)
Research and other tax credits
(39)  
(28)  
(29)
Impact of tax rate change
(3)
43 
(21)
Effective settlement of audits
— 
— 
(69)
Non-deductible executive compensation
10 
9 
10 
Other
9  
17  
15 
$
146 
$
858 
$
219 
108

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of differences between the carrying amounts of assets and
liabilities and their respective tax bases using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to be reversed. The
following table summarizes significant deferred tax assets and liabilities as of the dates indicated (in millions):
 
As of December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
Deferred tax assets:
 
Net operating loss, capital loss and credits
$
191  $
173 
Accruals and allowances
356  
390 
Stock-based compensation
12  
10 
Amortizable tax basis in intangibles
3,174 
3,471 
Net deferred tax assets
3,733  
4,044 
Valuation allowance
(136)  
(149)
3,597  
3,895 
Deferred tax liabilities:
 
Outside basis differences
(3,136)
(2,165)
Acquisition-related intangibles
(37)  
(36)
Depreciation and amortization
(202)  
(219)
Net unrealized gain on investments
(84)
(307)
(3,459)  
(2,727)
$
138  $
1,168 
As of December 31, 2021, our federal, state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards for income tax purposes were approximately $13
million, $43 million and $248 million, respectively. The federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are subject to various limitations under
Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and applicable state tax laws. If not utilized, the federal and state net operating loss carryforwards will
begin to expire in 2024 and 2023, respectively. The carryforward periods on our foreign net operating loss carryforwards are as follows: $5 million do
not expire and $243 million are subject to valuation allowance and begin to expire in 2027. As of December 31, 2021, state tax credit carryforwards
for income tax purposes were approximately $175 million. Most of the state tax credits carry forward indefinitely.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we maintained a valuation allowance with respect to certain of our deferred tax assets relating primarily
to operating losses in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions and certain state tax credits that we believe are not likely to be realized.
We have recognized the tax consequences of all foreign unremitted earnings and management has no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest
the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries as of the balance sheet date. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, $697 million and
$791 million, respectively, of our liability for deemed repatriation of foreign earnings was included in other liabilities on our consolidated balance
sheet. We have not provided for deferred taxes on outside basis differences in our investments in our foreign subsidiaries that are unrelated to
unremitted earnings. These basis differences will be indefinitely reinvested. A determination of the unrecognized deferred taxes related to these
other components of our outside basis difference is not practicable.
In connection with the transfer of our Classifieds business on June 24, 2021 we recorded $2.1 billion of income tax expense as part of income
from discontinued operations, of which $1.7 billion was a deferred tax liability for the outside basis difference related to our receipt of Adevinta
shares. Through the remainder of 2021, the deferred tax liability has decreased with the change in fair value of the Adevinta investment, which has
been recorded in income from continuing operations following the transaction close date through December 31, 2021.
109

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
The following table presents changes in unrecognized tax benefits for the periods indicated (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the beginning of the period
$
420 
$
387 
$
544 
Increases related to prior period tax positions
6 
30 
37 
Decreases related to prior period tax positions
(5)
(15)
(114)
Increases related to current period tax positions
42 
39 
28 
Settlements
(2)
(21)
(108)
Gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits as of the end of the period
$
461 
$
420 
$
387 
As  of  December  31,  2021,  gross  amounts  of  unrecognized  tax  benefits  of  $461  million  included  $50  million  of  unrecognized  tax  benefits
indemnified by PayPal. As of December 31, 2020, gross amounts of unrecognized tax benefits of $420 million included $50 million of unrecognized
tax benefits indemnified by PayPal. If total unrecognized tax benefits were realized in a future period, it would result in a tax benefit of $318 million.
Of this amount, approximately $46 million of unrecognized tax benefit is indemnified by PayPal and a corresponding receivable would be reduced
upon a future realization. As of December 31, 2021, our liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits were included in other liabilities on our consolidated
balance sheet.
We recognize interest and/or penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. In 2021 and 2020, tax benefits of $6 million
and  $10  million,  respectively,  were  included  in  tax  expense  for  interest  and  penalties.  The  amount  of  interest  and  penalties  accrued  as  of
December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $46 million and $39 million, respectively.
 
We are subject to both direct  and indirect  taxation  in the U.S.  and various  states  and foreign  jurisdictions.  We are under examination  by
certain  tax  authorities  for  the  2010  to  2020  tax  years.  We  believe  that  adequate  amounts  have  been  reserved  for  any  adjustments  that  may
ultimately result from these or other examinations. The material jurisdictions where we are subject to potential examination by tax authorities for tax
years after 2009 include, among others, the U.S. (Federal and California), Germany, Israel, Singapore, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
 
Although  the  timing  of  the  resolution  and/or  closure  of  audits  is  highly  uncertain,  it  is  reasonably  possible  that  the  balance  of  gross
unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change in the next 12 months. However, given the number of years remaining subject to examination
and the number of matters being examined, we are unable to estimate the full range of possible adjustments to the balance of gross unrecognized
tax benefits.
110

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 16 — Gain (Loss) on Equity Investments and Warrant, Net and Interest and Other, Net
The following table presents components of gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
  
2020
  
2019
Change in fair value of equity investment in Adevinta
$
(3,070)
$
— 
$
— 
Gain (loss) on sale of shares in Adevinta 
9 
— 
— 
Change in fair value of warrant
354 
770 
133 
Change in fair value of equity investment in Adyen
(10)
— 
— 
Change in fair value of equity investment in KakaoBank
403 
239 
— 
Gain (loss) on sale of shares in KakaoBank
83 
— 
— 
Impairment of equity investment in Paytm Mall
(160)
— 
— 
Gain (loss) on other investments 
26 
(2)
— 
Total gain (loss) on equity investments and warrant, net
$
(2,365)   $
1,007   $
133 
(1)
Gain (loss) on sale of shares in Adevinta included an $88 million gain recognized on the sale of the shares offset by a $79 million loss from the change in fair value of the
shares sold through the date of sale.
(2)
Gain (loss) on other investments primarily included: (i) in 2021, primarily a $41 million upward adjustment and a $10 million impairment recorded on equity investments
without readily determinable fair values; (ii) in 2020, primarily a $40 million impairment recorded on an investment and a $37 million gain for the receipt of proceeds that
were held in escrow related to a long-term investment that was sold in 2018.
The following table presents components of interest and other, net for the periods indicated (in millions):
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Interest income
$
19 
$
38 
$
112 
Interest expense
(269)
(304)
(311)
Foreign exchange and other
90 
(32)
(52)
Total interest and other, net
$
(160)
$
(298)
$
(251)
(1)
(2)
111

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 17 — Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The following tables summarize the changes in AOCI for the periods indicated (in millions):
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized
Gains (Losses) 
on Investments
Foreign
Currency
Translation
Estimated Tax
(Expense) Benefit
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2020
$
(85)
$
5 
$
654 
$
42 
$
616 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications
91 
(11)
(201)
(17)
(138)
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI
(59)
1 
125 
13 
80 
Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
150 
(12)
(326)
(30)
(218)
Balance as of December 31, 2021
$
65 
$
(7)
$
328 
$
12 
$
398 
Unrealized Gains
(Losses) on
Derivative
Instruments
Unrealized
Gains (Losses) 
on Investments
Foreign
Currency
Translation
Estimated Tax
(Expense) Benefit
Total
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
(9)
$
5 
$
363 
$
25 
$
384 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before
reclassifications
(61)
— 
291 
14 
244 
Less: Amount of gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI
15 
— 
— 
(3)
12 
Net current period other comprehensive income (loss)
(76)
— 
291 
17 
232 
Balance as of December 31, 2020
$
(85)
$
5 
$
654 
$
42 
$
616 
The following table summarizes reclassifications out of AOCI for periods indicated (in millions):
Details about AOCI Components
 
Affected Line Item in the Statement of Income
Amount of Gain (Loss)
Reclassified from AOCI for the
Year Ended December 31,
2021
2020
Gains (losses) on cash flow hedges
Foreign exchange contracts
Net revenues
$
(65)
$
15 
Foreign exchange contracts
Cost of net revenues
4 
— 
Interest rate contracts
Interest and other, net
2 
— 
Total, from continuing operations before income taxes
(59)
15 
Income taxes
13 
(3)
Total, from continuing operations net of income taxes
(46)
12 
Unrealized gains (losses) on investments
Interest and other, net
1 
— 
Total, before income taxes
1 
— 
Income taxes
— 
— 
Total, net of income taxes
1 
— 
Foreign currency translation
Discontinued operations net of income taxes
125 
— 
Total reclassifications for the period
Total, net of income taxes
$
80 
$
12 
112

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
Note 18 — Restructuring
The following table summarizes restructuring reserve activity during 2021 (in millions):
 
Employee Severance
and Benefits
Accrued liability as of January 1, 2021
$
— 
Charges
35 
Payments
(34)
Accrued liability as of December 31, 2021
$
1 
During the first quarter of 2021, management approved plans that included the reduction in workforce and other exit costs. The reduction was
substantially completed in the first quarter of 2021 and resulted in a pre-tax charge of $35 million.
During the first quarter of 2020 we substantially completed the reduction in workforce that was approved by management during the fourth
quarter of 2019. We incurred pre-tax restructuring charges of approximately $7 million primarily during the first quarter of 2020 in connection with the
action taken in the fourth quarter of 2019 and made payments of approximately $34 million during 2020.
During the first quarter of 2019, management approved a plan to drive operational improvement that included the reduction of workforce. The
reduction was substantially completed in the first quarter of 2019 and resulted in pre-tax restructuring charges of approximately $39 million. During
the fourth quarter of 2019, management approved a plan to drive operational improvement that included the reduction of workforce. We incurred a
pre-tax charge of $25 million, which was primarily related to employee severance and benefits.
The  restructuring  charges  incurred  in  2021,  2020  and  2019  were  included  in  general  and  administrative  expenses  in  the  consolidated
statement of income.
113

Table of Contents
Supplementary Data — Quarterly Financial Data — Unaudited
The following tables present certain unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information for each of the eight quarters in the two year period
ended December 31, 2021. This quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as the Consolidated Financial Statements and includes
all adjustments necessary to state fairly the information for the periods presented. Our StubHub, Classifieds and Korea businesses are classified as
discontinued operations.
Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited, in millions, except per share amounts)
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2021
Net revenues
$
2,638 
$
2,668 
$
2,501 
$
2,613 
Gross profit
$
2,032 
$
1,996 
$
1,823 
$
1,919 
Income (loss) from continuing operations
$
568 
$
294 
$
283 
$
(893)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
73 
$
10,440 
$
(19)
$
2,862 
Net income (loss)
$
641 
$
10,734 
$
264 
$
1,969 
Income (loss) per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.83 
$
0.44 
$
0.44 
$
(1.47)
Discontinued operations
0.11 
15.48 
(0.03)
4.72 
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
0.94 
$
15.92 
$
0.41 
$
3.25 
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.82 
$
0.43 
$
0.43 
$
(1.47)
Discontinued operations
0.10 
15.25 
(0.03)
4.72 
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
0.92 
$
15.68 
$
0.40 
$
3.25 
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
681 
674 
647 
606 
Diluted
693 
685 
658 
606 
Quarter Ended
March 31
June 30
September 30
December 31
2020
Net revenues
$
1,821 
$
2,337 
$
2,258 
$
2,478 
Gross profit
$
1,467 
$
1,920 
$
1,780 
$
1,930 
Income from continuing operations
$
421 
$
689 
$
605 
$
772 
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
$
2,991 
$
57 
$
59 
$
73 
Net income (loss)
$
3,412 
$
746 
$
664 
$
845 
Income per share - basic:
Continuing operations
$
0.56 
$
0.98 
$
0.87 
$
1.12 
Discontinued operations
3.97 
0.08 
0.08 
0.11 
Net income (loss) per share - basic
$
4.53 
$
1.06 
$
0.95 
$
1.23 
Income (loss) per share - diluted:
Continuing operations
$
0.56 
$
0.97 
$
0.86 
$
1.11 
Discontinued operations
3.95 
0.08 
0.08 
0.10 
Net income (loss) per share - diluted
$
4.51 
$
1.05 
$
0.94 
$
1.21 
Weighted-average shares:
Basic
753 
703 
696 
688 
Diluted
757 
711 
708 
697 
114

Table of Contents
eBay Inc.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULE
The  Financial  Statement  Schedule  II  —  VALUATION  AND  QUALIFYING  ACCOUNTS  for  continuing  operations  as  of  and  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Balance at
Beginning of Period
Charged/ Credited
to Net Income
Charged to Other
Account
Charges Utilized/
Write-offs
Balance at End of
Period
(In millions)
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
63 
$
109 
$
— 
$
(91)
$
81 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
81 
$
132 
$
— 
$
(116)
$
97 
Year Ended December 31, 2021
$
97 
$
79 
$
— 
$
(134)
$
42 
Allowance for Authorized Credits
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
31 
$
(3)
$
— 
$
— 
$
28 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
28 
$
11 
$
— 
$
— 
$
39 
Year Ended December 31, 2021
$
39 
$
(8)
$
— 
$
1 
$
32 
Allowance for Transaction Losses
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
23 
$
153 
$
— 
$
(153)
$
23 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
23 
$
198 
$
— 
$
(189)
$
32 
Year Ended December 31, 2021
$
32 
$
343 
$
— 
$
(287)
$
88 
Tax Valuation Allowance
Year Ended December 31, 2019
$
62 
$
42 
$
(1)
$
(7)
$
96 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
$
96 
$
53 
$
— 
$
— 
$
149 
Year Ended December 31, 2021
$
149 
$
6 
$
(12)
$
(7)
$
136 
115

Table of Contents
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
2.01
Separation and Distribution Agreement by and between
Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc. dated as of June 26, 2015.
8-K
000-24821
6/30/2015
2.02*
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 24, 2019 by
and among eBay Inc., eBay International AG, PUG LLC, and
solely for the purposes set forth therein, Pugnacious Endeavors,
Inc.
8-K
001-37713
11/25/2019
2.03
Transaction Agreement, dated as of July 20, 2020 by and
between eBay Inc., and Adevinta ASA.
8-K
001-37713
7/22/2020
2.04
Letter Agreement, dated as of October 16, 2020, amending
Transaction Agreement, dated as of July 20, 2020, by and
between eBay Inc., and Adevinta ASA.
10-K
001-37713
2/4/2021
2.05
Securities Purchase Agreement, dated as of June 30, 2021, by
and among eBay Inc., eBay KTA (UK) Ltd., Emerald SPV Co.,
Ltd., and, solely for the purposes set forth therein, E-mart Inc.
8-K
001-37713
6/30/2021
2.06
Share Purchase Agreement, dated as of July 14, 2021, by and
among eBay Inc., eBay International Management B.V. and
Astinlux Finco S.à r.l.
10-Q
001-37713
10/28/2021
3.01
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
 
 
10-Q
 
001-37713
7/18/2019
3.02
  Registrant’s Amended and Restated Bylaws.
 
 
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
4.01
  Form of Specimen Certificate for Registrant’s Common Stock.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097
 
8/19/1998
4.02
Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between Registrant and
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821
 
10/28/2010
4.03
Supplemental Indenture dated as of October 28, 2010 between
Registrant and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as
trustee.
8-K
 
000-24821
 
10/28/2010
4.05
Officer’s Certificate dated July 24, 2012.
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.06
Forms of 2.600% Note due 2022 and 4.000% Note due 2042
(included in Exhibit 4.05).
8-K
000-24821
7/24/2012
4.07
Officer’s Certificate dated July 28, 2014.
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.08
Form of 3.450% Note due 2024 (included in Exhibit 4.07).
8-K
000-24821
7/28/2014
4.09
Officer’s Certificate dated March 9, 2016.
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
4.10
Form of 3.800% Note due 2022 (included in Exhibit 4.09).
8-K
001-37713
3/9/2016
4.11
Officer’s Certificate dated June 6, 2017.
8-K
001-37713
6/6/2017
4.12
Form of Floating Rate Note due 2023, 2.150% Note due 2020,
2.750% Note due 2023 and 3.600% Note due 2027 (included in
Exhibit 4.11).
8-K
001-37713
6/6/2017
4.13
Officer’s Certificate dated March 11, 2020.
8-K
001-37713
3/11/2020
4.14
Form of Note due 2025, 1.900% and Note due 2030, 2.700%
(included in Exhibit 4.13).
8-K
001-37713
3/11/2020
4.15
Officer’s Certificate dated June 15, 2020.
8-K
001-37713
6/15/2020
4.16
Form of Note due 2025, 1.900% and Note due 2030, 2.700%
(included in Exhibit 4.15).
8-K
001-37713
6/15/2020
116

Table of Contents
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
4.17
Description of Securities.
10-K
001-37713
1/31/2020
4.18
Officers’ Certificate dated May 10, 2021 establishing the terms of
the 1.400% Notes due 2026, 2.600% Notes due 2031 and the
3.650% Notes due 2051
8-K
001-37713
5/10/2021
4.19
Form of 1.400% Note Due 2026 (included in Exhibit 4.18)
8-K
001-37713
5/10/2021
4.20
Form of 2.600% Note Due 2031 (included in Exhibit 4.18)
8-K
001-37713
5/10/2021
4.21
Form of 3.650% Note Due 2051 (included in Exhibit 4.18)
8-K
001-37713
5/10/2021
10.01+
  Form of Indemnity Agreement entered into by Registrant with
each of its directors and executive officers.
 
 
S-1
 
333-59097
 
7/15/1998
10.02+
  Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan, as amended.
 
 
10-K
 
000-24821
 
2/28/2007
10.03+
Amendment to Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan,
effective April 2, 2012.
10-Q
 
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.04+
Form of Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.05+
  
Form of Electing Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821
 
7/19/2012
10.06+
  
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2003
Deferred Stock Unit Plan.
 
 
10-Q
 
000-24821
 
7/19/2012
10.07+
  
Form of 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan Restricted Stock Unit
Grant Notice and Agreement.
 
 
10-Q/A
 
000-24821
 
4/24/2008
10.08+
  
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan, as amended and
restated.
 
 
8-K
 
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.09+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2003 Deferred Stock Unit Plan and Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.10+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement (with Modified
Vesting) under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821
 
7/19/2012
10.11+
Form of Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/19/2012
10.12+
Form of Stock Option Agreement (with Modified Vesting) under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821
 
7/19/2012
10.13+
Form of Director Deferred Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
 
000-24821
 
7/19/2012
10.14+
  Amended and Restated eBay Incentive Plan.
 
 
10-K
001-37713
2/4/2020
10.15+
  
eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and
restated effective January 1, 2022.
 
X
 
10.16+
eBay Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
DEF 14A
000-24821
3/19/2012
10.17
Credit Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2015, by and among
Registrant, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative
Agent, and the other parties thereto.
8-K
000-24821
11/12/2015
10.18+
Form of New Director Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.19+
Form of Director Annual Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.20+
Form of Electing Director Quarterly Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
4/19/2013
10.21+
Form of Global Stock Option Agreement under Registrant’s 2008
Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
117

Table of Contents
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 
Filed or Furnished with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.22+
Form of Global Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (and
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreement) under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
000-24821
7/18/2014
10.23+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award
Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.24+
Form of Stock Payment Award Agreement under Registrant’s
2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.25+
Form of Director Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.26+
Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant
Notice and Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Award
Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.27+
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Grant Notice and Restricted
Stock Unit Award Agreement under Registrant’s 2008 Equity
Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.28+
Notice Regarding Payment of Dividend Equivalents on Restricted
Stock Units and Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units under
Registrant’s 2008 Equity Incentive Award Plan.
10-K
001-37713
1/30/2019
10.29
Amendment dated June 30, 2016, to the Operating Agreement by
and among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings,
Inc., PayPal, Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte.
Holdings S.C.S.
10-Q
001-37713
7/21/2016
10.30
Operating Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015,  by and among
Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal Holdings, Inc., PayPal,
Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.31
Transition Services Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.32
Tax Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.33
Employee Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17, 2015, by and
between Registrant and PayPal Holdings, Inc.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.34
Intellectual Property Matters Agreement, dated as of July 17,
2015, by and among Registrant, eBay International AG, PayPal
Holdings, Inc., PayPal, Inc., PayPal Pte. Ltd. and PayPal
Payments Pte. Holdings S.C.S.
8-K
000-24821
7/20/2015
10.35+
Letter dated September 30, 2014 from Registrant to Scott
Schenkel.
10-Q
000-24821
7/21/2015
10.36+
Offer Letter dated April 2, 2015 between Registrant and Marie Oh
Huber.
10-Q
001-37713
4/27/2016
10.37+
Offer Letter dated February 1, 2017, between Registrant and
Wendy Jones.
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
10.38+
Offer Letter dated July 3, 2018, between Registrant and Wendy
Jones.
10-Q
001-37713
7/18/2019
10.39+
Letter Agreement between Scott Schenkel and eBay Inc., dated
October 11, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
10/16/2019
10.40+
Letter Agreement between Andrew Cring and eBay Inc., dated
October 11, 2019.
8-K
001-37713
10/16/2019
10.41
Credit Agreement, dated as of March 6, 2020, by and among the
Company, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent
and the other parties thereto.
8-K
001-37713
3/11/2020
118

Table of Contents
No.
  
Exhibit Description
 Filed or Furnished with
this 10-K
 
Incorporated by Reference
  
 
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Date Filed
10.42+
Offer Letter dated July 7, 2019 between Registrant and Peter
Thompson.
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
10.43+
Offer Letter dated May 1, 2015 between Registrant and Kristin Yetto.
10-Q
001-37713
4/30/2020
10.44+
Letter Agreement between Jamie Iannone and eBay Inc., dated April
12, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.45+
Letter Agreement between Scott Schenkel and eBay Inc., dated April
13, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.46+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. SVP and Above Standard
Severance Plan, effective April 11, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.47+
Amended and Restated eBay Inc. Change in Control Severance
Plan, effective April 11, 2020.
10-Q
001-37713
7/29/2020
10.48+
Letter Agreement between Andy Cring and eBay Inc., dated July 1,
2020.
10-Q
001-37713
10/29/2020
10.49+
Offer Letter dated May 7, 2021 between Registrant and Stephen
Priest
10-Q
001-37713
8/12/2021
21.01
  List of Subsidiaries.
 
X
 
 
 
23.01
  PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP consent.
 
X
 
 
 
24.01
  Power of Attorney (see signature page).
 
X
 
 
 
31.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
31.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.01
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Executive Officer, as required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
32.02
  
Certification of Registrant’s Chief Financial Officer, as required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
X
 
 
 
101
  
The following materials from the Annual Report on Form 10-K of
eBay Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2021, were formatted in
Inline XBRL (Extensible Business Reporting Language): (i) eBay Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets, (ii) eBay Inc. Consolidated Statements
of Income, (iii) eBay Inc. Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive
Income, (iv) eBay Inc. Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’
Equity and (v) eBay Inc. Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
The instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File
because its XBRL tags are imbedded within the Inline XBRL
document.
 
X
 
 
 
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted as Inline XBRL and
contained in Exhibit 101).
X
*    Schedules and exhibits have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The registrant agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule or
exhibit to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission upon request.
+    Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
119

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized on February 24, 2022.
eBay Inc.
By:
/s/ Jamie Iannone
Jamie Iannone
Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Jamie Iannone, Steve Priest,
Brian J. Doerger and Marie Oh Huber and each or any one of them, each with the power of substitution, his or her attorney-in-fact, to sign any amendments to
this report, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all
that each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf
of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on February 24, 2022.
Principal Executive Officer and Director:
Principal Financial Officer:
By:
/s/ Jamie Iannone
By:
/s/ Steve Priest
Jamie Iannone
Steve Priest
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Principal Accounting Officer:
By:
/s/ Brian J. Doerger
Brian J. Doerger
Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
120

Table of Contents
Additional Directors
By:
/s/ Paul S. Pressler
By:
/s/ Anthony J. Bates
Paul S. Pressler
Anthony J. Bates
Chairman of the Board and Director
Director
By:
/s/ Adriane M. Brown
By:
/s/ Diana Farrell
Adriane M. Brown
Diana Farrell
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Logan D. Green
By:
/s/ Bonnie S. Hammer
Logan D. Green
Bonnie S. Hammer
Director
Director
By:
/s/ E. Carol Hayles
By:
/s/ Kathleen C. Mitic
E. Carol Hayles
Kathleen C. Mitic
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Matthew J. Murphy
By:
/s/ Mohak Shroff
Matthew J. Murphy
Mohak Shroff
Director
Director
By:
/s/ Robert H. Swan
By:
/s/ Perry M. Traquina
Robert H. Swan
Perry M. Traquina
Director
Director
121

Exhibit 10.15
EBAY INC.
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
(As amended and restated, effective January 1, 2022)
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I. TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
1
1.1    Title
1
1.2    Definitions
1
ARTICLE II. PARTICIPATION
6
ARTICLE III. CONTRIBUTIONS
6
3.1    Elections to Defer Compensation
6
3.2    Distribution Elections
8
3.3    Company Contributions    
10
3.4    FICA and Other Taxes
11
ARTICLE IV. INVESTMENTS
11
4.1    Measurement Funds
11
4.2    Investment Elections
12
4.3    Compliance with Section 16 of the Exchange Act
12
ARTICLE V. ACCOUNTS
13
5.1    Accounts
13
5.2    Subaccounts
13
ARTICLE VI. VESTING
14
ARTICLE VII. DISTRIBUTIONS
14
7.1    Distribution of Accounts
14
7.2    Hardship Distribution
15
7.3    Effect of a Change in Control
16
7.4    Inability to Locate Participant
16
7.5     Prohibition on Acceleration of Distributions
17
ARTICLE VIII. ADMINISTRATION
17
8.1    Committee
17
8.2    Administrator
17
8.3    Committee Action
17
8.4    Powers and Duties of the Committee
17
i
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
8.5    Delegation of Authority
18
8.6    Construction and Interpretation
18
8.7    Information
18
8.8    Compensation, Expenses and Indemnity
18
8.9    Quarterly Statements
19
8.10    Disputes
19
8.11    Compliance with Section 409A of the Code
21
ARTICLE IX. MISCELLANEOUS    
21
9.1    Unsecured General Creditor
21
9.2    Restriction Against Assignment
22
9.3    Withholding
22
9.4    Amendment, Modification, Suspension or Termination
22
9.5    Designation of Beneficiary
23
9.6    Governing Law
23
9.7    Compliance with Code Section 162(m)
23
9.8    Payments on Behalf of Persons Under Incapacity
24
9.9    Limitation of Rights
24
9.10    Exempt ERISA Plan
24
9.11    Notice
24
9.12    Errors and Misstatements
24
9.13    Pronouns and Plurality
25
9.14    Severability
25
9.15    Status
25
9.16    Headings
25
ii
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
eBay Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), and its direct and indirect subsidiaries hereby
establish and maintain this eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan (the “Plan”) which is designed to provide certain
benefits for a select group of management and highly compensated employees through deferrals of salary and incentive
compensation. This Plan was initially effective as of January 1, 2008, and is amended and restated, as set forth herein,
effective January 1, 2022.
The Plan is intended to comply with the requirements of Sections 409A(a)(2), (3) and (4) of the Code and
the Treasury Regulations and other guidance issued by the Secretary of the Treasury thereunder. To the extent
permitted by such Treasury Regulations or other guidance, the Plan may be amended to conform to the requirements of
Section 409A of the Code.
ARTICLE I.
TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
1.1
Title.
    This Plan shall be known as the eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan.
1.2
Definitions.
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this Plan, with the first letter capitalized, they shall have
the meanings specified below.
(a)
“Account” or “Accounts” shall mean a Participant’s Deferral Account and/or Company Account.
(b)
“Administrator” shall mean the individuals designated by the Committee (who need not be a member of
the Committee) to handle the day-to-day Plan administration. If the Committee does not make such a designation, the
Administrator shall be the Vice-President of Human Resources Operations of the Company, or any successor position.
(c)
 “Affiliate” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Rule 12b-2 promulgated under the Exchange Act.
(d)
 “Base Salary” shall mean a Participant’s annual base salary, excluding bonus, incentive and all other
remuneration for services rendered to the Company, prior to reduction for any salary contributions to a plan established
pursuant to Section 125 or 423 of the Code or intended to be qualified pursuant to Section 401(k) of the Code and prior
to reduction for deferrals under this Plan.
(e)
“Beneficial Owner” has the meaning set forth in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act.
(f)
“Beneficiary” or “Beneficiaries” shall mean the person or persons, including a trustee, personal
representative or other fiduciary, last designated in writing by a Participant to receive the benefits specified hereunder in
the event of the Participant’s death in accordance with Section 9.5.
(g)
“Board of Directors” or “Board” shall mean the Board of Directors of the Company.
1
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(h)
“Bonus” shall mean an incentive award earned by a Participant under the Company’s short-term incentive
plan.
(i)
“Change in Control” shall be deemed to have occurred when any event or transaction described in
paragraph (1), (2), (3) or (4) occurs, subject to paragraph (5):
(1)    Any Person is or becomes the Beneficial Owner, directly or indirectly, of securities of the Company
representing fifty percent (50%) or more of the combined voting power of the Company’s then outstanding securities; or
(2)    The following individuals cease for any reason to constitute a majority of the number of directors then
serving: individuals who, on the Effective Date, constitute the Board and any new director (other than a director whose
initial assumption of office is in connection with an actual or threatened election contest, including, but not limited to, a
consent solicitation, relating to the election of directors of the Company) whose appointment or election by the Board or
nomination for election by the Company’s stockholders was approved or recommended by a vote of at least two-thirds
(2/3) of the directors then still in office who either were directors on the date hereof or whose appointment, election or
nomination for election was previously so approved or recommended; or
(3)    There is consummated a merger or consolidation of the Company or any direct or indirect subsidiary
of the Company with any other corporation, other than (A) a merger or consolidation which would result in the voting
securities of the Company outstanding immediately prior to such merger or consolidation continuing to represent (either
by remaining outstanding or by being converted into voting securities of the surviving entity or any parent thereof), in
combination with the ownership of any trustee or other fiduciary holding securities under an employee benefit plan of the
Company or any subsidiary of the Company, at least a majority of the combined voting power of the securities of the
Company or such surviving entity or any parent thereof outstanding immediately after such merger or consolidation, or
(B) a merger or consolidation effected to implement a recapitalization of the Company (or similar transaction) in which
no Person is or becomes the Beneficial Owner, directly or indirectly, of securities of the Company (not including in the
securities beneficially owned by such Person any securities acquired directly from the Company or its affiliates other
than in connection with the acquisition by the Company or its affiliates of a business) representing fifty percent (50%) or
more of the combined voting power of the Company’s then outstanding securities; or
(4)    The stockholders of the Company approve a plan of complete liquidation or dissolution of the
Company or there is consummated an agreement for the sale or disposition by the Company of all or substantially all of
the Company’s assets, other than a sale or disposition by the Company of all or substantially all of the Company’s
assets to an entity, at least a majority of the combined voting power of the voting securities of which are owned by
stockholders of the Company in substantially the same proportions as their ownership of the Company immediately prior
to such sale.
(5)    An event or transaction described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) shall be a “Change in Control” only
if such event or transaction is a “change in the ownership or effective control of the corporation, or in the ownership of a
substantial portion of the assets of the corporation,” within the meaning of Section 409A(a)(2)(A)(v) of the Code, to the
extent provided by the Secretary of the Treasury.
2
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(j)
“Code” shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
(k)
“Committee” shall mean the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors.
(l)
“Company” shall mean eBay Inc. and any successor corporations. Company shall also include each
corporation which is a member of a controlled group of corporations (within the meaning of Section 414(b) of the Code)
of which eBay Inc. is a component member.
(m)
“Company Account” shall mean the bookkeeping account maintained by the Company for each
Participant that is credited with an amount equal to the Company Contribution, if any, debited by amounts equal to all
distributions to and withdrawals made by the Participant and/or his Beneficiary and adjusted for investment earnings and
losses pursuant to Article V.
(n)
“Company Contributions” shall mean any discretionary employer contribution, if any, made to the Plan
on behalf of Eligible Individuals.
(o)
“Compensation” shall mean Base Salary and Bonus, and at the Committee’s discretion, Restricted Stock
Units that the Participant who is an employee is entitled to receive for services rendered to the Company.
(p)
“Deferral Account” shall mean the bookkeeping account maintained by the Company for each Participant
that is credited with amounts equal to the portion of the Participant’s Compensation that he elects to defer pursuant to
Section 3.1, debited by amounts equal to all distributions to and withdrawals made by the Participant and/or his
Beneficiary and adjusted for investment earnings and losses pursuant to Article V. The Deferral Account may be further
subdivided into Subaccounts as determined by the Committee, including separate Subaccounts separately reflecting the
deferral of a Participant’s Base Salary and the deferral of a Participant’s Bonus for each applicable Plan Year.
(q)
“Deferral Election Form” shall mean the form designated by the Committee for purposes of making
deferrals under Section 3.1.
(r)
“Disability” or “Disabled” means, with respect to a Participant, that the Participant:
(1)     is  unable  to  engage  in  any  substantial  gainful  activity  by  reason  of  any  medically  determinable
physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous
period of not less than twelve (12) months, or
(2)    is, by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to
result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12) months, receiving income
replacement benefits for a period of not less than three months under an accident or health plan covering employees of
such Participant’s Employer,
as determined in accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
3
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(s)
 “Distributable Amount” of a Participant’s Subaccounts with respect to a Plan Year shall mean the sum
of the vested balance of the Subaccounts in a Participant’s Deferral Account and Company Account with respect to such
Plan Year.
(t)
“Effective Date” shall mean January 1, 2008.
(u)
“Election Period” with respect to a Plan Year shall mean the period designated by the Committee;
provided, however, that such period shall be no less than ten business days. The Election Period with respect to a Plan
Year shall end not later than the last day of the prior Plan Year; provided, however, that, in the case of an Eligible
Individual who first becomes eligible to participate in the Plan during a Plan Year, the Election Period may be the thirty
(30) day period commencing on the date such Eligible Individual first becomes eligible to participate in accordance with
Section 409A(a)(4)(B)(ii) of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder; and provided, further, in the case of an
Eligible Individual’s election to defer a Bonus (or portion thereof) for a Plan Year that is performance-based
compensation based on services over a period of at least twelve (12) months, within the meaning of Section 409A(a)(4)
(B)(iii) of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder, the Election Period may be a period designated by the
Committee during such Plan Year that satisfies the requirements of Section 409A(a)(4)(B)(iii) of the Code and the
Treasury Regulations thereunder.
(v)
“Eligible Individual” shall mean those Executives selected by the Committee. The Committee may, in its
sole discretion, select such other individuals to participate in the Plan who do not otherwise meet the foregoing
designation.
(w)
“ERISA” shall mean the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
(x)
“Exchange Act” shall mean the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the applicable rules
and regulations thereunder.
(y)
“Executive” shall mean an executive of the Company who is on the U.S. payroll and who holds a position
as Vice President or who holds a position with a more senior grade level than Vice President, or is otherwise designated
by the Committee.
(z)
“401(k) Plan” shall mean the eBay Inc. 401(k) Savings Plan maintained by the Company under Code
Section 401(k), as in effect from time to time or as applicable for any Participant, a plan maintained by a direct or indirect
subsidiary of the Company under Code Section 401(k).
(aa)
“Measurement Fund” shall mean one or more of the investment funds selected by the Committee
pursuant to Section 4.1.
(bb)
“Participant” shall mean any Eligible Individual who becomes a Participant in accordance with Article II
and who has not received a complete distribution of the amounts credited to his Accounts.
(cc)
“Payroll Date” shall mean, with respect to any Participant, the date on which he would otherwise be paid
Compensation.
4
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(dd)
“Payment Date” shall mean the time as soon as practicable after one of the following dates as designated
by the Participant in his distribution form election with respect to a Plan Year:
(1)    the first business day of the seventh calendar month following the date of the Participant's Separation
from Service or Disability, or
(2)    the earlier of: (i) the first business day of June of a calendar year specified by the Participant that is
no earlier than the year after the year in which the Compensation would have been paid but for the Participant’s election
to defer such Compensation, or (ii) the first business day of the seventh calendar month following the date of the
Participant's Separation from Service or Disability.
“Payment Date” shall also mean the Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date elected in accordance with the
provisions of Section 7.1(b).
(ee)
“Person” means any person, entity or “group” within the meaning of Section 13(d)(3) or Section 14(d)(2)
of the Exchange Act, except that such term shall not include (1) the Company or any of its Affiliates, (2) a trustee or
other fiduciary holding securities under an employee benefit plan of the Company or any of its Affiliates, (3) an
underwriter temporarily holding securities pursuant to an offering of such securities, (4) a corporation owned, directly or
indirectly, by the stockholders of the Company in substantially the same proportions as their ownership of stock of the
Company, or (5) a person or group as used in Rule 13d-1(b) under the Exchange Act.
(ff)
“Plan” shall mean the eBay Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan set forth herein, as amended from time to
time.
(gg)
“Plan Year” shall mean the twelve (12) consecutive month period beginning on each January 1 and
ending on each December 31.
(hh)
“Restricted Stock Units” shall mean restricted stock units granted to Executives under the eBay Inc.
2008 Incentive Award Plan, eBay Inc. 1999 Global Equity Incentive Plan and eBay Inc. 1998 Equity Incentive Plan, or
any other equity compensation plans approved by the Company’s Stockholders.
(ii)
“Rule 16b-3” shall mean that certain Rule 16b-3 under the Exchange Act, as such Rule may be amended
from time to time.
(jj)
“Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date” shall mean the earlier of: (i) the first business day of June of a
calendar year specified by the Participant that is no earlier than the year after the year in which the Compensation would
have been paid but for the Participant’s election to defer such Compensation, or (ii) the first business day of the seventh
calendar month following the date of the Participant's Separation from Service or Disability.
(kk)
 “Separation from Service” shall mean with respect to a Participant, such Participant’s Termination, if
such Termination is a “separation from service,” within the meaning of Section 409A(a)(2)(A)(i) of the Code, as
determined by the Secretary of the Treasury (or such Participant’s other “separation from service,” as so defined).
5
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(ll)
“Subaccount” or “Subaccounts” shall mean the subaccount or subaccounts maintained with respect to a
Participant’s Deferral Account or Company Account.
(mm)
“Termination” shall mean for any Participant who is an employee, ceasing to be an employee of the
Company for reasons other than death or Disability. If a Participant is both an employee of the Company and a member
of the Board of Directors, he shall not have a Termination until he terminates from both positions.
(nn)
 “Valuation Date”, with respect to the Measurement Funds that are available under the 401(k) Plan, shall
have the same meaning as under the 401(k) Plan. For purposes of other Measurement Funds, “Valuation Date” shall be
as determined by the Committee.
ARTICLE II.
PARTICIPATION
(a)
An Eligible Individual shall become a Participant in the Plan by (1) electing to make deferrals in
accordance with Section 3.1 or receiving a Company Contribution and (2) filing with the Company such other forms as
the Committee may reasonably require for participation hereunder.
(b)
An Eligible Individual who completes the requirements of the preceding subsection of this Article II shall
commence participation in this Plan as of the first day of the Plan Year with respect to which Compensation is elected to
be deferred.
ARTICLE III.
CONTRIBUTIONS
3.1
Elections to Defer Compensation
(a)
General Rule. Each Eligible Individual may defer Compensation for a Plan Year by filing with the
Administrator a Deferral Election Form for such Plan Year that conforms to the requirements of this Section 3.1, no later
than the last day of the applicable Election Period for such Plan Year. The Committee may permit an Eligible Individual
who first becomes eligible to participate in the Plan during a Plan Year to have his first Election Period during such Plan
Year. An election to defer Compensation for a Plan Year must be filed during the Election Period prior to the effective
date of such election and shall be effective only for Compensation that constitutes compensation for services performed
during periods during the Plan Year beginning after the effective date of such election. Notwithstanding the previous
sentence, if an Eligible Individual’s Bonus (or portion thereof) is a performance-based compensation based on services
performed over a period of at least twelve (12) months, within the meaning of Section 409A(a)(4)(B)(iii) and the Treasury
Regulations thereunder, the Committee may permit such Eligible Individual to file an election to defer such Bonus (or
such portion thereof), or change such Eligible Individual’s prior election to defer such Bonus (or such portion thereof), no
later than six months before the end of the period over which such services are to be performed, under the terms and
conditions specified by the Committee, in accordance with Section 409A(a)(4)(B)(iii) of the Code and the Treasury
Regulations thereunder. A Participant shall make a separate election to defer Compensation for each Plan Year.
6
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(b)
Special Rules. Notwithstanding the above, the following restrictions apply to deferrals of Restricted Stock
Units.
(1)    Restricted Stock Units. A Participant may elect to defer Restricted Stock Units (or a portion thereof),
to the extent permitted by the Committee. In order to defer Restricted Stock Units (or a portion thereof), an eligible
Participant must file the appropriate Deferral Election Form no later than the election date required under Section 409A
of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder. A Participant’s election to defer Restricted Stock Units shall be
effective only for the Restricted Stock Units (or a portion thereof) that constitute compensation for services performed
during periods during the Plan Year (or a subsequent Plan Year) after the effective date of the Participant’s deferral
election, or as otherwise permitted under Section 409A of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
(2)    Limitation on Deferrals. A Participant may elect to defer Restricted Stock Units or any portion thereof,
only to the extent such deferral satisfies the requirements of Section 409A of the Code and the Treasury Regulations
thereunder.
(c)
Deferral Amounts.
(1)    The amount of Compensation which a Participant may elect to defer for a Plan Year is such
Compensation earned on or after the time at which the Participant elects to defer each Plan Year in accordance with
Section 3.1(a), and which is earned during such Plan Year. The applicable limitations for any Participant shall be
determined by the Committee, determined as of the first day of the Election Period for such Plan Year.
(2)    Each Participant shall be permitted to defer, in any whole percentage: (A) from 5% to 50% of Base
Salary, (B) from 5% to 100% of his Bonus and (C) from 5% to 100% of his Restricted Stock Units, subject to Section
3.1(b), rounded down to the nearest whole share.
(c)    Notwithstanding the limitations established above, the total amount deferred by a Participant shall be
limited in any calendar year, if necessary, to satisfy the Participant’s income and employment tax withholding obligations
(including Social Security, unemployment and Medicare), and the Participant’s employee benefit plan contribution
requirements, determined on the first day of the Election Period for such Plan Year, as determined by the Committee.
(d)
Duration of Deferral Election.
(1)    A Participant shall not modify or suspend his election to defer Compensation during a Plan Year.
(2)    A Participant must file a new deferral election for each subsequent Plan Year. In the event a
Participant fails to file a timely deferral election for the next Plan Year, he shall be deemed to have elected not to defer
any Compensation for such Plan Year.
(e)
Elections. Subject to the limitations of subsection (b), any Eligible Individual who does not elect to defer
Compensation during his Election Period for a Plan Year may subsequently become a Participant.
7
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
3.2
Distribution Elections.
(a)    General Rule. Each Participant shall make separate distribution elections with respect to each Plan Year for
which such Participant elects to defer Compensation in accordance with Section 3.1. A Participant’s distribution
elections with respect to a Plan Year shall apply to: (1) the Subaccounts in his Deferral Account to which shall be
credited the amount equal to the portion of his Compensation earned during such Plan Year that he elects to defer
pursuant to Section 3.1; and (2) the Subaccounts in his Company Account to which shall be credited the amount equal
to the Company Contribution for such Plan Year, if any. A Participant may make separate distribution elections with
respect to the deferral of his or her Base Salary and the deferral of his or her Bonus for the applicable Plan Year. A
Participant’s distribution election with respect to a Plan Year shall elect the Payment Date and the form of distribution of
his Distributable Amount credited to the applicable Subaccount with respect to such Plan Year for purposes of
distributions under subsection 7.1(a) in the event of such Participant’s Separation from Service or Disability. Such
Payment Date and distribution form elections shall be made on such Participant’s Deferral Election Form during the
Election Period for which such Participant elects to defer Compensation under Section 3.1 for such Plan Year, and such
Payment Date and distribution form elections with respect to such Plan Year shall be irrevocable, except as provided in
subsection (b). A Participant may elect any Payment Date described in Section 1.2(dd), and may elect distribution in the
normal form, as described in paragraph 7.1(a)(1), or an optional form described in subparagraphs 7.1(a)(2)(A), (B) or
(C). In the event a Participant fails to elect a Payment Date for the Distributable Amount credited to a Subaccount with
respect to a Plan Year, his Payment Date for such Distributable Amount shall be the date described in Section 1.2(dd)
(1). In the event a Participant fails to make a distribution form election for the Distributable Amount credited to a
Subaccount with respect to a Plan Year, such Distributable Amount shall be distributed in the normal form, as described
in paragraph 7.1(a)(1) in the event of his Separation from Service or Disability, except as provided in subsection (b).
Except as provided in subsection (b), a Participant’s distribution for the Distributable Amount credited to a Subaccount
with respect to a Plan Year shall be made or commence as soon as administratively practicable after the applicable
Payment Date.
(b)    Changes to Distribution Form Election. Subject to subsection (e), a Participant may change his distribution
form election for the Distributable Amount credited to a Subaccount with respect to a Plan Year in accordance with this
subsection (b) as follows:
    (1)    Change from Lump Sum. If such Participant elected to receive the distribution of such Subaccount with
respect to a Plan Year in the event of his Separation from Service or Disability in the normal form, as described in
paragraph 7.1(a)(1) ( i.e., a lump sum), such Participant may change such distribution form election by making a new
distribution form election for such Subaccount providing for distribution in one of the following forms, with such
distribution made or commencing on the fifth anniversary of his initially elected Payment Date:
        (A)    a lump sum, or
        (B)    annual installments (calculated as set forth at Section 7.1(a)(6)) over a period of from two (2) up to
fifteen (15) years.
    
8
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(2)    Change from Installments. If such Participant elected to receive the distribution of the Distributable
Amount credited to a Subaccount with respect to a Plan Year in the event of his Separation from Service or
Disability in an optional form, as provided in subparagraph 7.1(a)(2) (i.e., annual installments over a period of
years), such Participant may change such distribution form election by making a new distribution form election for
such Subaccount providing for distribution in one of the following forms, with such distribution commencing on the
fifth anniversary of his initially elected Payment Date:
        (i)    a lump sum, provided that no installments have commenced with respect to such Plan Year,
        (ii)    annual installments (calculated as set forth at Section 7.1(a)(6)) over the period of years specified in
such Participant’s initial distribution form election, provided that no installments have commenced with respect to such
Plan Year, or
        (iii)    annual installments (calculated as set forth at Section 7.1(a)(6)) over a period of from two (2) up to
fifteen (15) years, provided that such period exceeds the period of years specified in such Participant’s initial distribution
form election, and provided, further, that no installments have commenced with respect to such Plan Year.
    (3)    A Participant may make only one change to his distribution form election with respect to a Plan Year
under this subsection (b).
(c)    Election of Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date. A Participant may elect a Scheduled In-Service
Withdrawal Date with respect to his deferrals of Compensation (including any investment earnings on such amounts)
plus any Company Contributions to the extent vested, if any, (the “Withdrawal Amount”) with respect to a Plan Year.
Such election of a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date for such Participant’s Withdrawal Amount with respect to a
Plan Year shall be made by such Participant during the Election Period for which such Participant elects to defer
Compensation under Section 3.1 for such Plan Year, and such election of a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date shall
be irrevocable, except as provided in subsection (d). A Participant may make separate Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal
Date elections for his deferrals of Base Salary and Bonus (including any investment earnings on such amounts) with
respect to each Plan Year. A Participant’s Withdrawal Amount with respect to a Plan Year shall be credited to the
applicable Subaccount(s) under such Participant’s Accounts for such Plan Year. A Participant shall not be required to
elect a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to his deferrals of Compensation for a Plan Year and, if a
Participant fails to make an election of a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date for a Plan Year, no Scheduled In-
Service Withdrawal Date shall apply with respect to his deferrals of Compensation for such Plan Year.
(d)    Change of Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date. Subject to subsection (e), if a Participant elected a
Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to his deferrals of Compensation (including any investment earnings
on such amounts) with respect to a Plan Year, such Participant may change such Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal
Date for the Withdrawal Amount with respect to such Plan Year by electing a new Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal
Date for the Withdrawal Amount with respect to such Plan Year that is not less than five years later than the Scheduled
In-Service Withdrawal Date previously elected by such Participant for such Plan Year. A Participant who has not elected
a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date for his deferrals of Compensation (including any investment earnings on such
amounts) for a Plan Year may not subsequently elect a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date for his deferrals of
Compensation (including any investment earnings on such amounts) for such Plan Year. A Participant may make only
one change to the Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to each Plan Year under this subsection (d).
9
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(e)    Limitation on Distribution Changes. A Participant’s election to change his distribution form election with
respect to a Plan Year under subsection (b), or change of a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to a
Plan Year under subsection (d), shall be subject to the following limitations:
    (1)    The Participant’s election to change his distribution election form with respect to a Plan Year, or change
his Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to a Plan Year, shall not take effect until at least twelve (12)
months after his election to change the distribution form election, or Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date, is made. If
the distribution of such Participant’s Distributable Amount with respect to a Plan Year (in the case of a change in his
distribution election form), or the distribution of the Withdrawal Amount with respect to such Plan Year (in the case of a
change in his Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date), is made or commenced before the election to change his
distribution form election or Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date, as the case may be, becomes effective, the election
to change his distribution form election or Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date shall not thereafter become effective,
and distributions shall be made in accordance with the distribution form election, and Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal
Date (if any), as applicable, in effect prior to the Participant’s election to change.
    (2)    The Participant’s election to change his distribution election form with respect to a Plan Year, or change
his Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to a Plan Year, shall provide that each payment with respect to
such new distribution form election, or new Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date, shall be deferred for a period of not
less than five years from the date such payment would otherwise have been made.
    (3)    The Participant’s election to change his Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to a Plan
Year shall not be made less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the first scheduled payment under the
Participant’s initial election of the Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date with respect to such Plan Year.
The limitations under this subsection (e) shall be applied in accordance with Section 409A(a)(4)(C) of the Code and the
Treasury Regulations thereunder.
3.3
Company Contributions
(a)
For any Plan Year, the Company may, but is under no obligation to, make contributions on behalf of a
Participant in addition to the Participant’s elective deferrals. Such contributions may be in any amount or form (for
example, matching or profit sharing contributions) and subject to any conditions or terms as the Company, in its sole
discretion, deems appropriate.
10
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(b)
The Company Contribution for a Plan Year shall be credited to a Participant’s Company Account in the
manner determined by the Committee.
3.4
FICA and Other Taxes.
(a)
Annual Deferral Amounts. For each Plan Year in which a Participant who is an employee makes a deferral
under Section 3.1, the Company shall withhold from that portion of the Participant’s Compensation that is not being
deferred, in a manner determined by the Company, the Participant’s share of FICA and other employment taxes on such
amount. If necessary, the Committee may reduce the Participant's deferrals under Section 3.1 or make deductions from
his Deferral Account in order to comply with this Section, to the extent permitted under Section 409A of the Code and
the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
(b)
Company Amounts. For each Plan Year in which a Participant is credited with a contribution to his
Company Account under Section 3.3, the Company shall withhold from the Participant’s Compensation that is not
deferred, in a manner determined by the Company, the Participant’s share of FICA and other employment taxes. If
necessary, the Committee may reduce the Participant’s Company Account in order to comply with this Section, to the
extent permitted under Section 409A of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
ARTICLE IV.
INVESTMENTS
4.1
Measurement Funds.
(a)
In the manner designated by the Committee, Participants may elect one or more Measurement Funds to
be used to determine the additional amounts to be credited to their Accounts. Although the Participant may designate
the Measurement Funds, the Committee shall not be bound by such designation. The Committee shall select from time
to time, in its sole discretion, the Measurement Funds to be available under the Plan.
(b)
No Actual Investment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Plan that may be interpreted to the
contrary, the Measurement Funds are to be used for measurement purposes only, and a Participant’s election of any
such Measurement Fund, the allocation to his Accounts thereto, the calculation of additional amounts and the crediting
or debiting of such amounts to a Participant’s Accounts shall not be considered or construed in any manner as an actual
investment of his Accounts in any such Measurement Fund. In the event that the Company, in its own discretion,
decides to invest funds in any or all of the Measurement Funds, no Participant shall have any rights in or to such
investments themselves. Without limiting the foregoing, a Participant’s Accounts shall at all times be a bookkeeping
entry only and shall not represent any investment made on his behalf by the Company. The Participant shall at all times
remain an unsecured creditor of the Company.
11
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
4.2
Investment Elections.
(a)
Deferral Accounts and Company Accounts. Except as provided in Section 4.3, Participants may designate
how their Deferral Accounts and Company Accounts, if any, shall be deemed to be invested under the Plan.
(1)    Such Participants may make separate investment elections for (i) their future deferrals of
Compensation, (ii) future Company Contributions and (iii) the existing balances of their Accounts.
(2)    Such Participants may make and change their investment elections by choosing from the
Measurement Funds designated by the Committee in accordance with the procedures established by the Committee.
(3)    Except as otherwise designated by the Committee, the available Measurement Funds under this
Section 4.2(a)(1) shall generally be the investment funds under the 401(k) Plan (excluding any brokerage account
option).
(4)    If a Participant fails to elect a Measurement Fund under this Section, he shall be deemed to have
elected the default Measurement Fund (as designated by the Committee) for all of his Accounts.
(b)
Continuing Investment Elections. Participants who have had a Termination but not yet commenced
distributions under Article VII or Participants or Beneficiaries who are receiving installment payments may continue to
make investment elections pursuant to subsection (a) and (b) above, as applicable, except as otherwise determined by
the Committee.
(c)
Certain Deferral Subaccounts. A Participant may not direct the investment of the Restricted Stock Unit
Subaccounts of the Deferral Accounts.
4.3
Compliance with Section 16 of the Exchange Act.
(a)
Any Participant or Beneficiary who is subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act shall have his
Measurement Fund elections under the Plan subject to the requirements of the Exchange Act, as interpreted by the
Committee.
(b)
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan or any rule, instruction, election form or other form, the
Plan and any such rule, instruction or form shall be subject to any additional conditions or limitations set forth in any
applicable exemptive rule under Section 16 of the Exchange Act (including any amendment to Rule 16b3) that are
requirements for the application of such exemptive rule. To the extent permitted by applicable law, such Plan provision,
rule, instruction or form shall be deemed amended to the extent necessary to conform to such applicable exemptive rule.
12
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
ARTICLE V.
ACCOUNTS
5.1
Accounts.
(a)
The Committee shall establish and maintain a Deferral Account, and a Company Account for each
Participant under the Plan. Each Participant’s Accounts shall be divided into separate Subaccounts in accordance with
Section 5.2. Each such Subaccount shall be further divided into separate investment fund Subaccounts, each of which
corresponds to a Measurement Fund elected by the Participant pursuant to Section 4.2. In addition, participants’
Deferral Accounts may be further divided into Subaccounts consisting of deferred Restricted Stock Units.
(b)
The performance of each elected Measurement Fund (either positive or negative) shall be determined by
the Committee, in its reasonable discretion, based on the performance of the Measurement Funds themselves. A
Participant’s Accounts shall be credited or debited on each Valuation Date based on the performance of each
Measurement Fund selected by the Participant, as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion, as though (i) a
Participant’s Accounts were invested in the Measurement Fund(s) selected by the Participant, in the percentages
applicable to such period, as of the close of business on the first business day of such period, at the closing price on
such date; (ii) the portion of the Participant's Compensation that was actually deferred pursuant to Section 3.1 during
any period were invested in the Measurement Fund(s) selected by the Participant, in the percentages applicable to such
period, no later than the close of business on the first business day after the day on which such amounts are actually
deferred from the Participant’s Compensation, at the closing price on such date; and (iii) any withdrawal or distribution
made to a Participant that decreases such Participant’s Accounts ceased being invested in the Measurement Fund(s), in
the percentages applicable to such period, no earlier than one business day prior to the distribution, at the closing price
on such date. The Participant’s Company Contributions, if any, shall be credited to his Company Account for purposes
of this Section, in the manner determined by the Committee.
5.2
Subaccounts.
(a)
The Committee shall establish and maintain, with respect to a Participant’s Deferral Account, separate
Subaccounts with respect to each Plan Year, to which shall be credited (i) an amount equal to the portion of the
Participant’s Base Salary earned during such Plan Year that he elects to defer pursuant to Section 3.1 and (ii) an
amount equal to the portion of the Participant’s Bonus earned during such Plan Year that he or she elects to defer
pursuant to Section 3.1, in each case debited by amounts equal to distributions to and withdrawals made by the
Participant and/or his Beneficiary and adjusted for investment earnings and losses pursuant to Article V.
(b)
The Committee shall establish and maintain, with respect to a Participant’s Company Account, a
Subaccount with respect to each Plan Year, to which shall be credited the amount equal to the Company Contributions,
if any, made pursuant to Section 3.3 on behalf of such Participant during such Plan Year, debited by amounts equal to
distributions to and withdrawals made by the Participant and/or his Beneficiary and adjusted for investment earnings and
losses pursuant to Article V.
13
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
ARTICLE VI.
VESTING
Each Participant shall be 100% vested in his Deferral Account at all times, provided, however, that any Restricted
Stock Units a Participant elects to defer shall remain subject to the conditions for vesting specified in any applicable
award notice or agreement. The Company will set conditions for the vesting of any Company Contributions on or before
the date they are contributed to the Plan.
ARTICLE VII.
DISTRIBUTIONS
7.1
Distribution of Accounts.
(a)
Distribution of Accounts.
(1)    Normal Form. Except as provided in paragraph (2), paragraph (3) or Section 7.3, a Participant’s
Distributable Amount with respect to each Plan Year shall be paid to the Participant in a single lump sum in cash on the
Participant’s Payment Date.
(2)    Optional Forms. Instead of receiving his Distributable Amount with respect to each Plan Year as
described at Section 7.1(a)(1), the Participant may elect in accordance with Section 3.2 an optional form of payment (on
the form provided by Company) at the time of his deferral election for such Plan Year to receive his Distributable Amount
in equal annual installments in cash (calculated as set forth in Section 7.1(a)(6)) over a period of from two (2) up to
fifteen (15) years beginning on the Participant’s Payment Date. The payment of such Participant’s Distributable Amount
with respect each Plan Year shall be made or commence on such Participant’s Payment Date.
(3)    Distribution Election Changes. In the event that a Participant changes his distribution form election
with respect to a Plan Year in accordance with Section 3.2(b), and such new distribution form election becomes effective
upon the Separation from Service or Disability of such Participant, the Distributable Amount with respect to such Plan
Year shall be paid to the Participant in accordance with such new distribution form election.
(4)    Small Accounts. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, in the event the total of a Participant’s
Distributable Amounts with respect to all Plan Years is equal to or less than $50,000 on the Participant’s Payment Date,
such Distributable Amounts shall be distributed to the Participant (or his Beneficiary, as applicable) in a lump sum.
(5)    Investment Adjustments. The Participant’s Accounts shall continue to be adjusted for investment
earnings and losses pursuant to Section 4.2 and Section 4.3 of the Plan until all amounts credited to his Accounts under
the Plan have been distributed.
(6)    Calculating Installments. All installment payments made under the Plan shall be determined in
accordance with the annual fractional payment method, calculated as follows: the balance of the applicable Subaccount
in the Participant’s Accounts with respect to a Plan Year shall be calculated as of the close of business on the last
business day of the year. The annual installment shall be calculated by multiplying this balance by a fraction, the
numerator of which is one, and the denominator of which is the remaining number of annual payments due the
Participant. By way of example, if the Participant elects 10 year installments for the distribution of the applicable
Subaccount in his Accounts with respect to a Plan Year, the first payment shall be 1/10 of the balance of such
Subaccount calculated as described in this definition. The following year, the payment shall be 1/9 of such Subaccount,
calculated as described in this definition. Each annual installment shall be paid on or as soon as practicable after the last
business day of the applicable year.
14
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(b)
Distribution on a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date.
        (1)    In the case of a Participant who has elected a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date for a distribution to be
made while still in the employ of the Company, such Participant shall receive his Withdrawal Amount as shall have been
elected by the Participant to be subject to the Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date. A Participant’s Scheduled In-
Service Withdrawal Date with respect to amounts of Compensation deferred in a given Plan Year must be at least one
year from the last day of the Plan Year for which such deferrals are made.
        (2)    The Participant may elect, in accordance with Section 3.2, to have the Withdrawal Amount paid in a lump sum
in cash or in equal annual installments in cash (calculated as set forth in Section 7.1(a)(6)) over a period of from two (2)
up to fifteen (15) years beginning on the Participant’s Payment Date.
        (3)    A Participant may elect to change the Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal Date for the Withdrawal Amount for
any Plan Year in accordance with Section 3.2(d).
        (4)    In the event of Participant’s Separation from Service or Disability prior to a Scheduled In-Service Withdrawal
Date, the Participant’s entire Withdrawal Amount shall be paid in accordance with the Participant’s election with respect
to such Plan Year under Section 7.1(a).
(c)
Distribution upon Death. In the event a Participant dies, any remaining balance in his Accounts shall be
paid to his Beneficiary in a lump sum in cash on the first business day of the seventh calendar month following the date
of the Participant’s death.
7.2
Hardship Distribution.
A Participant shall be permitted to elect a Hardship Distribution of all or a portion of his Accounts under the Plan
prior to the Payment Date, subject to the following restrictions:
(a)
The election to take a Hardship Distribution shall be made by filing the form provided by the Committee
before the date established by the Committee.
(b)
The Committee shall have made a determination that the requested distribution constitutes a Hardship
Distribution in accordance with subsection (d).
(c)
The amount determined by the Committee as a Hardship Distribution shall be paid in a single lump sum in
cash as soon as practicable after the end of the calendar month in which the Hardship Distribution election is made and
approved by the Committee. The Hardship Distribution shall be distributed proportionately from the Subaccounts in the
Participant’s Accounts.
15
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(d)
If a Participant receives a Hardship Distribution, the Participant shall be ineligible to contribute deferrals to
the Plan for the following Plan Year. “Hardship Distribution” shall mean a severe financial hardship to the Participant
resulting from (i) an illness or accident of the Participant, the Participant’s spouse or of his dependent (as defined in
Section 152(a) of the Code), (ii) loss of a Participant’s property due to casualty, or (iii) other similar extraordinary and
unforeseeable circumstances arising as a result of events beyond the control of the Participant, as determined by the
Committee in accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(B)(ii)(I) of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder. The
amount of the Hardship Distribution with respect to a severe financial hardship shall not exceed the amounts necessary
to satisfy such hardship, plus amounts necessary to pay taxes reasonably anticipated as a result of the distribution, after
taking into account the extent to which such hardship is or may be relieved through reimbursement or compensation by
insurance or otherwise or by liquidation of the Participant’s assets (to the extent the liquidation of such assets would not
itself cause severe financial hardship), as determined by the Committee in accordance with Section 409A(a)(2)(B)(ii)(II)
of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
7.3
Effect of a Change in Control.
(a)
In the event there is a Change in Control, the person who is the chief executive officer (or, if not so
identified, the Company’s highest ranking officer) shall name a third-party fiduciary as the sole member of the
Committee immediately prior to such Change in Control. The appointed fiduciary, shall oversee the administration of the
Plan and provide for the distributions of the accounts under the Plan in accordance with the terms of the Plan and the
elections of the Participants.
(b)
Upon and after the occurrence of a Change in Control, the Company must (i) pay all reasonable
administrative fees and expenses of the appointed fiduciary, (ii) indemnify the appointed fiduciary against any costs,
expenses and liabilities including, without limitation, attorney’s fees and expenses arising in connection with the
appointed fiduciary's duties hereunder, other than with respect to matters resulting from the gross negligence of the
appointed fiduciary or its agents or employees and (iii) timely provide the appointed fiduciary with all necessary
information related to the Plan, the Participants and Beneficiaries.
(c)
Notwithstanding Section 9.4, in the event there is a Change in Control no amendment may be made to this
Plan except as approved by the third-party fiduciary. Upon a Change in Control, the Company shall establish an
irrevocable trust and contribute assets to such trust in an amount equal to the aggregate amount credited to the
Participants’ Accounts, as determined by the appointed fiduciary, plus any deferred payments as they are deferred by
the Participants. Such trust shall conform to the model “rabbi trust” agreement provided by the Internal Revenue Service
in Revenue Procedure 92-64, as revised from time to time, and shall be structured as an unfunded arrangement.
7.4
Inability to Locate Participant.
In the event that the Committee is unable to locate a Participant or Beneficiary within two years following
the required Payment Date, the amount allocated to the Participant’s Accounts shall be forfeited. If, after such forfeiture,
the Participant or Beneficiary later claims such benefit, such benefit shall be reinstated without interest or earnings from
the date of forfeiture, subject to applicable escheat laws.
7.5     Prohibition on Acceleration of Distributions.
The time or schedule of payment of any withdrawal or distribution under the Plan shall not be subject to
acceleration, except as provided under Treasury Regulations promulgated in accordance with Section 409A(a)(3) of the
Code.
16
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
ARTICLE VIII. ADMINISTRATION
8.1
Committee.
The Committee shall administer the Plan in accordance with this Article.
8.2
Administrator.
The Administrator, unless restricted by the Committee, shall exercise the powers under Sections 8.4 and
8.5 except when the exercise of such authority would materially affect the cost of the Plan to the Company or materially
increase benefits to Participants.
8.3
Committee Action.
The Committee shall act at meetings by affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Committee.
Any action permitted to be taken at a meeting may be taken without a meeting if, prior to such action, a written consent
to the action is signed by all members of the Committee and such written consent is filed with the minutes of the
proceedings of the Committee. A member of the Committee shall not vote or act upon any matter which relates solely to
himself or herself as a Participant. The chairman or any other member or members of the Committee designated by the
chairman may execute any certificate or other written direction of behalf of the Committee.
8.4
Powers and Duties of the Committee.
(a)
The Committee, on behalf of the Participants and their Beneficiaries, shall enforce the Plan in accordance
with its terms, shall be charged with the general administration of the Plan, and shall have all powers necessary to
accomplish its purposes as set forth herein, including, but not by way of limitation, the following:
(1)    To select the Measurement Funds in accordance with Section 4.1 hereof;
(2)    To construe and interpret the terms and provisions of the Plan and to remedy any inconsistencies or
ambiguities hereunder;
(3)    To select employees eligible to participate in the Plan;
17
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(4)    To compute and certify to the amount and kind of benefits payable to Participants and their
Beneficiaries;
(5)    To maintain all records that may be necessary for the administration of the Plan;
(6)    To provide for the disclosure of all information and the filing or provision of all reports and statements
to Participants, Beneficiaries or governmental agencies as shall be required by law;
(7)    To make and publish such rules for the regulation of the Plan and procedures for the administration of
the Plan as are not inconsistent with the terms hereof;
(8)    To appoint a plan administrator or any other agent, and to delegate to them such powers and duties
in connection with the administration of the Plan as the Committee may from time to time prescribe; and
(9)    To take all actions necessary for the administration of the Plan.
8.5
Delegation of Authority. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the Committee may from time to time delegate
to a committee of one or more members of the Board or one or more executives or employees of the Company its
powers and duties under the Plan, including its power and authority under Section 9.4. Any delegation hereunder shall
be subject to the restrictions and limits that the Committee specifies at the time of such delegation, and the Committee
may at any time rescind the authority so delegated or appoint a new delegatee. At all times, the delegatee appointed
under this Section 8.5 shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the Committee.
8.6
Construction and Interpretation.
The Committee shall have full discretion to construe and interpret the terms and provisions of this Plan,
which interpretations or construction shall be final and binding on all parties, including but not limited to the Company
and any Participant or Beneficiary. The Committee shall administer such terms and provisions in a uniform and
nondiscriminatory manner and in full accordance with any and all laws applicable to the Plan.
8.7
Information.
To enable the Committee to perform its functions, the Company shall supply full and timely information to
the Committee on all matters relating to the Compensation of all Participants, their death or other events which cause
termination of their participation in this Plan, and such other pertinent facts as the Committee may require.
8.8
Compensation, Expenses and Indemnity.
(a)
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation for their services hereunder.
18
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(b)
The Committee is authorized at the expense of the Company to employ such legal counsel and other
advisors as it may deem advisable to assist in the performance of its duties hereunder. Expenses and fees in connection
with the administration of the Plan shall be paid by the Company.
(c)
To the extent permitted by applicable state law, the Company shall indemnify and save harmless the
Committee and each member thereof, the Board of Directors and any delegate of the Committee who is an employee of
the Company against any and all expenses, liabilities and claims, including legal fees to defend against such liabilities
and claims arising out of their discharge in good faith of responsibilities under or incident to the Plan, other than
expenses and liabilities arising out of willful misconduct. This indemnity shall not preclude such further indemnities as
may be available under insurance purchased by the Company or provided by the Company under any bylaw, agreement
or otherwise, as such indemnities are permitted under state law.
8.9
Quarterly Statements.
Under procedures established by the Committee, a Participant shall receive a statement with respect to
such Participant’s Accounts on a quarterly basis as of each March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31.
8.10
Disputes.
(a)
Claim.
A person who believes that he is being denied a benefit to which he is entitled under this Plan (a
“Claimant”) may file a written request for such benefit with the Administrator, setting forth his claim. The request must be
addressed to the Administrator at the Company at its then principal place of business.
(b)
Claim Decision.
Upon receipt of a claim, the Administrator shall advise the Claimant that a reply shall be forthcoming within
90 days (or in the case of a claim for disability benefits (a “Disability Claim”), 45 days) and shall, in fact, deliver such
reply within such applicable period. The Administrator may, however, extend the reply period for an additional 90 days
(or in the case of a Disability Claim, 30 days) for special circumstances (or in the case of a Disability Claim, only if such
extension is necessary due to matters beyond the Plan’s control). The extension notice must indicate the special
circumstances requiring an extension of time and the date by which the claim reviewer expects to render a decision.
If a Disability Claim cannot be processed within the first 30-day extension period due to matters beyond
the Plan’s control, the Plan’s deadline for responding to the claim may be extended for up to an additional 30 days,
provided that the Claimant is so advised in writing or by electronic means within the first extension period. In addition to
indicating the special circumstances requiring an extension of time and the date by which the claim reviewer expects to
render a decision, each extension notice for a Disability Claim also must specifically explain the standards on which the
entitlement to a benefit is based, the unresolved issues that prevent a decision on the claim, and the additional
information needed to resolve those issues. The Claimant must be afforded at least 45 days to provide the specified
information.
19
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Administrator shall inform the Claimant in writing, using
language calculated to be understood by the Claimant, setting forth: (i) the specified reason or reasons for such denial;
(ii) the specific reference to pertinent provisions of this Plan on which such denial is based; (iii) a description of any
additional material or information necessary for the Claimant to perfect his claim and an explanation of why such
material or such information is necessary; (iv) appropriate information as to the steps to be taken if the Claimant wishes
to submit the claim for review; and (v) the time limits for requesting a review under subsection (c).
In the case of a Disability Claim denial, the denial notice must be provided in a culturally and linguistically
appropriate manner (to the extent required by the regulations under Section 503 of ERISA) and, in addition to the
information required by the preceding paragraph, must include: (A) a discussion of the decision, including an explanation
of the basis for disagreeing with or not following (1) the views of health care professionals treating the Claimant and
vocational professionals who evaluated the Claimant, in each case as presented by the Claimant to the Plan; (2) the
views of medical or vocational experts whose advice was obtained on behalf of the Plan in connection with the denial,
without regard to whether the advice was relied upon in making the benefit determination; and (3) a Social Security
disability determination presented by the Claimant to the Plan; (B) if the denial is based on medical necessity,
experimental treatment, or a similar exclusion or limit, an explanation of the scientific or clinical judgment for the
determination, applying the terms of the Plan to the Claimant’s medical circumstances, or a statement that such an
explanation will be provided upon request and free of charge; (C) any specific internal rules, guidelines, protocols,
standards, or other similar criteria of the Plan relied upon in the denial (or if none, a statement to that effect); and (D) a
statement that, upon request and free of charge, the Claimant is entitled to reasonable access to, and copies of, all
documents, records, and other information relevant to the claim.
(c)
Request for Review.
Within 60 days (or in the case of a Disability Claim, 180 days) after the receipt by the Claimant of the
written decision described above, the Claimant may request in writing a review of the determination of the Administrator.
Such review shall be completed by the Committee. Such request must be addressed to the Secretary of the Company,
at its then principal place of business. The Claimant or his duly authorized representative may, but need not, review the
pertinent documents and submit issues and comments in writing for consideration by the Committee. If the Claimant
does not request a review within such 60-day (or in the case of a Disability Claim, 180-day) period, he shall be barred
and estopped from challenging the Administrator’s determination.
In the case of a Disability Claim denial, the Claimant (or his authorized representative) also has the right
to: (i) receive a review that does not defer to the initial claim denial and that is conducted by someone other than the
individual who made the denial and who is not such person’s subordinate; (ii) be given the identity of any medical or
vocational experts whose advice was obtained in connection with the benefit determination, regardless of whether the
advice was relied upon in making the decision; (iii) receive (in instances when the benefit determination was based in
whole or part on medical judgment) a review in which the Committee consults with a health care professional with
appropriate training and experience (and which professional did not consult on the initial denial and who is not such
person’s subordinate); (iv) automatically be provided as soon as possible and sufficiently in advance of the appeal
determination, free of charge, any new or additional evidence considered, relied upon or generated by the Committee or
other person making the benefit determination (or at the direction of the Committee or such person) in connection with
the claim; and (v) automatically be provided as soon as possible and sufficiently in advance of the appeal determination,
free of charge, any new or additional rationale for the appeal determination.
20
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(d)
Review of Decision.
Within 60 days (or in the case of a Disability Claim, 45 days) after the receipt of a request for review by the
Committee, after considering all materials presented by the Claimant, the Committee shall inform the Claimant in writing,
in a manner calculated to be understood by the Claimant, of its decision, setting forth the specific reasons for its decision
and specific references to the pertinent provisions of this Plan on which the decision is based. If special circumstances
require that the review period be extended, the Committee shall so notify the Claimant and shall render the decision as
soon as possible, but no later than 120 days (or in the case of a Disability Claim, 90 days) after receipt of the request for
review. The extension notice must indicate the special circumstances requiring an extension of time and the date by
which the Committee expects to render a decision.
If the appeal of the claim is wholly or partially denied, the notice of the Committee’s final decision must
include specific reasons for the denial, specific references to the pertinent Plan provisions on which the denial is based,
and a statement that the Claimant is entitled, upon request and free of charge, to reasonable access to, and copies of,
all documents, records and other information relevant to the claim. The notice must be written in a manner calculated to
be understood by the Claimant and must notify the Claimant of his right to bring a civil action under Section 502(a) of
ERISA. In the case of a Disability Claim denial, the notice must be provided in a culturally and linguistically appropriate
manner (to the extent required by the regulations under Section 503 of ERISA), and in addition to the above, must
include (i) a statement of the applicable contractual limitations period, including the calendar date that such period will
expire with respect to the claim; and (ii) the information set forth in items (A)-(C) in the final paragraph of Section
8.10(b), regarding claim denials, above.
8.11
Compliance with Section 409A of the Code.
The Plan shall be interpreted, construed and administered in a manner that satisfies the requirements of
Sections 409A(a)(2), (3) and (4) of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
ARTICLE IX.
MISCELLANEOUS
9.1
Unsecured General Creditor.
Participants and their Beneficiaries, heirs, successors, and assigns shall have no legal or equitable rights,
claims, or interest in any specific property or assets of the Company. No assets of the Company shall be held in any way
as collateral security for the fulfilling of the obligations of the Company under this Plan. Any and all of the Company’s
assets shall be, and remain, the general unpledged, unrestricted assets of the Company. The Company’s obligation
under the Plan shall be merely that of an unfunded and unsecured promise of the Company to pay money in the future,
and the rights of the Participants and Beneficiaries shall be no greater than those of unsecured general creditors. It is
the intention of the Company that this Plan be unfunded for purposes of the Code and Title I of ERISA.
21
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
9.2
Restriction Against Assignment.
(a)
The Company shall pay all amounts payable hereunder only to the person or persons designated by the
Plan and not to any other person or entity. No right, title or interest in the Plan or in any account may be sold, pledged,
assigned or transferred in any manner other than by will or the laws of descent and distribution. No right, title or interest
in the Plan or in any Account shall be liable for the debts, contracts or engagements of the Participant or his successors
in interest or shall be subject to disposition by transfer, alienation, anticipation, pledge, encumbrance, assignment or any
other means whether such disposition be voluntary or involuntary or by operation of law by judgment, levy, attachment,
garnishment or any other legal or equitable proceedings (including bankruptcy), and any attempted disposition thereof
shall be null and void and of no effect, except to the extent that such disposition is permitted by the preceding sentence.
(b)
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), a Participant’s interest in his Account may be transferred
by the Participant pursuant to a domestic relations order that constitutes a “qualified domestic relations order” as defined
by the Code or Title I of ERISA.
9.3
Withholding.
There shall be deducted from each payment made under the Plan or any other Compensation payable to
the Participant (or Beneficiary) all taxes which are required to be withheld by the Company in respect to such payment
or this Plan. The Company shall have the right to reduce any payment (or compensation) by the amount of such of cash
sufficient to provide the amount of said taxes.
9.4
Amendment, Modification, Suspension or Termination.
(a)    Subject to Section 7.3, the Committee may amend, modify, suspend or terminate the Plan in whole or
in part, except that no amendment, modification, suspension or termination shall have any retroactive effect to reduce
any vested amounts allocated to a Participant’s Accounts. In the event of Plan termination, distributions shall continue to
be made in accordance with the terms of the Plan.
(b)    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan, if and to the extent the Company shall determine
that the terms of the Plan may result in the failure of the Plan, or amounts deferred by or for any Participant under the
Plan,  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Section  409A  of  the  Code,  or  any  applicable  regulations  or  guidance
promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury in connection therewith, the Company shall have authority to take such
action  to  amend,  modify,  cancel  or  terminate  the  Plan  or  distribute  any  or  all  of  the  amounts  deferred  by  or  for  a
Participate, as it deems necessary or advisable, including without limitation:
(1)    Any amendment or modification of the Plan to conform the Plan to the requirements of Section
409A of the Code or any regulations or other guidance thereunder (including, without limitation, any amendment or
modification of the terms of any applicable to any Participant’s Accounts regarding the timing or form of payment).
(2)    Any cancellation or termination of any unvested interest in a Participant’s Accounts without any
payment to the Participant.
22
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
(3)    Any cancellation or termination of any vested interest in any Participant’s Accounts, with
immediate payment to the Participant of the amount otherwise payable to such Participant.
Any such amendment, modification, cancellation, or termination of the Plan may adversely affect the rights of a
Participant without the Participant’s consent.
9.5
Designation of Beneficiary.
(a)
Each Participant shall have the right to designate, revoke and redesignate Beneficiaries hereunder and to
direct payment of his Distributable Amount to such Beneficiaries upon his death.
(b)
Designation, revocation and redesignation of Beneficiaries must be made in writing in accordance with the
procedures established by the Committee and shall be effective upon delivery to the Committee.
(c)
No designation of a Beneficiary other than the Participant’s spouse shall be valid unless consented in
writing by such spouse. If there is no Beneficiary designation in effect, or the designated beneficiary does not survive the
Participant, then the Participant’s spouse shall be the Beneficiary. If there is no surviving spouse, the duly appointed and
currently acting personal representative of the Participant’s estate (which shall include either the Participant’s probate
estate or living trust) shall be the Beneficiary.
(d)
After the Participant’s death, any Beneficiary (other than the Participant’s estate) who is to receive
installment payments may designate a secondary beneficiary to receive amounts due under this Plan to the Beneficiary
in the event of the Beneficiary’s death prior to receiving full payment from the Plan. If no secondary beneficiary is
designated, it shall be the Beneficiary’s estate.
9.6
Governing Law.
Subject to ERISA, this Plan shall be construed, governed and administered in accordance with the laws of
the State of California.
9.7
Compliance with Code Section 162(m)
It is the intent of the Company that any Compensation which is deferred under the Plan by a person who is, with
respect to the year of distribution, deemed by the Committee to be a “covered employee” within the meaning of Code
Section 162(m) and regulations thereunder, which Compensation constitutes either “qualified performance-based
compensation” within the meaning of Code Section 162(m) and regulations thereunder or compensation not otherwise
subject to the limitation on deductibility under Section 162(m) and regulations thereunder, shall not, as a result of
deferral hereunder, become compensation with respect to which the Company in fact would not be entitled to a tax
deduction under Code Section 162(m). If the Company determines in good faith prior to a Change in Control that there is
a reasonable likelihood that any compensation paid to a Participant for a taxable year of the Company would not be
deductible by the Company solely by reason of the limitation under Code Section 162(m), then to the extent deemed
necessary by the Committee to ensure that the entire amount of any distribution to the Participant pursuant to this Plan
prior to the Change in Control is deductible, the Company may defer all or any portion of a distribution under this Plan.
Any amounts deferred pursuant to this limitation shall continue to be credited/debited with additional amounts in
accordance with Article IV, even if such amount is being paid out in installments. The amounts so deferred and amounts
credited thereon shall be distributed to the Participant or his Beneficiary (in the event of the Participant’s death)
commencing as soon as reasonably practicable following the Plan Year in which such Participant’s Separation from
Service, Disability or Death occurs, or if earlier, the effective date of a Change in Control. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in this Plan, this Section shall not apply to any distributions made after a Change in Control.
23
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
9.8
Payments on Behalf of Persons Under Incapacity.
In the event that any amount becomes payable under the Plan to a person who, in the sole judgment of the
Committee, is considered by reason of physical or mental condition to be unable to give a valid receipt therefore, the
Committee may direct that such payment be made to any person found by the Committee, in its sole judgment, to have
assumed the care of such person. Any payment made pursuant to such termination shall constitute a full release and
discharge of the Committee and the Company.
9.9
Limitation of Rights
Neither the establishment of the Plan nor any modification thereof, nor the creating of any fund or account,
nor the payment of any benefits shall be construed as giving to any Participant or other person any legal or equitable
right against the Company except as provided in the Plan. In no event shall the terms of employment of, or membership
on the Board by, any Participant be modified or in any way be effected by the provisions of the Plan.
9.10
Exempt ERISA Plan
The Plan is intended to be an unfunded plan maintained primarily to provide deferred compensation
benefits for a select group of management or highly compensated employees within the meaning of Sections 201, 301
and 401 of ERISA and therefore to be exempt from Parts 2, 3 and 4 of Title I of ERISA.
9.11
Notice
Any notice or filing required or permitted to be given to the Committee under the Plan shall be sufficient if
in writing and hand delivered, or sent by registered or certified mail, to the principal office of the Company, directed to
the attention of the General Counsel and Secretary of the Company. Such notice shall be deemed given as of the date
of delivery or, if delivery is made by mail, as of the date shown on the postmark on the receipt for registration or
certification.
9.12
Errors and Misstatements
In the event of any misstatement or omission of fact by a Participant to the Committee or any clerical error
resulting in payment of benefits in an incorrect amount, the Committee shall promptly cause the amount of future
payments to be corrected upon discovery of the facts and shall pay or, if applicable, cause the Plan to pay, the
Participant or any other person entitled to payment under the Plan any underpayment in a lump sum or to recoup any
overpayment from future payments to the Participant or any other person entitled to payment under the Plan in such
amounts as the Committee shall direct or to proceed against the Participant or any other person entitled to payment
under the Plan for recovery of any such overpayment.
24
    

eBay Inc.
Deferred Compensation Plan
9.13
Pronouns and Plurality
The masculine pronoun shall include the feminine pronoun, and the singular the plural where the context
so indicates.
9.14
Severability
In the event that any provision of the Plan shall be declared unenforceable or invalid for any reason, such
unenforceability or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of the Plan but shall be fully severable, and the
Plan shall be construed and enforced as if such unenforceable or invalid provision had never been included herein.
9.15
Status
The establishment and maintenance of, or allocations and credits to, the Accounts of any Participant shall
not vest in any Participant any right, title or interest in and to any Plan assets or benefits except at the time or times and
upon the terms and conditions and to the extent expressly set forth in the Plan.
9.16
Headings.
Headings and subheadings in this Plan are inserted for convenience of reference only and are not to be
considered in the construction of the provisions hereof.
Executed at San Jose, California this ____ day of ____________, 2021.
    eBay Inc.
    By:    ______________________________
    Title:    ______________________________
    Date:    ______________________________

 Exhibit 21.01
 
LIST OF SUBSIDIARIES
The following is a list of our subsidiaries as of December 31, 2021 that are required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K.
INTERNATIONAL SUBSIDIARIES
 
 
Jurisdiction of
Name
 
Incorporation
eBay GmbH
Germany
eBay International Treasury Center Sarl
Luxembourg
eBay Sarl
Luxembourg
eBay International Holding GmbH
Switzerland
eBay Marketplaces GmbH
Switzerland
eBay (UK) Limited
United Kingdom
DOMESTIC SUBSIDIARIES
 
 
Jurisdiction of
Name
 
Incorporation
eBay Commerce Inc.
United States
25
    

Exhibit 23.01
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-3 (No.333-236491), Form S-4 (No. 333-117914),
and Form S-8 (Nos. 333-64179, 333-87593, 333-41944, 333-58046, 333-97729, 333-100426, 333-107832, 333-117913, 333-127971, 333-129072,
333-136118, 333-140942, 333-143880, 333-149131, 333-149132, 333-151851, 333-155314, 333-159778, 333-165438, 333-168295, 333-171154,
333-174242, 333-175416, 333-175417, 333-176477, 333-176663, 333-178369, 333-181535, 333-181539, 333-192514, 333-193299, 333-195987,
333-203546, 333-213340) of eBay Inc. of our report dated February 24, 2022 relating to the financial statements and financial statement schedule
and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in this Form 10‑K.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
San Jose, California
February 24, 2022

Exhibit 31.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Jamie Iannone, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.
/s/ Jamie Iannone
Jamie Iannone
Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: February 24, 2022

Exhibit 31.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Steve Priest, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of eBay Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
over financial reporting.
/s/ Steve Priest
Steve Priest
Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: February 24, 2022

Exhibit 32.01
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Jamie Iannone, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
/s/ Jamie Iannone
Jamie Iannone
Chief Executive Officer
                                                                   
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: February 24, 2022
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.

Exhibit 32.02
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002.
I, Steve Priest, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that:
(i) The accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(ii) The information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of eBay
Inc.
/s/ Steve Priest
Steve Priest
Chief Financial Officer
                                                                                          
(Principal Financial Officer)
Date: February 24, 2022
The foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350 and is not being filed as part of this report.
