Table of Contents 
      
UNITED STATES  
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION  
Washington, D.C. 20549  
FORM 10-K  
   
   
Commission file number: 001-01185  
   
GENERAL MILLS, INC.  
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)  
   
(763) 764-7600  
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)  
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:  
   
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None  
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes  No   
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes  No   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been 
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes  No   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any, every Interactive Data 
File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period 
that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes  No   
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be 
contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 
10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting 
company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange 
Act. (Check one):  
   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). Yes  No   
Aggregate market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, based on the closing price of $51.85 per share as reported on 
the New York Stock Exchange on November 21, 2014 (the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter): 
$30,938.3 million.  
Number of shares of Common Stock outstanding as of June 12, 2015: 598,737,719 (excluding 155,875,609 shares held in the treasury). 
 ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE FISCAL 
YEAR ENDED May 31, 2015 
 TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE 
TRANSITION PERIOD FROM             TO             
Delaware 
 
41-0274440 
(State or other jurisdiction of 
 
(I.R.S. Employer 
incorporation or organization) 
 
Identification No.) 
Number One General Mills Boulevard 
 
Minneapolis, Minnesota 
 
55426 
(Address of principal executive offices) 
 
(Zip Code) 
Title of each class 
 
Name of each exchange 
on which registered 
Common Stock, $.10 par value 
 
New York Stock Exchange 
Large accelerated filer   
  
Accelerated filer   
Non-accelerated filer 
   (Do not check if a smaller reporting company) 
  Smaller reporting company   

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE  
Portions of the registrant’s Proxy Statement for its 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders are incorporated by reference into Part III. 

Table of Contents  
Table of Contents  
   
   
2 
 
  
 
  
Page  
Part I 
  
  
Item 1 
  Business 
   3   
Item 1A 
  Risk Factors 
   8   
Item 1B 
  Unresolved Staff Comments 
   13   
Item 2 
  Properties 
   13   
Item 3 
  Legal Proceedings 
   14   
Item 4 
  Mine Safety Disclosures 
   14   
Part II 
  
  
Item 5 
  
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of 
Equity Securities 
   15   
Item 6 
  Selected Financial Data 
   16   
Item 7 
  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
   17   
Item 7A 
  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
   46   
Item 8 
  Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
   48   
Item 9 
  Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
   105   
Item 9A 
  Controls and Procedures 
   105   
Item 9B 
  Other Information 
   105   
Part III 
  
  
Item 10 
  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 
   106   
Item 11 
  Executive Compensation 
   106   
Item 12 
  Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters 
   107   
Item 13 
  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
   107   
Item 14 
  Principal Accounting Fees and Services 
   107   
Part IV 
  
  
Item 15 
  Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules 
   108   
Signatures   
   112   

Table of Contents  
PART I  
   
General Mills, Inc. was incorporated in Delaware in 1928. The terms “General Mills,” “Company,” “registrant,” “we,” “us,” and “our” mean 
General Mills, Inc. and all subsidiaries included in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report unless the context indicates 
otherwise.  
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.  
COMPANY OVERVIEW  
We are a leading global manufacturer and marketer of branded consumer foods sold through retail stores. We also are a leading supplier of 
branded and unbranded food products to the North American foodservice and commercial baking industries. We manufacture our products in 
16 countries and market them in more than 100 countries. In addition to our consolidated operations, we have 50 percent interests in two 
strategic joint ventures that manufacture and market food products sold in more than 130 countries worldwide.  
We offer a variety of food products that provide great taste, nutrition, convenience and value for consumers around the world, with a focus on 
five large global categories:  
   
   
   
   
   
Other significant product categories include:  
   
   
   
Our Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW) joint venture with Nestlé S.A. (Nestlé) competes in the ready-to-eat cereal category in markets outside 
North America and our Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ) joint venture competes in the super-premium ice cream category in Japan. For net sales 
contributed by each class of similar products, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
We manage and review the financial results of our business under three operating segments: U.S. Retail; International; and Convenience Stores 
and Foodservice. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) in Item 7 of this 
report for a description of our segments. For financial information by segment and geographic area, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial 
Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
   
3 
ITEM 1 
Business 
  
•   ready-to-eat cereal; 
  
•   convenient meals, including meal kits, ethnic meals, pizza, soup, side dish mixes, frozen breakfast, and frozen entrees; 
  
•   snacks, including grain, fruit and savory snacks, nutrition bars, and frozen hot snacks; 
  
•   yogurt; and 
  
•   super-premium ice cream. 
  
•   baking mixes and ingredients; 
  
•   refrigerated and frozen dough; and 
  
•   frozen and shelf-stable vegetables. 

Table of Contents  
Customers. Our primary customers are grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, drug, dollar and discount 
chains, commercial and noncommercial foodservice distributors and operators, restaurants, and convenience stores. We generally sell to these 
customers through our direct sales force. We use broker and distribution arrangements for certain products or to serve certain types of 
customers. For further information on our customer credit and product return practices, please refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial 
Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
During fiscal 2015, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates (Wal-Mart) accounted for 21 percent of our consolidated net sales and 30 percent of 
our net sales in the U.S. Retail segment. No other customer accounted for 10 percent or more of our consolidated net sales. Wal-Mart also 
represented 7 percent of our net sales in the International segment and 9 percent of our net sales in the Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
segment. As of May 31, 2015, Wal-Mart accounted for 29 percent of our U.S. Retail receivables, 6 percent of our International receivables, and 
9 percent of our Convenience Stores and Foodservice receivables. The five largest customers in our U.S. Retail segment accounted for 54 
percent of its fiscal 2015 net sales, the five largest customers in our International segment accounted for 24 percent of its fiscal 2015 net sales, 
and the five largest customers in our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment accounted for 44 percent of its fiscal 2015 net sales.  
Competition. The consumer foods industry is highly competitive, with numerous manufacturers of varying sizes in the United States and 
throughout the world. The food categories in which we participate also are very competitive. Our principal competitors in these categories all 
have substantial financial, marketing, and other resources. Competition in our product categories is based on product innovation, product 
quality, price, brand recognition and loyalty, effectiveness of marketing, promotional activity, and the ability to identify and satisfy consumer 
preferences. Our principal strategies for competing in each of our segments include unique consumer insights, effective customer relationships, 
superior product quality, innovative advertising, product promotion, product innovation aligned with consumers’ needs, an efficient supply 
chain, and price. In most product categories, we compete not only with other widely advertised, branded products, but also with regional brands 
and with generic and private label products that are generally sold at lower prices. Internationally, we compete with both multi-national and 
local manufacturers, and each country includes a unique group of competitors.  
Raw materials, ingredients, and packaging. The principal raw materials that we use are grains (wheat, oats, and corn), sugar, dairy products, 
vegetables, fruits, meats, vegetable oils, and other agricultural products. We also use substantial quantities of carton board, corrugated, plastic 
and metal packaging materials, operating supplies, and energy. Most of these inputs for our domestic and Canadian operations are purchased 
from suppliers in the United States. In our international operations, inputs that are not locally available in adequate supply may be imported 
from other countries. The cost of these inputs may fluctuate widely due to external conditions such as weather, product scarcity, limited sources 
of supply, commodity market fluctuations, currency fluctuations, and changes in governmental agricultural and energy policies and regulations. 
We have some long-term fixed price contracts, but the majority of our inputs are purchased on the open market. We believe that we will be able 
to obtain an adequate supply of needed inputs. Occasionally and where possible, we make advance purchases of items significant to our 
business in order to ensure continuity of operations. Our objective is to procure materials meeting both our quality standards and our production 
needs at price levels that allow a targeted profit margin. Since these inputs generally represent the largest variable cost in manufacturing our 
products, to the extent possible, we often manage the risk associated with adverse price movements for some inputs using a variety of risk 
management strategies. We also have a grain merchandising operation that provides us efficient access to, and more informed knowledge of, 
various commodity markets, principally wheat and oats. This operation holds physical inventories that are carried at fair market value and uses 
derivatives to manage its net inventory position and minimize its market exposures.  
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  
Our research and development resources are focused on new product development, product improvement, process design and improvement, 
packaging, and exploratory research in new business and technology areas. Research and development expenditures were $229 million in fiscal 
2015, $244 million in fiscal 2014, and $238 million in fiscal 2013.  
   
4 

Table of Contents  
TRADEMARKS AND PATENTS  
Our products are marketed under a variety of valuable trademarks. Some of the more important trademarks used in our global operations (set 
forth in italics in this report) include Annie’s, Betty Crocker , Bisquick , Bugles , Cascadian Farm , Cheerios , Chex , Cinnamon Toast Crunch , 
Cocoa Puffs , Cookie Crisp , Fiber One , Food Should Taste Good , Fruit by the Foot , Fruit Gushers , Fruit Roll-Ups , Gardetto’s , Go-Gurt , 
Gold Medal , Golden Grahams , Green Giant , Häagen-Dazs , Helpers , Jeno’s , Jus-Rol , Kitano , Kix , La Salteña , Lärabar , Latina , 
Liberté , Lucky Charms , Muir Glen , Nature Valley , Oatmeal Crisp , Old El Paso , Pillsbury , Progresso , Raisin Nut Bran , Total , Totino’s , 
Trix , Wanchai Ferry , Wheaties , Yoki , and Yoplait . We protect these marks as appropriate through registrations in the United States and other 
jurisdictions. Depending on the jurisdiction, trademarks are generally valid as long as they are in use or their registrations are properly 
maintained and they have not been found to have become generic. Registrations of trademarks can also generally be renewed indefinitely as 
long as the trademarks are in use.  
Some of our products are marketed under or in combination with trademarks that have been licensed from others, including Reese’s Puffs for 
cereal, Hershey’s for a variety of products, Weight Watchers as an endorsement for yogurt and soup, and Cinnabon for refrigerated dough, 
frozen pastries, and baking products. Our fruit snacks business uses a variety of licensed trademarks, including Mott’s , Minions , Sunkist , 
Scooby Doo , Batman , Tom and Jerry , Hello Kitty , Thomas the Tank Engine , and various Warner Bros. and Nickelodeon characters. Our 
yogurt business uses a variety of licensed trademarks, including various Disney, Marvel, Warner Bros., and Nickelodeon characters.  
Our cereal trademarks are licensed to CPW and may be used in association with the Nestlé trademark. Nestlé licenses certain of its trademarks 
to CPW, including the Nestlé and Uncle Toby’s trademarks. The Häagen-Dazs trademark is licensed royalty-free exclusively to Nestlé for ice 
cream and other frozen dessert products in the United States and Canada. The Häagen-Dazs trademark is also licensed to HDJ. The J. M. 
Smucker Company holds an exclusive royalty-free license to use the Pillsbury brand and the Pillsbury Doughboy character in the dessert mix 
and baking mix categories in the United States and under limited circumstances in Canada and Mexico. The Green Giant trademark is licensed 
to a third party for use in connection with its sale of fresh produce in the United States and Europe.  
The Yoplait trademark and other related trademarks are owned by Yoplait Marques SNC, an entity in which we own a 50 percent interest. 
These marks are licensed exclusively to Yoplait SAS, an entity in which we own a 51 percent interest. Yoplait SAS licenses these trademarks 
to its franchisees. The Liberté trademark and other related trademarks are owned by Liberté Marques Sàrl, an entity in which we own a 50 
percent interest.  
We continue our focus on developing and marketing innovative, proprietary products. We consider the collective rights under our various 
patents, which expire from time to time, a valuable asset, but we do not believe that our businesses are materially dependent upon any single 
patent or group of related patents.  
SEASONALITY  
In general, demand for our products is evenly balanced throughout the year. However, within our U.S. Retail segment demand for refrigerated 
dough, frozen baked goods, and baking products is stronger in the fourth calendar quarter. Demand for Progresso soup and Green Giant 
canned and frozen vegetables is higher during the fall and winter months. Internationally, demand for Häagen-Dazs ice cream is higher during 
the summer months and demand for baking mix and dough products increases during winter months. Due to the offsetting impact of these 
demand trends, as well as the different seasons in the northern and southern hemispheres, our International segment net sales are generally 
evenly balanced throughout the year.  
BACKLOG  
Orders are generally filled within a few days of receipt and are subject to cancellation at any time prior to shipment. The backlog of any 
unfilled orders as of May 31, 2015, was not material.  
   
5 

Table of Contents  
WORKING CAPITAL  
A description of our working capital is included in the Liquidity section of MD&A in Item 7 of this report. Our product return practices are 
described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
EMPLOYEES  
As of May 31, 2015, we had approximately 42,000 full- and part-time employees.  
FOOD QUALITY AND SAFETY REGULATION  
The manufacture and sale of consumer food products is highly regulated. In the United States, our activities are subject to regulation by various 
federal government agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, Department of Agriculture, Federal Trade Commission, 
Department of Commerce, and Environmental Protection Agency, as well as various state and local agencies. Our business is also regulated by 
similar agencies outside of the United States.  
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS  
As of May 31, 2015, we were involved with two active cleanup sites associated with the alleged or threatened release of hazardous substances 
or wastes located in Minneapolis, Minnesota and Moonachie, New Jersey. These matters involve several different actions, including 
administrative proceedings commenced by regulatory agencies and demand letters by regulatory agencies and private parties.  
Our operations are subject to the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, and all similar state, local, and 
foreign environmental laws and regulations applicable to the jurisdictions in which we operate.  
Based on current facts and circumstances, we believe that neither the results of our environmental proceedings nor our compliance in general 
with environmental laws or regulations will have a material adverse effect upon our capital expenditures, earnings, or competitive position.  
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS  
The section below provides information regarding our executive officers as of July 6, 2015:  
Richard C. Allendorf , age 54, is Senior Vice President, General Counsel, and Secretary. Mr. Allendorf joined General Mills in 2001 from The 
Pillsbury Company. He was promoted to Vice President, Deputy General Counsel in 2010, first overseeing the legal affairs of the U.S. Retail 
segment and Consumer Food Sales and then, in August 2012, overseeing the legal affairs of the International segment and Global Ethics and 
Compliance. He was named to his present position in February 2015. Prior to joining General Mills, he practiced law with the Shearman and 
Sterling and Mackall, Crounse and Moore law firms. He was in finance with General Electric prior to his legal career.  
John R. Church , age 49, is Executive Vice President, Supply Chain. Mr. Church joined General Mills in 1988 as a Product Developer in the 
Big G cereals division and held various positions before becoming Vice President, Engineering in 2003. In 2005, his role was expanded to 
include development of the Company’s strategy for the global sourcing of raw materials and manufacturing capabilities. He was named Vice 
President, Supply Chain Operations in 2007, Senior Vice President, Supply Chain in 2008, and to his present position in July 2013.  
Peter C. Erickson , age 54, is Executive Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality. Mr. Erickson joined General Mills in 1994 as 
part of the Colombo yogurt acquisition. He has held various positions in Research & Development and became Vice President, Innovation, 
Technology and Quality in 2003 and Senior Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality in 2006. He was named to his present position 
in July 2013.  
   
6 

Table of Contents  
Jeffrey L. Harmening , age 48, is Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, U.S. Retail. Mr. Harmening joined General Mills in 1994 
and served in various marketing roles in the Betty Crocker, Yoplait, and Big G cereal divisions. He was promoted to Marketing Director in 
2000 and held leadership roles in Big G New Enterprises and Foodservice New Business. He was named Vice President, Marketing for CPW in 
2003 and a Vice President of the Big G cereal division in 2007. In 2011, he was promoted to Senior Vice President for the Big G cereal 
division. Mr. Harmening was appointed Senior Vice President, Chief Executive Officer of CPW in 2012, and he was named to his present 
position in May 2014.  
Donal L. Mulligan , age 54, is Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Mulligan joined General Mills in 2001 from The 
Pillsbury Company. He served as Vice President, Financial Operations for our International division until 2004, when he was named Vice 
President, Financial Operations for Operations and Technology. Mr. Mulligan was appointed Treasurer of General Mills in 2006, Senior Vice 
President, Financial Operations in 2007, and was elected to his present position in 2007. From 1987 to 1998, he held several international 
positions at PepsiCo, Inc. and YUM! Brands, Inc. Mr. Mulligan is a director of Tennant Company.  
Kimberly A. Nelson , age 52, is Senior Vice President, External Relations, and President of the General Mills Foundation. Ms. Nelson joined 
General Mills in 1988 and has held marketing leadership roles in the Big G cereal, Snacks, and Meals divisions. She was elected Vice 
President, President, Snacks in 2004, Senior Vice President, President, Snacks in 2008, and Senior Vice President, External Relations in 
September 2010. She was named President of the General Mills Foundation in May 2011.  
Shawn P. O’Grady , age 51, is Senior Vice President, President, Sales & Channel Development. Mr. O’Grady joined General Mills in 1990 
and held several marketing roles in the Snacks, Meals and Big G cereal divisions. He was promoted to Vice President in 1998 and held 
marketing positions in the Betty Crocker and Pillsbury USA divisions. In 2004, he moved into Consumer Foods Sales, becoming Vice 
President, President, U.S. Retail Sales in 2007, and Senior Vice President, President, Consumer Foods Sales Division in 2010. He was 
promoted to his current position in June 2012.  
Christopher D. O’Leary , age 55, is Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, International. Mr. O’Leary joined General Mills in 
1997 as Vice President, Corporate Growth. He was elected a Senior Vice President in 1999 and President of the Meals division in 2001. 
Mr. O’Leary was named to his present position in 2006. Prior to joining General Mills, he spent 17 years at PepsiCo, Inc., last serving as 
President and Chief Executive Officer of the Hostess Frito-Lay business in Canada. Mr. O’Leary is a director of Telephone and Data Systems, 
Inc. and Newell Rubbermaid, Inc.  
Kendall J. Powell , age 61, is Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of General Mills. Mr. Powell joined General Mills in 1979 
and served in a variety of positions before becoming a Vice President in 1990. He became President of the Yoplait division in 1996, President 
of the Big G cereal division in 1997, and Senior Vice President of General Mills in 1998. From 1999 to 2004, he served as Chief Executive 
Officer of CPW. He returned from CPW in 2004 and was elected Executive Vice President. Mr. Powell was elected President and Chief 
Operating Officer of General Mills with overall global operating responsibility for the Company in 2006, Chief Executive Officer in 2007, and 
Chairman of the Board in 2008. He is a director of Medtronic, Inc.  
Jacqueline Williams-Roll , age 46, is Senior Vice President, Human Resources. Ms. Williams-Roll joined General Mills in 1995. She held 
human resources leadership roles in Supply Chain, Finance, Marketing and Organization Effectiveness, and she also worked a large part of her 
career on businesses outside of the United States. She was named Vice President, Human Resources, International in 2010, and then promoted 
to Senior Vice President, Human Resources Operations in September 2013. She was named to her present position in September 2014. Prior to 
joining General Mills, she held sales and management roles with Jenny Craig International.  
Jerald A. Young , age 58, is Vice President, Controller. Mr. Young joined General Mills in 1992 and held several finance roles within the 
Pillsbury division before he was appointed Vice President of Finance for the Convenience Stores and Foodservice Division in 2000. Mr. Young 
was subsequently appointed Vice President Internal Audit in 2005 and Vice President, Supply Chain in 2008. He was named to his present 
position in August 2011.  
   
7 

Table of Contents  
WEBSITE ACCESS  
Our website is www.generalmills.com. We make available, free of charge in the “Investors” portion of this website, annual reports on Form 10-
K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) 
or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (1934 Act) as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or 
furnish it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Reports of beneficial ownership filed pursuant to Section 16(a) of the 1934 Act 
are also available on our website.  
   
Our business is subject to various risks and uncertainties. Any of the risks described below could materially, adversely affect our business, 
financial condition, and results of operations.  
The food categories in which we participate are very competitive, and if we are not able to compete effectively, our results of operations 
could be adversely affected.  
The food categories in which we participate are very competitive. Our principal competitors in these categories all have substantial financial, 
marketing, and other resources. In most product categories, we compete not only with other widely advertised branded products, but also with 
regional brands and with generic and private label products that are generally sold at lower prices. Competition in our product categories is 
based on product innovation, product quality, price, brand recognition and loyalty, effectiveness of marketing, promotional activity, and the 
ability to identify and satisfy consumer preferences. If our large competitors were to seek an advantage through pricing or promotional changes, 
we could choose to do the same, which could adversely affect our margins and profitability. If we did not do the same, our revenues and market 
share could be adversely affected. Our market share and revenue growth could also be adversely impacted if we are not successful in 
introducing innovative products in response to changing consumer demands or by new product introductions of our competitors. If we are 
unable to build and sustain brand equity by offering recognizably superior product quality, we may be unable to maintain premium pricing over 
generic and private label products.  
We may be unable to maintain our profit margins in the face of a consolidating retail environment.  
There has been significant consolidation in the grocery industry, resulting in customers with increased purchasing power. In addition, large 
retail customers may seek to use their position to improve their profitability through improved efficiency, lower pricing, increased reliance on 
their own brand name products, increased emphasis on generic and other economy brands, and increased promotional programs. If we are 
unable to use our scale, marketing expertise, product innovation, knowledge of consumers’ needs, and category leadership positions to respond 
to these demands, our profitability and volume growth could be negatively impacted. In addition, the loss of any large customer for an extended 
length of time could adversely affect our sales and profits. For more information on significant customers, please see Company Overview in 
Item 1 of this report.  
Price changes for the commodities we depend on for raw materials, packaging, and energy may adversely affect our profitability.  
The principal raw materials that we use are commodities that experience price volatility caused by external conditions such as weather, product 
scarcity, limited sources of supply, commodity market fluctuations, currency fluctuations, and changes in governmental agricultural and energy 
policies and regulations. Commodity price changes may result in unexpected increases in raw material, packaging, and energy costs. If we are 
unable to increase productivity to offset these increased costs or increase our prices, we may experience reduced margins and profitability. We 
do not fully hedge against changes in commodity prices, and the risk management procedures that we do use may not always work as we 
intend.  
   
8 
ITEM 1A Risk Factors 

Table of Contents  
Volatility in the market value of derivatives we use to manage exposures to fluctuations in commodity prices will cause volatility in our 
gross margins and net earnings.  
We utilize derivatives to manage price risk for some of our principal ingredient and energy costs, including grains (oats, wheat, and corn), oils 
(principally soybean), dairy products, natural gas, and diesel fuel. Changes in the values of these derivatives are recorded in earnings currently, 
resulting in volatility in both gross margin and net earnings. These gains and losses are reported in cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements 
of Earnings and in unallocated corporate items in our segment operating results until we utilize the underlying input in our manufacturing 
process, at which time the gains and losses are reclassified to segment operating profit. We also record our grain inventories at fair value. We 
may experience volatile earnings as a result of these accounting treatments.  
If we are not efficient in our production, our profitability could suffer as a result of the highly competitive environment in which we 
operate.  
Our future success and earnings growth depend in part on our ability to be efficient in the production and manufacture of our products in highly 
competitive markets. Gaining additional efficiencies may become more difficult over time. Our failure to reduce costs through productivity 
gains or by eliminating redundant costs resulting from acquisitions or divestitures could adversely affect our profitability and weaken our 
competitive position. Many productivity initiatives involve complex reorganization of manufacturing facilities and production lines. Such 
manufacturing realignment may result in the interruption of production, which may negatively impact product volume and margins. We are 
currently pursuing several multi-year restructuring and cost savings initiatives designed to increase our efficiency and reduce expenses. If we 
are unable to execute those initiatives as planned, we may not realize all or any of the anticipated benefits, which could adversely affect our 
business and results of operations.  
Disruption of our supply chain could adversely affect our business.  
Our ability to make, move, and sell products is critical to our success. Damage or disruption to raw material supplies or our manufacturing or 
distribution capabilities due to weather, including any potential effects of climate change, natural disaster, fire, terrorism, cyber-attack, 
pandemic, strikes, import restrictions, or other factors could impair our ability to manufacture or sell our products. Failure to take adequate 
steps to mitigate the likelihood or potential impact of such events, or to effectively manage such events if they occur, particularly when a 
product is sourced from a single supplier or location, could adversely affect our business and results of operations, as well as require additional 
resources to restore our supply chain.  
Concerns with the safety and quality of food products could cause consumers to avoid certain food products or ingredients.  
We could be adversely affected if consumers in our principal markets lose confidence in the safety and quality of certain food products or 
ingredients. Adverse publicity about these types of concerns, whether or not valid, may discourage consumers from buying our products or 
cause production and delivery disruptions.  
If our food products become adulterated, misbranded, or mislabeled, we might need to recall those items and may experience product 
liability claims if consumers are injured.  
We may need to recall some of our products if they become adulterated, misbranded, or mislabeled. A widespread product recall could result in 
significant losses due to the costs of a recall, the destruction of product inventory, and lost sales due to the unavailability of product for a period 
of time. We could also suffer losses from a significant product liability judgment against us. A significant product recall or product liability 
case could also result in adverse publicity, damage to our reputation, and a loss of consumer confidence in our food products, which could have 
an adverse effect on our business results and the value of our brands.  
We may be unable to anticipate changes in consumer preferences and trends, which may result in decreased demand for our products. 
Our success depends in part on our ability to anticipate the tastes and eating habits of consumers and to offer products that appeal to their 
preferences. Consumer preferences and category-level consumption may change from  
   
9 

Table of Contents  
time to time and can be affected by a number of different trends and other factors. If we fail to anticipate, identify or react to these changes and 
trends, or to introduce new and improved products on a timely basis, we may experience reduced demand for our products, which would in turn 
cause our revenues and profitability to suffer. Similarly, demand for our products could be affected by consumer concerns regarding the health 
effects of ingredients such as sodium, trans fats, genetically modified organisms, sugar, processed wheat, or other product ingredients or 
attributes.  
We may be unable to grow our market share or add products that are in faster growing and more profitable categories.  
The food industry’s growth potential is constrained by population growth. Our success depends in part on our ability to grow our business 
faster than populations are growing in the markets that we serve. One way to achieve that growth is to enhance our portfolio by adding 
innovative new products in faster growing and more profitable categories. Our future results will also depend on our ability to increase market 
share in our existing product categories. If we do not succeed in developing innovative products for new and existing categories, our growth 
may slow, which could adversely affect our profitability.  
Economic downturns could limit consumer demand for our products.  
The willingness of consumers to purchase our products depends in part on local economic conditions. In periods of economic uncertainty, 
consumers may purchase more generic, private label, and other economy brands and may forego certain purchases altogether. In those 
circumstances, we could experience a reduction in sales of higher margin products or a shift in our product mix to lower margin offerings. In 
addition, as a result of economic conditions or competitive actions, we may be unable to raise our prices sufficiently to protect margins. 
Consumers may also reduce the amount of food that they consume away from home at customers that purchase products from our Convenience 
Stores and Foodservice segment. Any of these events could have an adverse effect on our results of operations.  
Our results may be negatively impacted if consumers do not maintain their favorable perception of our brands.  
Maintaining and continually enhancing the value of our many iconic brands is critical to the success of our business. The value of our brands is 
based in large part on the degree to which consumers react and respond positively to these brands. Brand value could diminish significantly due 
to a number of factors, including consumer perception that we have acted in an irresponsible manner, adverse publicity about our products, our 
failure to maintain the quality of our products, the failure of our products to deliver consistently positive consumer experiences, concerns about 
food safety, or our products becoming unavailable to consumers. The growing use of social and digital media by consumers, us, and third 
parties increases the speed and extent that information or misinformation and opinions can be shared. Negative posts or comments about us, our 
brands, or our products on social or digital media could seriously damage our brands and reputation. If we do not maintain the favorable 
perception of our brands, our business results could be negatively impacted.  
Our international operations are subject to political and economic risks.  
In fiscal 2015, 29 percent of our consolidated net sales were generated outside of the United States. We are accordingly subject to a number of 
risks relating to doing business internationally, any of which could significantly harm our business. These risks include:  
   
   
10 
•   political and economic instability; 
•   exchange controls and currency exchange rates; 
•   nationalization of operations; 
•   compliance with anti-corruption regulations; 
•   foreign tax treaties and policies; and 
•   restriction on the transfer of funds to and from foreign countries, including potentially negative tax consequences. 

Table of Contents  
Our financial performance on a U.S. dollar denominated basis is subject to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. These fluctuations could 
cause material variations in our results of operations. Our principal exposures are to the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound sterling, 
Canadian dollar, Chinese renminbi, euro, Japanese yen, Mexican peso, and Swiss franc. From time to time, we enter into agreements that are 
intended to reduce the effects of our exposure to currency fluctuations, but these agreements may not be effective in significantly reducing our 
exposure.  
New regulations or regulatory-based claims could adversely affect our business.  
Our facilities and products are subject to many laws and regulations administered by the United States Department of Agriculture, the Federal 
Food and Drug Administration, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and other federal, state, local, and foreign governmental 
agencies relating to the production, packaging, storage, distribution, quality, and safety of food products and the health and safety of our 
employees. Our failure to comply with such laws and regulations could subject us to lawsuits, administrative penalties, and civil remedies, 
including fines, injunctions, and recalls of our products. We advertise our products and could be the target of claims relating to alleged false or 
deceptive advertising under federal, state, and foreign laws and regulations. We may also be subject to new laws or regulations restricting our 
right to advertise our products, including proposals to limit advertising to children. Changes in laws or regulations that impose additional 
regulatory requirements on us could increase our cost of doing business or restrict our actions, causing our results of operations to be adversely 
affected.  
We are subject to various federal, state, local, and foreign environmental laws and regulations. Our failure to comply with environmental laws 
and regulations could subject us to lawsuits, administrative penalties, and civil remedies. We are currently party to a variety of environmental 
remediation obligations. Due to regulatory complexities, uncertainties inherent in litigation, and the risk of unidentified contaminants on 
current and former properties of ours, the potential exists for remediation, liability, indemnification, and compliance costs to differ from our 
estimates. We cannot guarantee that our costs in relation to these matters, or compliance with environmental laws in general, will not exceed 
our established liabilities or otherwise have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.  
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness, which could limit financing and other options and in some cases adversely affect our 
ability to pay dividends.  
As of May 31, 2015, we had total debt, redeemable interests, and noncontrolling interests of $10.4 billion. The agreements under which we 
have issued indebtedness do not prevent us from incurring additional unsecured indebtedness in the future. Our level of indebtedness may limit 
our:  
   
There are various financial covenants and other restrictions in our debt instruments and noncontrolling interests. If we fail to comply with any 
of these requirements, the related indebtedness (and other unrelated indebtedness) could become due and payable prior to its stated maturity 
and our ability to obtain additional or alternative financing may also be adversely affected.  
Our ability to make scheduled payments on or to refinance our debt and other obligations will depend on our operating and financial 
performance, which in turn is subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business, and other factors beyond our control.  
   
11 
•   ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, or general corporate purposes, particularly if the ratings 
assigned to our debt securities by rating organizations were revised downward; and 
•   flexibility to adjust to changing business and market conditions and may make us more vulnerable to a downturn in general economic 
conditions. 

Table of Contents  
Global capital and credit market issues could negatively affect our liquidity, increase our costs of borrowing, and disrupt the 
operations of our suppliers and customers.  
We depend on stable, liquid, and well-functioning capital and credit markets to fund our operations. Although we believe that our operating 
cash flows, financial assets, access to capital and credit markets, and revolving credit agreements will permit us to meet our financing needs for 
the foreseeable future, there can be no assurance that future volatility or disruption in the capital and credit markets will not impair our liquidity 
or increase our costs of borrowing. We also utilize interest rate derivatives to reduce the volatility of our financing costs. If we are not effective 
in hedging this volatility, we may experience an increase in our costs of borrowing. Our business could also be negatively impacted if our 
suppliers or customers experience disruptions resulting from tighter capital and credit markets or a slowdown in the general economy.  
Volatility in the securities markets, interest rates, and other factors could substantially increase our defined benefit pension, other 
postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit costs.  
We sponsor a number of defined benefit plans for employees in the United States, Canada, and various foreign locations, including defined 
benefit pension, retiree health and welfare, severance, and other postemployment plans. Our major defined benefit pension plans are funded 
with trust assets invested in a globally diversified portfolio of securities and other investments. Changes in interest rates, mortality rates, health 
care costs, early retirement rates, investment returns, and the market value of plan assets can affect the funded status of our defined benefit 
plans and cause volatility in the net periodic benefit cost and future funding requirements of the plans. A significant increase in our obligations 
or future funding requirements could have a negative impact on our results of operations and cash flows from operations.  
Our business operations could be disrupted if our information technology systems fail to perform adequately or are breached.  
Information technology serves an important role in the efficient and effective operation of our business. We rely on information technology 
networks and systems, including the internet, to process, transmit, and store electronic information to manage a variety of business processes 
and to comply with regulatory, legal, and tax requirements. Our information technology systems and infrastructure are critical to effectively 
manage our key business processes including digital marketing, order entry and fulfillment, supply chain management, finance, administration, 
and other business processes. These technologies enable internal and external communication among our locations, employees, suppliers, 
customers, and others and include the receipt and storage of personal information about our employees and proprietary business information. 
Our information technology systems, some of which are dependent on services provided by third parties, may be vulnerable to damage, 
interruption, or shutdown due to any number of causes such as catastrophic events, natural disasters, fires, power outages, systems failures, 
telecommunications failures, security breaches, computer viruses, hackers, and other causes. Increased cyber-security threats pose a potential 
risk to the security and viability of our information technology systems, as well as the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data 
stored on those systems. The failure of our information technology systems to perform as we anticipate could disrupt our business and result in 
transaction errors, processing inefficiencies, data loss, and the loss of sales and customers. Any interruption of our information technology 
systems could have operational, reputational, legal, and financial impacts that may have a material adverse effect on our business.  
A change in the assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses or a different weighted-average cost of capital used to 
value our reporting units or our indefinite-lived intangible assets could negatively affect our consolidated results of operations and net 
worth.  
As of May 31, 2015, we had $13.1 billion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Goodwill for each of our reporting units is tested 
for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. We compare the 
carrying value of the net assets of a reporting unit, including goodwill, to the fair value of the unit. If the fair value of the net assets of the 
reporting unit is less than the net assets including goodwill, impairment has occurred. Our estimates of fair value are determined based on a 
discounted cash flow model. Growth rates for sales and profits are determined using inputs from our long-range planning process. We also 
make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other factors.  
   
12 

Table of Contents  
While we currently believe that our goodwill is not impaired, different assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses could 
result in significant impairment losses.  
We evaluate the useful lives of our intangible assets, primarily intangible assets associated with the Pillsbury , Totino’s , Progresso , Green 
Giant , Yoplait , Old El Paso , Yoki , Häagen-Dazs , and Annie’s brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a 
determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, 
other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or 
changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the 
expected lives of other related groups of assets.  
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are also tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that 
their carrying value may not be recoverable. Our estimate of the fair value of the brands is based on a discounted cash flow model using inputs 
including projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates which could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a 
discount rate. Our Green Giant , Uncle Toby’s , and Mountain High brands have experienced declining business performance, and we will 
continue to monitor these businesses. For further information on goodwill and intangible assets, please refer to Note 6 to the Consolidated 
Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
Our failure to successfully integrate acquisitions into our existing operations could adversely affect our financial results.  
From time to time, we evaluate potential acquisitions or joint ventures that would further our strategic objectives. Our success depends, in part, 
upon our ability to integrate acquired and existing operations. If we are unable to successfully integrate acquisitions, our financial results could 
suffer. Additional potential risks associated with acquisitions include additional debt leverage, the loss of key employees and customers of the 
acquired business, the assumption of unknown liabilities, the inherent risk associated with entering a geographic area or line of business in 
which we have no or limited prior experience, failure to achieve anticipated synergies, and the impairment of goodwill or other acquisition-
related intangible assets.  
   
None.  
   
We own our principal executive offices and main research facilities, which are located in the Minneapolis, Minnesota metropolitan area. We 
operate numerous manufacturing facilities and maintain many sales and administrative offices, warehouses, and distribution centers around the 
world.  
As of May 31, 2015, we operated 66 facilities for the production of a wide variety of food products. Of these facilities, 34 are located in the 
United States (1 of which is leased), 7 in the Asia/Pacific region (2 of which are leased), 5 in Canada (3 of which are leased), 11 in 
Europe/Australia (2 of which are leased), and 9 in Latin America and Mexico. The following is a list of the locations of our principal 
production facilities, which primarily support the segment noted:  
   
   
13 
ITEM 1B 
Unresolved Staff Comments 
ITEM 2 
Properties 
U.S. Retail 
  
  
• Carson, California 
  • Irapuato, Mexico 
  • Albuquerque, New Mexico 
• Covington, Georgia 
  • Reed City, Michigan 
  • Buffalo, New York 
• Belvidere, Illinois 
  • Fridley, Minnesota 
  • Cincinnati, Ohio 
• West Chicago, Illinois 
  • Hannibal, Missouri 
  • Wellston, Ohio 
• Cedar Rapids, Iowa 
  • Vineland, New Jersey 
  • Murfreesboro, Tennessee 
  
  • Milwaukee, Wisconsin 

Table of Contents  
We operate numerous grain elevators in the United States in support of our domestic manufacturing activities. We also utilize approximately 
12 million square feet of warehouse and distribution space, nearly all of which is leased, that primarily supports our U.S. Retail segment. We 
own and lease a number of dedicated sales and administrative offices around the world, totaling approximately 3 million square feet. We have 
additional warehouse, distribution, and office space in our plant locations.  
As part of our Häagen-Dazs business in our International segment, we operate 481 (all leased) and franchise 334 branded ice cream parlors in 
various countries around the world, all outside of the United States and Canada.  
   
We are the subject of various pending or threatened legal actions in the ordinary course of our business. All such matters are subject to many 
uncertainties and outcomes that are not predictable with assurance. In our opinion, there were no claims or litigation pending as of May 31, 
2015, that were reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. See the 
information contained under the section entitled “Environmental Matters” in Item 1 of this report for a discussion of environmental matters in 
which we are involved.  
   
None.  
   
14 
International 
  
  
• Mt. Waverly, Australia 
  • Paranavai, Brazil 
  • Arras, France 
• Rooty Hill, Australia 
  • Pouso Alegre, Brazil 
  • Labatut, France 
• Sao Bernardo do Campo, Brazil 
  • St. Hyacinthe, Canada 
  • Le Mans, France 
• Cambara, Brazil 
  • Guangzhou, China 
  • Moneteau, France 
• Marilia, Brazil 
  • Sanhe, China 
  • Vienne, France 
• Nova Prata, Brazil 
  • Shanghai, China 
  • San Adrian, Spain 
Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
• Chanhassen, Minnesota 
  • Joplin, Missouri 
  • Martel, Ohio 
ITEM 3 
Legal Proceedings 
ITEM 4 
Mine Safety Disclosures 

Table of Contents  
PART II  
   
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “GIS.” On June 19, 2015, there were approximately 32,000 
record holders of our common stock. Information regarding the market prices for our common stock and dividend payments for the two most 
recent fiscal years is set forth in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
The following table sets forth information with respect to shares of our common stock that we purchased during the fiscal quarter ended 
May 31, 2015:  
   
   
15 
ITEM 5 
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
Period 
  
Total Number 
of Shares 
Purchased (a)    
Average 
Price Paid 
Per Share    
Total Number of 
Shares Purchased as 
Part of a Publicly 
Announced Program (b)    
Maximum Number of 
Shares that may yet be 
Purchased Under the 
Program (b)  
February 23, 2015-
  
  
  
  
March 29, 2015 
  
 
1,930    
$ 
53.79    
 
1,930    
 
86,487,672  
March 30, 2015-
  
  
  
  
April 26, 2015 
  
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
86,487,672  
April 27, 2015-
  
  
  
  
May 31, 2015 
  
 
144    
 
55.70    
 
144    
 
86,487,528  
Total 
  
 
2,074    
$ 
53.92    
 
2,074    
 
86,487,528  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
The total number of shares purchased includes shares of common stock withheld for the payment of withholding taxes upon the 
distribution of deferred option units. 
(b) 
On May 6, 2014, our Board of Directors approved an authorization for the repurchase of up to 100,000,000 shares of our common stock. 
Purchases can be made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative 
instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, and accelerated repurchase programs. The Board did not specify an expiration date for the 
authorization. 

Table of Contents  
The following table sets forth selected financial data for each of the fiscal years in the five-year period ended May 31, 2015:  
   
   
16 
ITEM 6 
Selected Financial Data 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions, Except Per Share Data, Percentages and Ratios 
  2015 (a)  
 
2014 
 
 
2013 
 
 
2012 
 
 
2011 
 
Operating data: 
  
 
 
 
 
Net sales 
  $ 17,630.3  
 $17,909.6  
 $17,774.1  
 $ 16,657.9  
 $ 14,880.2  
Gross margin (b) 
   5,949.2  
  6,369.8  
  6,423.9  
  6,044.7  
  5,953.5  
Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
   3,328.0  
  3,474.3  
  3,552.3  
  3,380.7  
  3,192.0  
Total segment operating profit (c) 
    3,035.0   
  3,153.9  
  3,222.9  
  3,011.6  
  2,945.6  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills 
   1,221.3  
  1,824.4  
  1,855.2  
  1,567.3  
  1,798.3  
Advertising and media expense 
   
823.1  
  
869.5  
  
895.0  
  
913.7  
  
843.7  
Research and development expense 
   
229.4  
  
243.6  
  
237.9  
  
245.4  
  
235.0  
Average shares outstanding: 
  
 
 
 
 
Diluted 
   
618.8  
  
645.7  
  
665.6  
  
666.7  
  
664.8  
Earnings per share: 
  
 
 
 
 
Diluted 
  $ 
1.97  
 $
2.83  
 $
2.79  
 $ 
2.35  
 $ 
2.70  
Diluted, excluding certain items affecting comparability (c) 
  $ 
2.86   
 $
2.82  
 $
2.72  
 $ 
2.56  
 $ 
2.48  
Operating ratios: 
  
 
 
 
 
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales 
   
33.7 %    
35.6 %    
36.1 %    
36.3%    
40.0 %  
Selling, general, and administrative expenses as a 
percentage of net sales 
    
18.9 %    
19.4 %    
20.0 %    
20.3%    
21.5 %  
Total segment operating profit as a percentage of net sales (c) 
   
17.2 %    
17.6 %    
18.1 %    
18.1%    
19.8 %  
Effective income tax rate 
   
33.3 %    
33.3 %    
29.2 %    
32.1%    
29.7 %  
Return on average total capital (b) (c) 
   
11.2 %    
11.6 %    
12.0 %    
12.7%    
13.7 %  
Balance sheet data: 
  
 
 
 
 
Land, buildings, and equipment 
  $ 3,783.3  
 $ 3,941.9  
 $ 3,878.1  
 $ 3,652.7  
 $ 3,345.9  
Total assets 
   21,964.5  
  23,145.7  
  22,658.0  
  21,096.8  
  18,674.5  
Long-term debt, excluding current portion 
   7,607.7  
  6,423.5  
  5,926.1  
  6,161.9  
  5,542.5  
Total debt (b) 
    9,223.9   
  8,785.8  
  7,969.1  
  7,429.6  
  6,885.1  
Cash flow data: 
  
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities 
  $ 2,542.8  
 $ 2,541.0  
 $ 2,926.0  
 $ 2,407.2  
 $ 1,531.1  
Capital expenditures 
   
712.4  
  
663.5  
  
613.9  
  
675.9  
  
648.8  
Fixed charge coverage ratio (b) 
    
5.54   
  
8.04  
  
7.62  
  
6.26  
  
7.03  
Operating cash flow to debt ratio (b) 
   
27.6 %    
28.9 %    
36.7 %    
32.4%    
22.2 %  
Share data: 
  
 
 
 
 
Low stock price 
  $ 
48.86  
 $
46.86  
 $
37.55  
 $ 
34.95  
 $ 
33.57  
High stock price 
    
57.14   
  
54.40  
  
50.93  
  
41.05  
  
39.95  
Closing stock price 
   
56.15  
  
53.81  
  
48.98  
  
39.08  
  
39.29  
Cash dividends per common share 
   
1.67  
  
1.55  
  
1.32  
  
1.22  
  
1.12  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(a) 
Fiscal 2015 was a 53-week year; all other fiscal years were 52 weeks. 
(b) 
See “Glossary” in Item 8 of this report for definition. 
(c) 
See “Non-GAAP Measures” in Item 7 of this report for our discussion of this measure not defined by generally accepted accounting 
principles. 

Table of Contents  
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW  
We are a global consumer foods company. We develop distinctive value-added food products and market them under unique brand names. We 
work continuously to improve our core products and to create new products that meet consumers’ evolving needs and preferences. In addition, 
we build the equity of our brands over time with strong consumer-directed marketing, innovative new products, and effective merchandising. 
We believe our brand-building strategy is the key to winning and sustaining leading share positions in markets around the globe.  
Our fundamental financial goal is to generate superior returns for our stockholders over the long term. We believe that increases in net sales, 
segment operating profit, earnings per share (EPS), and return on average total capital are the key drivers of financial performance for our 
business.  
Our long-term growth objectives are to consistently deliver:  
   
   
   
   
We believe that this financial performance, coupled with an attractive dividend yield, should result in long-term value creation for stockholders. 
We return a substantial amount of cash to stockholders through dividends and share repurchases.  
Our fiscal 2015 performance was mixed. Our two smaller operating segments delivered growth. Operating profit for the Convenience Stores 
and Foodservice segment increased 15 percent to an all-time high of $353 million. Operating results for the International segment were muted 
by a significant negative impact from foreign currency exchange and slowing economic growth in key emerging markets, but the segment 
achieved good margin expansion and profit growth in constant currency. Results for our U.S. Retail segment were disappointing, as both net 
sales and segment operating profit declined. Our brands achieved share gains in categories representing 65 percent of our products’ sales in 
measured U.S. retail channels, but overall sales trends in many categories were weak, reflecting the impact of changing consumer food 
preferences.  
Our consolidated net sales for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, declined 2 percent to $17.6 billion, as unfavorable foreign exchange offset 
the benefits of a 53 week and six months of incremental contribution from the Annie’s Inc. (Annie’s) natural and organic foods business 
acquired in October 2014. On a constant-currency basis, net sales increased 1 percent. Total segment operating profit of $3.0 billion declined 4 
percent and 2 percent in constant currency. Diluted EPS declined 30 percent to $1.97 per share. Adjusted diluted EPS, which excludes certain 
items affecting comparability of results, rose 1 percent to $2.86 per share and increased 4 percent on a constant-currency basis. These results 
were in line with our expectations which were revised in the second quarter of fiscal 2015. Our return on average total capital declined 40 basis 
points to 11.2 percent. (See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for discussion of total segment operating profit, adjusted diluted EPS, 
constant-currency nets sales growth rates, constant-currency total segment operating profit growth rate, constant-currency adjusted diluted EPS 
growth rate, and return on average total capital, which are not defined by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)).  
Net cash provided by operations totaled $2.5 billion in fiscal 2015. This cash generation supported capital investments totaling $712 million in 
fiscal 2015. We also returned significant cash to stockholders through an 8 percent dividend increase, and share repurchases totaling $1.2 
billion.  
We recorded the following achievements related to our other key operating objectives for fiscal 2015:  
   
   
17 
ITEM 7 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
• 
  low single-digit annual growth in net sales; 
• 
  mid single-digit annual growth in total segment operating profit; 
• 
  high single-digit annual growth in diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability; and 
• 
  improvement in return on average total capital. 
• 
  Product improvements on established brands and new-product introductions designed to respond to evolving consumer food preferences 
generated good growth for a variety of our product lines. Examples included renewed sales growth for our U.S. Yogurt operating unit; 
strong sales contributions from protein-enriched 
rd 

Table of Contents  
cereal varieties; robust consumer demand across international markets for new Old El Paso Mexican food items; and double-digit growth 
for our U.S. portfolio of natural and organic food products.  
   
   
   
   
   
A detailed review of our fiscal 2015 performance appears below in the section titled “Fiscal 2015 Consolidated Results of Operations.”  
Our sales and earnings growth targets for fiscal 2016 reflect the impact of one less week compared to fiscal 2015. The Annie’s business will 
contribute 6 months of incremental results. We expect foreign currency exchange will continue to have a negative impact on reported results 
for our international operations, and we expect the operating environment in our large developing markets (China and Brazil) to remain 
uncertain. We estimate our input cost inflation for fiscal 2016 at 2 percent. With these assumptions in mind:  
   
   
   
   
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.  
   
18 
• 
  The acquisition of Annie’s in October 2014 significantly expanded our scale and participation in the attractive U.S. natural and organic 
food category. Combined net sales in the U.S. for our portfolio of natural and organic brands exceeded $570 million in fiscal 2015. 
• 
  We increased our share of U.S. cereal category measured dollar sales. 
• 
  We increased our share of U.S. yogurt category measured dollar sales, including strong gains in the Greek yogurt segment, and renewed 
sales growth in the regular and child yogurt segments. Our international yogurt operations expanded to China with first production and 
order shipments to the Shanghai market commencing near the end of the fiscal year. 
• 
  We generated strong levels of supply chain productivity savings in 2015 through our ongoing Holistic Margin Management (HMM) 
efforts. Beyond this program, we began several new cost savings initiatives during the fiscal year. Project Century is our effort to simplify 
our North American supply chain. Project Catalyst is focused on increasing the agility and effectiveness of our U.S. Retail and corporate 
organizations, and we are making changes to various corporate policies and practices to reduce overhead expense. Together, these three 
initiatives generated more than $75 million in cost savings during fiscal 2015, and they are expected to produce a cumulative $260 to 
$280 million in savings in fiscal 2016. 
• 
  We delivered strong cash returns to stockholders through dividends of $1.67 per share and share repurchases totaling $1.2 billion. Share 
repurchase activity in fiscal 2015 and 2014 reduced the average number of diluted shares outstanding in fiscal 2015 by 4 percent from 
fiscal 2014. 
• 
  We expect fiscal 2016 net sales to essentially match 2015 levels in constant currency, reflecting the impact of one less week of business. 
• 
  We expect fiscal 2016 total segment operating profit to increase at a low-single-digit rate in constant currency, as HMM and our more 
recent cost-saving initiatives increase our efficiency and improve margins. 
• 
  We expect fiscal 2016 adjusted diluted EPS to increase at a mid-single-digit rate in constant currency. 
• 
  Our fiscal 2016 plans call for continued strong cash returns to stockholders. The current annualized dividend rate of $1.76 per share is up 
5 percent from the annual dividend paid in 2015. Share repurchases in fiscal 2016 are expected to result in a net reduction in average 
diluted shares outstanding of approximately 1 percent. 

Table of Contents  
FISCAL 2015 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS  
Fiscal 2015 had 53 weeks compared to 52 weeks in fiscal 2014.  
Fiscal 2015 net sales declined 2 percent to $17,630 million and increased 1 percent on a constant-currency basis. In fiscal 2015, net earnings 
attributable to General Mills were $1,221 million, down 33 percent from $1,824 million in fiscal 2014, and we reported diluted EPS of 
$1.97 in fiscal 2015, down 30 percent from $2.83 in fiscal 2014. Fiscal 2015 results include restructuring-related charges, an indefinite-lived 
intangible asset impairment charge, tax impact of the repatriation of foreign earnings, losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain 
commodity positions and grain inventories, integration costs resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s, and the impact of Venezuela currency 
devaluation. Fiscal 2014 results include the impact of Venezuela currency devaluation, a gain on the divestiture of certain grain elevators, 
losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, and restructuring charges related to our fiscal 
2012 productivity and cost savings plan. Diluted EPS excluding these items affecting comparability totaled $2.86 in fiscal 2015, up 1 percent 
from $2.82 in fiscal 2014. Diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability on a constant-currency basis increased 4 percent 
compared to fiscal 2014 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of these measures not defined by GAAP).  
Net sales declined 2 percent to $17,630 million in fiscal 2015 from $17,910 in fiscal 2014. The components of net sales growth are shown in 
the following table:  
   
The 53 week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales growth, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from 
volume.  
Cost of sales increased $141 million in fiscal 2015 to $11,681 million. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $90 million net increase in cost of sales 
related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories as described in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial 
Statements in Item 8 of this report, compared to a net decrease of $49 million in fiscal 2014. In fiscal 2015, we recorded $60 million of 
restructuring charges in cost of sales. Product mix drove a $17 million increase in cost of sales. We also recorded a $3 million foreign exchange 
loss in fiscal 2015 related to Venezuela currency devaluation compared to a $23 million loss in fiscal 2014. Lower volume drove a $68 million 
decrease in cost of sales.  
We also expect to incur approximately $65 million of restructuring initiative project-related cash costs and recorded $13 million of these costs 
in cost of sales in fiscal 2015 (please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).  
Gross margin declined 7 percent in fiscal 2015 versus fiscal 2014. Gross margin as a percent of net sales of 34 percent decreased 190 basis 
points compared to fiscal 2014.  
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses decreased $146 million in fiscal 2015 versus fiscal 2014 primarily due to a 5 percent 
decrease in advertising and media expense, and savings from Project Catalyst (please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
in Item 8 of this report) and our other cost management initiatives. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $5 million charge related to Venezuela 
currency devaluation compared to a $39 million charge in fiscal 2014. In addition, we recorded $16 million of integration costs in fiscal 2015 
related to our acquisition of Annie’s. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales decreased 50 basis points compared to fiscal 2014.  
   
19 
   
  
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014  
Contributions from volume growth (a) 
  
 
(1) pt   
Net price realization and mix 
  
 
2  pts  
Foreign currency exchange 
  
 
(3) pts   
Net sales growth 
  
 
(2) pts   
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments. 
rd 

Table of Contents  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs totaled $544 million in fiscal 2015 compared to $4 million in fiscal 2014.  
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our 
U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within the segment. As a result, we recorded a $260 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 
fiscal 2015 related to the Green Giant brand intangible asset.  
Restructuring charges recorded in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs were $284 million in fiscal 2015 compared to $4 million in 
fiscal 2014. Total charges associated with our restructuring initiatives recognized in fiscal 2015 and 2014 consisted of the following:  
   
(a) Includes $59.6 million of restructuring charges recorded in cost of sales during fiscal 2015.  
(b) Cumulative annual savings estimated by fiscal 2017. Includes savings from SG&A cost reduction projects.  
Please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for more information regarding our restructuring 
activities.  
There were no divestitures in fiscal 2015. During fiscal 2014, we recorded a divestiture gain of $66 million related to the sale of certain grain 
elevators in our U.S. Retail segment.  
Interest, net for fiscal 2015 totaled $315 million, $13 million higher than fiscal 2014. Average interest bearing instruments increased $1,370 
million, generating a $55 million increase in net interest. The average interest rate decreased 47 basis points, including the effect of the mix of 
debt, generating a $42 million decrease in net interest.  
Our consolidated effective tax rate for fiscal 2015 of 33.3 percent was consistent with fiscal 2014. The 4.5 percentage point impact resulting 
from the repatriation of $606 million of foreign earnings in fiscal 2015 was offset by changes in earnings mix by country, certain favorable 
discrete items, and favorable state tax rate changes.  
   
20 
 
  
As Reported 
   
Estimated 
 
In Millions 
  
Fiscal 2015 
   
Fiscal 2014 
   
Future 
   
Total 
   
Savings (b)  
   
  Charge   Cash    Charge    Cash    Charge    Cash    Charge    Cash    
Total Century (a) 
  $ 181.8   $ 12.0   $ 
—    $ —    $ 
111    $ 109    $ 
293   $ 121      
Catalyst 
   148.4    45.0    
—     —     
—     73     
148    118      
International 
   
13.9    6.5    
1.0     6.0     
1     
8     
15    14      
Other 
   
(0.6 )   0.1    
2.6     16.4     
—     —     
—    —      
Total restructuring charges (a) 
   343.5    63.6    
3.6     22.4     
112     190     
456    253      
Project-related costs recorded in costs of sales 
   
13.2    9.7    
—     —     
52     55     
65    65      
Restructuring charges and project-related costs 
  $ 356.7   $ 73.3   $ 
3.6    $22.4    $ 
164    $ 245    $ 
521   $ 318      
   
  
   
Future cumulative annual savings 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  $ 
350  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures for fiscal 2015 decreased to $84 million compared to $90 million in fiscal 2014 primarily driven by 
unfavorable foreign currency exchange and an asset impairment charge of $3 million at Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW) in South Africa. 
The change in net sales for each joint venture is set forth in the following table:  
   
The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are shown in the following table:  
   
Average diluted shares outstanding decreased by 27 million in fiscal 2015 from fiscal 2014 due to share repurchases.  
FISCAL 2015 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS  
Cash and cash equivalents decreased $533 million from fiscal 2014, as discussed in the “Liquidity” section below.  
Receivables decreased $97 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by timing of sales.  
Inventories decreased $19 million from fiscal 2014.  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased $15 million from fiscal 2014.  
Land, buildings, and equipment decreased $159 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by $108 million related to restructuring activities. 
Goodwill and other intangible assets decreased $113 million from fiscal 2014, driven by foreign exchange and a $260 million impairment 
charge related to an indefinite-lived intangible asset, partially offset by the $858 million of intangible assets recorded in the acquisition of 
Annie’s.  
Other assets decreased $302 million from fiscal 2014, largely driven by a decrease in the funded status of our defined benefit pension plans 
primarily due to the adoption of new mortality tables for the annual remeasurement of the obligations associated with these plans.  
Accounts payable increased $73 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by the extension of payment terms and the timing of payments.  
Notes payable and long-term debt, including current portion, increased $438 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by $1,107 million of 
net long-term debt issuances, partially offset by net commercial paper payments.  
The current and noncurrent portions of net deferred income taxes liability decreased $142 million from fiscal 2014, primarily as a result of 
changes in the funded status of our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans.  
   
21 
 
  
As Reported  
 
Constant-Currency Basis  
   
  
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014  
 
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014  
CPW 
  
 
(10 )%   
 
(2)%  
Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ) 
  
 
(4 )  
 
 
6  
Joint Ventures 
  
 
(9 )%   
 
(1)%  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fiscal 2015 vs. Fiscal 2014 
  
CPW      
HDJ 
 
Contributions from volume growth 
   (1)   pt      
(5) pts   
Net price realization and mix 
   (1)   pt      
11  pts  
Foreign currency exchange 
   (8) pts      
(10) pts   
Net sales growth 
   (10) pts      
(4) pts   
  
   
  
  
  
     
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Other current liabilities increased $140 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by the establishment of restructuring reserves related to the 
actions taken in fiscal 2015.  
Other liabilities increased $102 million from fiscal 2014, largely driven by an increase in our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans 
liabilities primarily due to the adoption of new mortality tables for the annual remeasurement of the obligations associated with these plans.  
Redeemable interest decreased $205 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by foreign exchange.  
Retained earnings increased $204 million from fiscal 2014, reflecting fiscal 2015 net earnings of $1,221 million less dividends declared of 
$1,018 million. Treasury stock increased $836 million from fiscal 2014, driven by $1,162 million of share repurchases, partially offset by 
$326 million related to stock-based compensation plans. Additional paid in capital increased $65 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven 
by redeemable interest revaluation, partially offset by stock compensation activity. AOCI increased by $970 million from fiscal 2014.  
Noncontrolling interests decreased $75 million from fiscal 2014, primarily driven by foreign exchange.  
FISCAL 2014 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS  
Our consolidated results for fiscal 2014 include one additional quarter of operating activity from the acquisition of Yoki Alimentos S.A. (Yoki) 
in Brazil, one additional quarter of operating activity from the assumption of the Canadian Yoplait franchise license, and three additional 
quarters of operating activity from the acquisition of Immaculate Baking Company in the United States. Collectively, these items are referred to 
as “new businesses” in comparing our fiscal 2014 results to fiscal 2013.  
Fiscal 2014 net sales grew 1 percent to $17,910 million including 1 percentage point of growth contributed by new businesses and 1 percentage 
point of unfavorable foreign currency exchange. In fiscal 2014,  net earnings attributable to General Mills  were $1,824 million, down 2 
percent from $1,855 million in fiscal 2013, and we reported  diluted EPS  of $2.83 in fiscal 2014, up 1 percent from $2.79 in fiscal 2013. 
Fiscal 2014 results include a gain on the divestiture of certain grain elevators, the impact of Venezuela currency devaluation, gains from the 
mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, and restructuring charges related to our fiscal 2012 
productivity and cost savings plan. Fiscal 2013 results include the effects from various discrete tax items, the impact of Venezuela currency 
devaluation, restructuring charges related to our fiscal 2012 productivity and cost savings plan, integration costs resulting from the acquisition 
of Yoki, and gains from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories. Diluted EPS excluding these items 
affecting comparability totaled $2.82 in fiscal 2014, up 4 percent from $2.72 in fiscal 2013 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a 
description of our use of this measure not defined by GAAP).  
Net sales grew 1 percent in fiscal 2014 to $17,910 from $17,774 in fiscal 2013. The components of net sales growth are shown in the following 
table:  
   
Net sales growth included 1 percentage point of growth from new businesses. Contributions from volume growth included 2 percentage points 
from new businesses.  
   
22 
   
  
Fiscal 2014
vs. 2013  
Contributions from volume growth (a) 
  
 
1 pt  
Net price realization and mix 
  
 
1 pt  
Foreign currency exchange 
  
 
(1) pt   
Net sales growth 
  
 
1 pt  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments. 

Table of Contents  
Cost of sales  increased $190 million in fiscal 2014 to $11,540 million. Higher volume drove an $115 million increase in cost of sales. Product 
mix also drove an $130 million increase in cost of sales. In fiscal 2014, we recorded a $49 million net decrease in cost of sales related to mark-
to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories as described in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in 
Item 8 of this report, compared to a net decrease of $4 million in fiscal 2013. We also recorded a $23 million foreign exchange loss in fiscal 
2014 related to the Venezuela currency devaluation compared to a $16 million loss in fiscal 2013. In fiscal 2013, we also recorded a $17 
million non-recurring expense related to the assumption of the Canadian Yoplait franchise license.  
Gross margin  declined 1 percent in fiscal 2014 versus fiscal 2013. Gross margin as a percent of net sales of 36 percent was unchanged 
compared to fiscal 2013.  
SG&A expenses decreased $78 million in fiscal 2014 versus fiscal 2013. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily driven by a 3 percent 
decrease in advertising and media expense, a smaller contribution to the General Mills Foundation, a decrease in incentive compensation 
expense, and lower pension expense compared to fiscal 2013. In fiscal 2014, we recorded a $39 million charge related to Venezuela currency 
devaluation compared to a $9 million charge in fiscal 2013. In addition, we recorded $12 million of integration costs in fiscal 2013 related to 
our acquisition of Yoki. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales decreased 1 percent compared to fiscal 2013.  
During fiscal 2014, we recorded a divestiture gain of $66 million related to the sale of certain grain elevators in our U.S. Retail segment. 
There were no divestitures in fiscal 2013.  
Interest, net  for fiscal 2014 totaled $302 million, $15 million lower than fiscal 2013. The average interest rate decreased 41 basis points, 
including the effect of the mix of debt, generating a $31 million decrease in net interest. Average interest bearing instruments increased $367 
million, generating a $16 million increase in net interest.  
Our consolidated  effective tax rate  for fiscal 2014 was 33.3 percent compared to 29.2 percent in fiscal 2013. The 4.1 percentage point 
increase was primarily related to the restructuring of our General Mills Cereals, LLC (GMC) subsidiary during the first quarter of fiscal 2013, 
which resulted in a $63 million decrease to deferred income tax liabilities related to the tax basis of the investment in GMC and certain 
distributed assets, with a corresponding non-cash reduction to income taxes. During fiscal 2013, we also recorded a $34 million discrete 
decrease in income tax expense and an increase in our deferred tax assets related to certain actions taken to restore part of the tax benefits 
associated with Medicare Part D subsidies which had previously been reduced in fiscal 2010 with the enactment of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. Our fiscal 2013 tax expense also includes a 
$12 million charge associated with the liquidation of a corporate investment.  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures  for fiscal 2014 decreased to $90 million compared to $99 million in fiscal 2013 primarily driven by 
increased consumer spending at CPW and unfavorable foreign currency exchange from HDJ. The change in net sales for each joint venture is 
set forth in the following table:  
   
   
23 
 
  
As Reported  
 
Constant Currency Basis  
   
  
Fiscal 2014
vs. 2013  
 
Fiscal 2014 
vs. 2013  
CPW 
  
 
(1 )%   
 
Flat   
HDJ 
  
 
(8 )  
 
 
9  %  
Joint Ventures 
  
 
(2 )%   
 
2  %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are shown in the following table:  
   
Average diluted shares outstanding  decreased by 20 million in fiscal 2014 from fiscal 2013 due primarily to the repurchase of 36 million 
shares, partially offset by the issuance of 7 million shares related to stock compensation plans.  
RESULTS OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS  
Our businesses are organized into three operating segments: U.S. Retail; International; and Convenience Stores and Foodservice.  
Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we changed how we assess segment operating performance to exclude the asset and liability 
remeasurement impact from hyperinflationary economies. This impact is now included in unallocated corporate items. All periods presented 
have been changed to conform to this presentation.  
The following tables provide the dollar amount and percentage of net sales and operating profit from each segment for fiscal years 2015, 2014, 
and 2013:  
   
Segment operating profit excludes unallocated corporate items, gain on divestitures, and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs because 
these items affecting operating profit are centrally managed at the corporate level and are excluded from the measure of segment profitability 
reviewed by our executive management.  
   
24 
Fiscal 2014 vs. Fiscal 2013 
  CPW    
HDJ 
 
Contributions from volume growth 
  
Flat     
11 pts  
Net price realization and mix 
  
Flat     
(2) pts   
Foreign currency exchange 
  
(1) pt     
(17) pts   
Net sales growth 
  
(1) pt     
(8) pts   
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
  
2015 
 
 
2014 
 
 
2013 
 
In Millions 
    Dollars    
 
 
Percent of 
Total 
  
   
  Dollars     
 
 
Percent of 
Total 
   
    Dollars     
 
 
Percent of 
Total 
   
  
Net Sales 
  
  
 
  
 
  
U.S. Retail 
  $ 10,507.0     
60 %   $10,604.9     
59 %   $ 10,614.9     
60 %  
International 
    5,128.2     
29   
  5,385.9     
30  
  5,200.2     
29  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
   1,995.1     
11  
  1,918.8     
11  
  1,959.0     
11  
Total 
  $ 17,630.3     
100 %   $17,909.6     
100 %   $ 17,774.1     
100 %  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Segment Operating Profit 
  
  
 
  
 
  
U.S. Retail 
  $ 2,159.3     
71 %   $ 2,311.5     
73 %   $ 2,392.9     
74 %  
International 
   
522.6     
17  
  
535.1     
17  
  
515.4     
16  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
    
353.1     
12   
  
307.3     
10  
  
314.6     
10  
Total 
  $ 3,035.0     
100 %   $ 3,153.9     
100 %   $ 3,222.9     
100 %  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
U.S. RETAIL SEGMENT  
Beginning with the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we realigned certain operating units within our U.S. Retail operating segment. We also 
changed the name of our Yoplait operating unit to Yogurt and our Big G operating unit to Cereal. Frozen Foods transitioned into Meals and 
Baking Products. Small Planet Foods transitioned into Snacks, Cereal, and Meals. The Yogurt operating unit was unchanged. We revised the 
amounts previously reported in the net sales and net sales percentage change by operating unit within our U.S. Retail segment to conform to the 
new operating unit structure. These realignments had no effect on previously reported consolidated net sales, operating segments’ net sales, 
operating profit, segment operating profit, net earnings attributable to General Mills, or EPS. In addition, results from the acquired Annie’s 
business are included in the Meals and Snacks operating units.  
Our U.S. Retail segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, 
and drug, dollar and discount chains operating throughout the United States. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat 
cereals, refrigerated yogurt, soup, meal kits, shelf stable and frozen vegetables, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking 
mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, grain, fruit and savory snacks, and a wide variety of organic products including meal kits, granola bars, 
and cereal.  
In fiscal 2015, net sales for our U.S. Retail segment were $10,507 million, down 1 percent compared to fiscal 2014. In fiscal 2014, net sales for 
this segment totaled $10,605 million, flat compared to fiscal 2013. The components of U.S. Retail net sales growth are shown in the following 
table:  
   
The acquisition of Annie’s added 1 percentage point of net sales growth, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from volume in fiscal 2015. 
The 53 week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales growth, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from 
volume.  
Net sales for our U.S. retail operating units are shown in the following table:  
   
   
25 
   
  
Fiscal 2015      
vs. 2014         
Fiscal 2014
vs. 2013  
Contributions from volume growth (a) 
  
 
(1)pt    
 
Flat   
Net price realization and mix 
  
 
Flat    
 
Flat   
Net sales growth 
  
  
(1)pt    
 
Flat   
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments. 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
 
2015    
 
2014    
 
2013  
Meals 
  
$ 2,674.3   
$ 2,772.4    
$ 2,836.0  
Cereal 
  
 2,330.1    
 2,410.2    
 2,407.8  
Snacks 
  
 2,134.4    
 1,997.8    
 1,867.6  
Baking Products 
  
  1,969.8    
 2,096.1    
 2,133.9  
Yogurt and other 
  
 1,398.4    
 1,328.4    
 1,369.6  
Total 
  
$ 10,507.0    
$ 10,604.9    
$10,614.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
rd 

Table of Contents  
U.S. Retail net sales percentage change by operating unit are shown in the following table:  
   
Segment operating profit of $2,159 million in fiscal 2015 declined $152 million, or 7 percent, from fiscal 2014. The decrease was primarily 
driven by lower volume and an increase in supply chain costs, partially offset by a 6 percent reduction in advertising and media expense.  
Segment operating profit of $2,312 million in fiscal 2014 declined $81 million, or 3 percent, from fiscal 2013. The decrease reflected higher 
trade spending, partially offset by a 1 percent reduction in advertising and media expense.  
INTERNATIONAL SEGMENT  
Our International segment consists of retail and foodservice businesses outside of the United States. Our product categories include ready-to-
eat cereals, shelf stable and frozen vegetables, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza snacks, 
refrigerated yogurt, grain and fruit snacks, and super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts. We also sell super-premium ice cream and frozen 
desserts directly to consumers through owned retail shops. Our International segment also includes products manufactured in the United States 
for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. 
Revenues from export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end customer is located.  
Net sales for our International segment were down 5 percent in fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014, to $5,128 million. Net sales totaled $5,386 
million in fiscal 2014, up 4 percent from $5,200 million in fiscal 2013. The components of International net sales growth are shown in the 
following table:  
   
The 53 week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales growth, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from 
volume.  
   
26 
   
  
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014  
 
Fiscal 2014 
vs. 2013  
Meals 
  
 
(4 )%  
 
(2 )%  
Cereal 
  
  
(3 )  
 
 
Flat   
Baking Products 
  
 
(6 )  
 
 
(2 )  
Snacks 
  
 
7  
 
 
7  
Yogurt 
  
 
5  
 
 
(3 )  
Total 
  
 
(1 )%  
 
Flat   
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014    
Fiscal 2014
vs. 2013  
Contributions from volume growth (a) 
  
 
Flat     
 
5 pts  
Net price realization and mix 
  
 
6 pts    
 
3 pts  
Foreign currency exchange 
  
 
(11) pts     
 
(4) pts   
Net sales growth 
  
 
(5) pts     
 
4 pts  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments. 
rd 

Table of Contents  
Net sales for our International segment by geographic region are shown in the following table:  
   
International change in net sales by geographic region are shown in the following table:  
   
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2015 declined 2 percent to $523 million from $535 million in fiscal 2014, primarily driven by unfavorable 
foreign currency exchange and higher input costs, partially offset by favorable net price realization and mix. International segment operating 
profit increased 9 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below 
for our use of this measure).  
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2014 grew 4 percent to $535 million from $515 million in fiscal 2013, primarily driven by volume growth, 
favorable net price realization and mix, and an additional quarter of results from the Yoki acquisition, partially offset by unfavorable foreign 
currency and higher input costs. In addition, we recorded a $17 million non-recurring expense related to the assumption of the Canadian 
Yoplait franchise license in fiscal 2013. International segment operating profit increased 10 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2014 
compared to fiscal 2013 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure).  
CONVENIENCE STORES AND FOODSERVICE SEGMENT  
In our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment our major product categories are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen 
breakfasts, unbaked and fully baked frozen dough products, baking mixes, and flour. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and 
nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience 
stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries. Substantially all of this segment’s operations are located in the United States.  
   
27 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
 
2015    
 
2014   
 
2013  
Europe (a) 
  
$ 2,126.5    
$ 2,188.8   
$ 2,214.6  
Canada 
  
  1,105.1    
 1,195.3   
 1,210.5  
Asia/Pacific 
  
 1,023.5    
 981.8   
 899.1  
Latin America 
  
 873.1    
 1,020.0   
 876.0  
Total 
  
$ 5,128.2    
$ 5,385.9   
$ 5,200.2  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Fiscal 2013 net sales for the Europe region include an additional month of results. 
 
  
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales as Reported 
 
 
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales on Constant  
Currency Basis (a) 
 
  
  
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014
  
   
 
Fiscal 2014 
vs. 2013
   
  
 
 
 
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014
  
   
 
Fiscal 2014 
vs. 2013
   
  
Europe 
  
(3)%   
(1)%   
 
5 %   
(4)%  
Canada 
  
(8)  
 
(1)  
 
 
Flat   
 
5  
Asia/Pacific 
  
4  
 
9  
 
 
5  
 
9  
Latin America 
  
(14 )  
 
16  
 
 
17  
 
38  
Total 
  
(5)%   
4  %   
 
6 %   
8  %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(a) 
See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure. 

Table of Contents  
For fiscal 2015, net sales for our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment increased 4 percent to $1,995 million. For fiscal 2014, net sales 
decreased 2 percent to $1,919 million compared to $1,959 million in fiscal 2013. The components of Convenience Stores and Foodservice net 
sales growth are shown in the following table:  
   
The 53 week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 2 percentage points of net sales growth, reflecting 2 percentage points of growth from 
volume.  
In fiscal 2015, segment operating profit was $353 million, up 15 percent from $307 million in fiscal 2014. The increase was primarily driven 
by favorable net price realization and mix and higher volume.  
In fiscal 2014, segment operating profit was $307 million, down 2 percent from $315 million in fiscal 2013. The decrease was primarily driven 
by volume declines, unfavorable net price realization, and investments to protect and grow the business.  
UNALLOCATED CORPORATE ITEMS  
Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we changed how we assess segment operating performance to exclude the asset and liability 
remeasurement impact from hyperinflationary economies. This impact is now included in unallocated corporate items. All periods presented 
have been changed to conform to this presentation.  
Unallocated corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, 
contributions to the General Mills Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative 
project-related costs, and other items that are not part of our measurement of segment operating performance. This includes gains and losses 
from mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions until passed back to our operating segments in accordance with our policy as 
discussed in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
For fiscal 2015, unallocated corporate expense totaled $414 million compared to $258 million last year. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $90 
million net increase in expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, compared to a $49 
million net decrease in expense in fiscal 2014. In addition, we recorded $60 million of restructuring charges, and $13 million of restructuring 
initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2015. We recorded an $8 million foreign exchange loss related to the remeasurement of 
assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary compared to $62 million in fiscal 2014. We also recorded $16 million of integration costs 
resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s in fiscal 2015.  
For fiscal 2014, unallocated corporate expense totaled $258 million compared to $351 million in fiscal 2013. In fiscal 2014, we recorded a $49 
million net decrease in expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, compared to a $4 
million net decrease in expense in the prior year. Compensation and benefit expenses decreased $59 million and the contribution to the General 
Mills Foundation decreased in fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2013. We also recorded a $62 million foreign exchange loss related to the 
remeasurement of assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary in fiscal 2014 compared to $25 million in fiscal 2013. In fiscal 2013, we 
also recorded $12 million of integration costs related to the acquisition of Yoki.  
   
28 
   
  
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014    
Fiscal 2014
vs. 2013  
Contributions from volume growth (a) 
  
  
1pt    
 
(1)pt   
Net price realization and mix 
  
 
3pts    
 
(1)pt   
Foreign currency exchange 
  
 
NM    
 
NM   
Net sales growth 
  
  
4pts    
 
(2)pts   
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments. 
rd 

Table of Contents  
Venezuela is a highly inflationary economy, and we remeasure the value of the assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary based on the 
exchange rate at which we expect to remit dividends in U.S. dollars. In February 2014, the Venezuelan government established a new foreign 
exchange market mechanism (SICAD 2) and at that time indicated that it would be the market through which U.S. dollars would be obtained 
for the remittance of dividends. On February 12, 2015, the Venezuelan government replaced SICAD 2 with a new foreign exchange market 
mechanism (SIMADI). We expect to be able to access U.S. dollars through the SIMADI market. SIMADI has significantly higher foreign 
exchange rates than those available through the other foreign exchange mechanisms. In fiscal 2015, we recorded an $8 million foreign 
exchange loss in unallocated corporate items resulting from the remeasurement of assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary at the 
SIMADI rate of 199 bolivars per U.S. dollar. Our Venezuela operations represent less than 1 percent of our consolidated assets, liabilities, net 
sales, and segment operating profit. As of May 31, 2015, we had $0.3 million of non-U.S. dollar cash balances in Venezuela.  
IMPACT OF INFLATION  
Our gross margin performance in fiscal 2015 reflects the impact of 2 percent input cost inflation, primarily on commodities inputs. We expect 
input cost inflation of 2 percent in fiscal 2016. We attempt to minimize the effects of inflation through HMM, planning, and operating 
practices. Our risk management practices are discussed in Item 7A of this report.  
LIQUIDITY  
The primary source of our liquidity is cash flow from operations. Over the most recent three-year period, our operations have generated $8.0 
billion in cash. A substantial portion of this operating cash flow has been returned to stockholders through share repurchases and dividends. We 
also use cash from operations to fund our capital expenditures and acquisitions. We typically use a combination of cash, notes payable, and 
long-term debt to finance significant acquisitions and major capital expansions.  
As of May 31, 2015, we had $311 million of cash and cash equivalents held in foreign jurisdictions which will be used to fund foreign 
operations and acquisitions. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a one-time repatriation of $606 million of foreign 
earnings. This action reduced the economic cost of funding current restructuring initiatives and the acquisition of Annie’s completed in fiscal 
2015. We recorded a discrete income tax charge of $79 million in fiscal 2015 related to this action, and we expect to make approximately $24 
million in related cash income tax payments related to this action. We have previously asserted that our foreign earnings are permanently 
reinvested and will only be repatriated in a tax-neutral manner, and this one-time repatriation does not change this ongoing assertion.  
Cash Flows from Operations  
   
   
29 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
   
2015    
2014    
2013  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests 
  $1,259.4   $1,861.3   $1,892.5  
Depreciation and amortization 
   588.3     585.4    588.0  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures 
   
(84.3)    
(89.6)    
(98.8)  
Distributions of earnings from joint ventures 
   
72.6    
90.5    115.7  
Stock-based compensation 
   106.4    108.5    100.4  
Deferred income taxes 
   
25.3     172.5    
81.8  
Tax benefit on exercised options 
   
(74.6)    
(69.3)    (103.0 )  
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions 
   
(49.5)    
(49.7)    (223.2 )  
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan costs 
   
91.3    124.1    131.2  
Divestiture (gain) 
   
—    
(65.5 )    
—  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs 
   531.1    
(18.8)    
(60.2)  
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions 
   214.7    
(32.2)    471.1  
Other, net 
   (137.9 )    
(76.2)    
30.5  
Net cash provided by operating activities 
  $2,542.8   $2,541.0   $2,926.0  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
In fiscal 2015, our operations generated $2.5 billion of cash, flat compared to fiscal 2014. The $247 million change in current assets and 
liabilities was primarily driven by the timing of trade and promotion accruals, changes in tax accruals, and changes in derivative positions. This 
was largely offset by lower net earnings, which included a $260 million non-cash impairment charge and $271 million of non-cash 
restructuring charges, and a $147 million change in net deferred income taxes.  
We strive to grow core working capital at or below the rate of growth in our net sales. For fiscal 2015, core working capital decreased 13 
percent, primarily due to a decrease in accounts receivable and an increase in accounts payable, compared to a net sales decline of 2 percent. In 
fiscal 2014, core working capital decreased 9 percent, compared to net sales growth of 1 percent, and in fiscal 2013, core working capital 
decreased 5 percent, compared to net sales growth of 7 percent.  
In fiscal 2014, our operations generated $2.5 billion of cash compared to $2.9 billion in fiscal 2013. The $385 million decrease was primarily 
due to a $503 million change in current assets and liabilities. The change in current assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a $403 million 
change in other current liabilities largely due to changes in trade promotion and income tax accruals, and a $107 million change in inventory. In 
addition, in fiscal 2013 we made a $200 million voluntary contribution to our principal domestic pension plans.  
Cash Flows from Investing Activities  
   
In fiscal 2015, cash used by investing activities increased by $1.0 billion from fiscal 2014. We invested $712 million in land, buildings, and 
equipment in fiscal 2015, $49 million more than the same period last year. In the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we acquired Annie’s, a publicly 
traded food company headquartered in Berkeley, California, for an aggregate purchase price of $809 million, net of $12 million of cash 
acquired. We made $102 million of investments in affiliates, primarily CPW, in fiscal 2015. In addition, we received $28 million in payments 
from Sodiaal International (Sodiaal) in fiscal 2015 against the $132 million exchangeable note we purchased in fiscal 2012.  
In fiscal 2014, cash used by investing activities decreased by $954 million from fiscal 2013. We invested $664 million in land, buildings, and 
equipment in fiscal 2014, $50 million more than in fiscal 2013. We made $55 million of investments in affiliates, primarily CPW, in fiscal 
2014. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014, we sold certain grain elevators for $124 million in cash, including a working capital adjustment 
finalized in the first quarter of fiscal 2015. In addition we received $29 million in payments from Sodiaal in fiscal 2014 against the 
exchangeable note.  
We expect capital expenditures to be approximately $840 million in fiscal 2016. These expenditures will fund initiatives that are expected to 
fuel International growth, support innovative products, and continue HMM initiatives throughout the supply chain.  
   
30 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015   
2014   
2013  
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment 
  $ (712.4 )  
$(663.5 )  
$ (613.9 )  
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
    (822.3 )  
 
—   
 (898.0)  
Investments in affiliates, net 
  
 (102.4 )  
 (54.9 )  
 
(40.4)  
Proceeds from disposal of land, buildings, and equipment 
  
 
11.0   
 
6.6   
 
24.2  
Proceeds from divestiture 
  
 
—   
 121.6   
 
—  
Exchangeable note 
    
27.9   
 
29.3   
 
16.2  
Other, net 
  
 
(4.0 )  
 
(0.9 )  
 
(3.5 )  
Net cash used by investing activities 
  $ (1,602.2 )  
$(561.8 )  
$ (1,515.4)  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Cash Flows from Financing Activities  
   
Net cash used by financing activities decreased by $439 million in fiscal 2015. We had $204 million less net debt issuances in fiscal 2015 than 
the same period a year ago. For more information on our debt issuances and payments, please refer to Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial 
Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
During fiscal 2015, we received $164 million in proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options compared to $108 million in fiscal 
2014, an increase of $56 million. During fiscal 2013, we received $301 million in proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options.  
In May 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 100 million shares of our common stock. Purchases under the 
authorization can be made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative 
instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, and accelerated repurchase programs. The authorization has no specified termination date.  
During fiscal 2015, we repurchased 22 million shares of our common stock for $1,162 million. During fiscal 2014, we repurchased 36 million 
shares of our common stock for $1,745 million. During fiscal 2013, we repurchased 24 million shares of our common stock for $1,015 million. 
Dividends paid in fiscal 2015 totaled $1,018 million, or $1.67 per share, an 8 percent per share increase from fiscal 2014. Dividends paid in 
fiscal 2014 totaled $983 million, or $1.55 per share, a 17 percent per share increase from fiscal 2013 dividends of $1.32 per share. On 
March 10, 2015, our Board of Directors approved a 5 percent dividend increase, effective with the May 1, 2015 payment, to an annualized rate 
of $1.76 per share.  
Selected Cash Flows from Joint Ventures  
Selected cash flows from our joint ventures are set forth in the following table:  
   
   
31 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015   
2014   
2013  
Change in notes payable 
  $ (509.8 )   $ 
572.9   $ 
(44.5)  
Issuance of long-term debt 
    2,253.2    
 1,673.0   
 1,001.1  
Payment of long-term debt 
  
 (1,145.8)   
 (1,444.8)   
 (542.3 )  
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options 
  
 
163.7   
 
108.1   
 
300.8  
Tax benefit on exercised options 
  
 
74.6   
 
69.3   
 
103.0  
Purchases of common stock for treasury 
    (1,161.9)   
 (1,745.3)   
 (1,044.9)  
Dividends paid 
  
 (1,017.7)   
 (983.3 )   
 (867.6 )  
Addition of noncontrolling interest 
  
 
—    
 
17.6   
 
—   
Distributions to noncontrolling and redeemable interest holders 
  
 
(25.0)   
 
(77.4)   
 
(39.2)  
Other, net 
    
(16.1)   
 
(14.2)   
 
(6.6 )  
Net cash used by financing activities 
  $ (1,384.8)   $ (1,824.1)   $ (1,140.2)  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
Inflow (Outflow), in Millions 
  
2015   
2014   
2013  
Advances to joint ventures, net 
  $ (102.4 )   
$ (54.9)   
$ (36.7)  
Dividends received 
  
 
72.6   
 90.5   
 115.7  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
CAPITAL RESOURCES  
Total capital consisted of the following:  
   
The following table details the fee-paid committed and uncommitted credit lines we had available as of May 31, 2015:  
   
To ensure availability of funds, we maintain bank credit lines sufficient to cover our outstanding notes payable. Commercial paper is a 
continuing source of short-term financing. We have commercial paper programs available to us in the United States and Europe. We also have 
uncommitted and asset-backed credit lines that support our foreign operations. The credit facilities contain several covenants, including a 
requirement to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5 times.  
Certain of our long-term debt agreements, our credit facilities, and our noncontrolling interests contain restrictive covenants. As of May 31, 
2015, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.  
We have $1,000 million of long-term debt maturing in the next 12 months that is classified as current. We believe that cash flows from 
operations, together with available short- and long-term debt financing, will be adequate to meet our liquidity and capital needs for at least the 
next 12 months.  
As of May 31, 2015, our total debt, including the impact of derivative instruments designated as hedges, was 72 percent in fixed-rate and 28 
percent in floating-rate instruments, compared to 71 percent in fixed-rate and 29 percent in floating-rate instruments on May 25, 2014.  
Improvement in return on average total capital is one of our key performance measures (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our 
discussion of this measure, which is not defined by GAAP). Return on average total capital decreased 40 basis points from 11.6 percent in 
fiscal 2014 to 11.2 percent in fiscal 2015 as fiscal 2015 earnings declined. On a constant-currency basis, return on average total capital 
decreased 20 basis points. We also believe that our fixed charge coverage ratio and the ratio of operating cash flow to debt are important 
measures of our financial strength. Our fixed charge coverage ratio in fiscal 2015 was 5.54 compared to 8.04 in fiscal 2014. The measure 
decreased from fiscal 2014 as earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures decreased by $893 million including a 
$260 million non-cash pretax charge related to an indefinite-lived intangible  
   
32 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
2015 
   
May 25, 
2014 
 
Notes payable 
  
$
615.8    
$ 1,111.7  
Current portion of long-term debt 
  
 1,000.4    
 1,250.6  
Long-term debt 
  
 7,607.7    
 6,423.5  
Total debt 
  
 9,223.9    
 8,785.8  
Redeemable interest 
  
 
778.9    
 
984.1  
Noncontrolling interests 
  
 
396.0    
 
470.6  
Stockholders’ equity 
  
 4,996.7    
 6,534.8  
Total capital 
  
$15,395.5    
$16,775.3  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Billions 
  
Facility 
Amount    
Borrowed 
Amount  
Credit facility expiring: 
  
  
April 2017 
  
$ 
1.7   
$ 
—  
May 2019 
  
 
1.0   
 
—  
June 2019 
  
 
0.2   
 
0.1  
Total committed credit facilities 
  
 
2.9   
 
0.1  
Uncommitted credit facilities 
  
 
0.5   
 
0.1  
Total committed and uncommitted credit facilities 
  
$ 
3.4   
$ 
0.2  
  
  

Table of Contents  
asset impairment and a $344 million pretax increase in restructuring charges in fiscal 2015. Our operating cash flow to debt ratio decreased 1.3 
percentage points to 27.6 percent in fiscal 2015, driven by an increase in total debt.  
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS and a 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl. Sodiaal 
holds the remaining interests in each of these entities. We consolidate these entities into our consolidated financial statements. We record 
Sodiaal’s 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl as noncontrolling interests, and their 49 percent interest in 
Yoplait SAS as a redeemable interest on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These euro- and Canadian dollar-denominated interests are reported 
in U.S. dollars on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Sodiaal has the ability to put a limited portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value 
once per year through a maximum term expiring December 2020. As of May 31, 2015, the redemption value of the redeemable interest was 
$779 million which approximates its fair value.  
The third-party holder of the General Mills Cereals, LLC (GMC) Class A Interests receives quarterly preferred distributions from available net 
income based on the application of a floating preferred return rate, to the holder’s capital account balance established in the most recent mark-
to-market valuation (currently $252 million). For fiscal 2015, the floating preferred rate was equal to the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 110 
basis points. The preferred return rate is adjusted every three years through a negotiated agreement with the Class A Interest holder or through a 
remarketing auction. On June 1, 2015, subsequent to our year-end, the floating preferred return rate on GMC’s Class A Interests was reset to 
the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 125 basis points.  
We have an option to purchase the Class A Interests for consideration equal to the then current capital account value, plus any unpaid preferred 
return and the prescribed make-whole amount. If we purchase these interests, any change in the third-party holder’s capital account from its 
original value will be charged directly to retained earnings and will increase or decrease the net earnings used to calculate EPS in that period.  
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS  
As of May 31, 2015, we have issued guarantees and comfort letters of $434 million for the debt and other obligations of consolidated 
subsidiaries, and guarantees and comfort letters of $258 million for the debt and other obligations of non-consolidated affiliates, mainly CPW. 
In addition, off-balance sheet arrangements are generally limited to the future payments under non-cancelable operating leases, which totaled 
$400 million as of May 31, 2015.  
As of May 31, 2015, we had invested in five variable interest entities (VIEs). None of our VIEs are material to our results of operations, 
financial condition, or liquidity as of and for the year ended May 31, 2015.  
   
33 

Table of Contents  
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations, including payments due by period:  
   
   
34 
 
  
Payments Due by Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
Total 
   
2016 
   2017 -18    2019 -20    
2021 and 
Thereafter  
Long-term debt (a) 
  $ 8,615.4   $ 1,000.0    $ 1,707.5    $ 1,650.0     $4,257.9  
Accrued interest 
   
91.8    
91.8     
—     
—     
—  
Operating leases (b) 
   
400.5    108.4     
133.1     
77.4     
81.6  
Capital leases 
   
1.5    
0.6     
0.6     
0.3     
—  
Purchase obligations (c) 
   2,363.8    2,124.2     
141.8     
65.5     
32.3  
Total contractual obligations 
   11,473.0    3,325.0     1,983.0     1,793.2     4,371.8  
Other long-term obligations (d) 
   1,738.2    
—     
—     
—     
—  
Total long-term obligations 
  $ 13,211.2   $ 3,325.0    $ 1,983.0    $ 1,793.2     $4,371.8  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Amounts represent the expected cash payments of our long-term debt and do not include $1 million for capital leases or $8 million for net 
unamortized bond premiums and discounts and fair value adjustments. 
(b) 
Operating leases represents the minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable operating leases. 
(c) 
The majority of the purchase obligations represent commitments for raw material and packaging to be utilized in the normal course of 
business and for consumer marketing spending commitments that support our brands. For purposes of this table, arrangements are 
considered purchase obligations if a contract specifies all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased, a 
pricing structure, and approximate timing of the transaction. Most arrangements are cancelable without a significant penalty and with 
short notice (usually 30 days). Any amounts reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as accounts payable and accrued liabilities are 
excluded from the table above. 
(d) 
The fair value of our foreign exchange, equity, commodity, and grain derivative contracts with a payable position to the counterparty was 
$133 million as of May 31, 2015, based on fair market values as of that date. Future changes in market values will impact the amount of 
cash ultimately paid or received to settle those instruments in the future. Other long-term obligations mainly consist of liabilities for 
accrued compensation and benefits, including the underfunded status of certain of our defined benefit pension, other postretirement 
benefit, and postemployment benefit plans, and miscellaneous liabilities. We expect to pay $22 million of benefits from our unfunded 
postemployment benefit plans and $14 million of deferred compensation in fiscal 2016. We are unable to reliably estimate the amount of 
these payments beyond fiscal 2016. As of May 31, 2015, our total liability for uncertain tax positions and accrued interest and penalties 
was $196 million. 

Table of Contents  
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES  
For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. 
Our significant accounting estimates are those that have a meaningful impact on the reporting of our financial condition and results of 
operations. These estimates include our accounting for promotional expenditures, valuation of long-lived assets, intangible assets, redeemable 
interest, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans. 
Promotional Expenditures  
Our promotional activities are conducted through our customers and directly or indirectly with end consumers. These activities include: 
payments to customers to perform merchandising activities on our behalf, such as advertising or in-store displays; discounts to our list prices to 
lower retail shelf prices; payments to gain distribution of new products; coupons, contests, and other incentives; and media and advertising 
expenditures. The recognition of these costs requires estimation of customer participation and performance levels. These estimates are based on 
the forecasted customer sales, the timing and forecasted costs of promotional activities, and other factors. Differences between estimated 
expenses and actual costs are recognized as a change in management estimate in a subsequent period. Our accrued trade, coupon, and consumer 
marketing liabilities were $565 million as of May 31, 2015, and $578 million as of May 25, 2014. Because our total promotional expenditures 
(including amounts classified as a reduction of revenues) are significant, if our estimates are inaccurate we would have to make adjustments in 
subsequent periods that could have a material effect on our results of operations.  
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets  
We estimate the useful lives of long-lived assets and make estimates concerning undiscounted cash flows to review for impairment whenever 
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) may not be recoverable. Fair value is 
measured using discounted cash flows or independent appraisals, as appropriate.  
Intangible Assets  
Goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets are not subject to amortization and are tested for impairment annually and whenever 
events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Our estimates of fair value for goodwill impairment testing are 
determined based on a discounted cash flow model. We use inputs from our long-range planning process to determine growth rates for sales 
and profits. We also make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other factors.  
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, mainly brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a 
determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, 
other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or 
changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the 
expected lives of other related groups of assets. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, 
over their useful lives, generally ranging from 4 to 30 years. Our estimate of the fair value of our brand assets is based on a discounted cash 
flow model using inputs which include projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not 
own the brands, and a discount rate.  
   
35 

Table of Contents  
As of May 31, 2015, we had $13.1 billion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. While we currently believe that the fair value of 
each intangible exceeds its carrying value and that those intangibles so classified will contribute indefinitely to our cash flows, materially 
different assumptions regarding future performance of our businesses or a different weighted-average cost of capital (WACC) could result in 
significant impairment losses and amortization expense. We performed our fiscal 2015 assessment of our intangible assets as of November 24, 
2014. As of our annual assessment date, there was no impairment of any of our intangible assets as their related fair values were substantially in 
excess of the carrying values, except for the Mountain High , Uncle Toby’s, and Green Giant brands. The excess fair value above the carrying 
value of these brand assets were as follows:  
   
At the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in 
our U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within the segment. Therefore, future sales and profitability projections in our long-range plan for 
this business declined. As a result of this triggering event, we performed an interim impairment assessment of the Green Giant brand intangible 
asset as of May 31, 2015, and determined that the fair value of the brand asset no longer exceeded the carrying value of the asset. Significant 
assumptions used in that assessment included our updated long-range cash flow projections for the Green Giant business, an updated royalty 
rate, a WACC, and a tax rate. We recorded a $260 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015 related to this asset.  
Our Green Giant , Uncle Toby’s and Mountain High brands have experienced declining business performance, and we will continue to monitor 
these businesses.  
Redeemable Interest  
During the third quarter of fiscal 2015, we adjusted the redemption value of Sodiaal’s redeemable interest in Yoplait SAS based on a 
discounted cash flow model. The significant assumptions used to estimate the redemption value include projected revenue growth and 
profitability from our long-range plan, capital spending, depreciation and taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate. As of 
May 31, 2015, the redemption value of the redeemable interest was $779 million.  
Stock-based Compensation  
The valuation of stock options is a significant accounting estimate that requires us to use judgments and assumptions that are likely to have a 
material impact on our financial statements. Annually, we make predictive assumptions regarding future stock price volatility, employee 
exercise behavior, dividend yield, and the forfeiture rate. For more information on these assumptions, please refer to Note 11 to the 
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
   
36 
In Millions 
  
Carrying
 
Value 
   
Excess 
Fair  
Value 
Above 
Carrying 
 
Value 
 
Mountain High 
  
$ 
35.4    
 
3 % 
Uncle Toby’s 
  
$ 
57.7    
 
7 % 
Green Giant 
  
$ 
425.9    
 
13 % 
  
  

Table of Contents  
The estimated fair values of stock options granted and the assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were as follows:  
   
The risk-free interest rate for periods during the expected term of the options is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve in effect at 
the time of grant. An increase in the expected term by 1 year, leaving all other assumptions constant, would increase the grant date fair value by 
2 percent. If all other assumptions are held constant, a one percentage point increase in our fiscal 2015 volatility assumption would increase the 
grant date fair value of our fiscal 2015 option awards by 7 percent.  
To the extent that actual outcomes differ from our assumptions, we are not required to true up grant-date fair value-based expense to final 
intrinsic values. However, these differences can impact the classification of cash tax benefits realized upon exercise of stock options, as 
explained in the following two paragraphs. Furthermore, historical data has a significant bearing on our forward-looking assumptions. 
Significant variances between actual and predicted experience could lead to prospective revisions in our assumptions, which could then 
significantly impact the year-over-year comparability of stock-based compensation expense.  
Any corporate income tax benefit realized upon exercise or vesting of an award in excess of that previously recognized in earnings (referred to 
as a windfall tax benefit) is presented in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as a financing cash flow. The actual impact on future 
years’ financing cash flows will depend, in part, on the volume of employee stock option exercises during a particular year and the relationship 
between the exercise-date market value of the underlying stock and the original grant-date fair value previously determined for financial 
reporting purposes.  
Realized windfall tax benefits are credited to additional paid-in capital within the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Realized shortfall tax benefits 
(amounts which are less than that previously recognized in earnings) are first offset against the cumulative balance of windfall tax benefits, if 
any, and then charged directly to income tax expense, potentially resulting in volatility in our consolidated effective income tax rate. We 
calculated a cumulative amount of windfall tax benefits for the purpose of accounting for future shortfall tax benefits and currently have 
sufficient cumulative windfall tax benefits to absorb projected arising shortfalls, such that we do not currently expect future earnings to be 
affected by this provision. However, as employee stock option exercise behavior is not within our control, it is possible that materially different 
reported results could occur if different assumptions or conditions were to prevail.  
Income Taxes  
We apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. Accordingly, we recognize the 
amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. Future changes in judgment 
related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions will affect earnings in the quarter of such change. For more information on 
income taxes, please refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
   
37 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
   
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Estimated fair values of stock options granted 
  
 
$7.22       
 $6.03      
 $3.65    
Assumptions: 
  
  
  
Risk-free interest rate 
  
 
2.6 %    
 
2.6 %    
 
1.6 %  
Expected term 
  
 8.5 years      
 9.0 years    
 9.0 years  
Expected volatility 
  
 
17.5 %    
 17.4 %    
 17.3 %  
Dividend yield 
  
 
3.1 %    
 
3.1 %    
 
3.5 %  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Defined Benefit Pension, Other Postretirement Benefit, and Postemployment Benefit Plans  
We have defined benefit pension plans covering many employees in the United States, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. We also 
sponsor plans that provide health care benefits to many of our retirees in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. Under certain circumstances, 
we also provide accruable benefits to former or inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and members of our Board of 
Directors, including severance and certain other benefits payable upon death. Please refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
in Item 8 of this report for a description of our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans.  
We recognize benefits provided during retirement or following employment over the plan participants’ active working lives. Accordingly, we 
make various assumptions to predict and measure costs and obligations many years prior to the settlement of our obligations. Assumptions that 
require significant management judgment and have a material impact on the measurement of our net periodic benefit expense or income and 
accumulated benefit obligations include the long-term rates of return on plan assets, the interest rates used to discount the obligations for our 
benefit plans, and health care cost trend rates.  
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets  
Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by our asset allocation, our historical long-term investment performance, our estimate 
of future long-term returns by asset class (using input from our actuaries, investment services, and investment managers), and long-term 
inflation assumptions. We review this assumption annually for each plan, however, our annual investment performance for one particular year 
does not, by itself, significantly influence our evaluation.  
Our historical investment returns (compound annual growth rates) for our United States defined benefit pension and other postretirement 
benefit plan assets were 6.5 percent, 11.7 percent, 8.1 percent, 7.8 percent, and 9.6 percent for the 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 year periods ended 
May 31, 2015.  
On a weighted-average basis, the expected rate of return for all defined benefit plans was 8.53 percent for fiscal 2015, 8.53 percent for fiscal 
2014, and 8.53 percent for fiscal 2013.  
Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on assets by 100 basis points would increase our net pension and postretirement expense by $62 
million for fiscal 2016. A market-related valuation basis is used to reduce year-to-year expense volatility. The market-related valuation 
recognizes certain investment gains or losses over a five-year period from the year in which they occur. Investment gains or losses for this 
purpose are the difference between the expected return calculated using the market-related value of assets and the actual return based on the 
market-related value of assets. Our outside actuaries perform these calculations as part of our determination of annual expense or income.  
Discount Rates  
Our discount rate assumptions are determined annually as of the last day of our fiscal year for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement 
benefit, and postemployment benefit plan obligations. We work with our outside actuaries to determine the timing and amount of expected 
future cash outflows to plan participants and, using the Aa Above Median corporate bond yield, to develop a forward interest rate curve, 
including a margin to that index based on our credit risk. This forward interest rate curve is applied to our expected future cash outflows to 
determine our discount rate assumptions.  
   
38 

Table of Contents  
Our weighted-average discount rates were as follows:  
   
Lowering the discount rates by 100 basis points would increase our net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and 
postemployment benefit plan expense for fiscal 2016 by approximately $167 million. All obligation-related experience gains and losses are 
amortized using a straight-line method over the average remaining service period of active plan participants.  
Health Care Cost Trend Rates  
We review our health care cost trend rates annually. Our review is based on data we collect about our health care claims experience and 
information provided by our actuaries. This information includes recent plan experience, plan design, overall industry experience and 
projections, and assumptions used by other similar organizations. Our initial health care cost trend rate is adjusted as necessary to remain 
consistent with this review, recent experiences, and short-term expectations. Our initial health care cost trend rate assumption is 7.3 percent for 
retirees age 65 and over and 6.5 percent for retirees under age 65 at the end of fiscal 2015. Rates are graded down annually until the ultimate 
trend rate of 5.0 percent is reached in 2025 for all retirees. The trend rates are applicable for calculations only if the retirees’ benefits increase 
as a result of health care inflation. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view on the 
rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate health care cost premium. Assumed trend rates for health care costs have an important effect on 
the amounts reported for the other postretirement benefit plans.  
A one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:  
   
Any arising health care claims cost-related experience gain or loss is recognized in the calculation of expected future claims. Once recognized, 
experience gains and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over 15 years, resulting in at least the minimum amortization required 
being recorded.  
Financial Statement Impact  
In fiscal 2015, we recorded net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan expense of $153 million 
compared to $140 million of expense in fiscal 2014 and $159 million of expense in fiscal 2013. As of May 31, 2015, we had cumulative 
unrecognized actuarial net losses of $1.7 billion on our defined benefit pension plans and $81 million on our postretirement and 
postemployment benefit plans, mainly as the result of liability increases from lower interest rates, partially offset by recent increases in the 
values of plan assets. These unrecognized actuarial net losses will result in increases in our future pension and postretirement benefit expenses 
because they currently exceed the corridors defined by GAAP.  
   
39 
   
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans  
 
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans  
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
 
Obligations as of May 31, 2015, and fiscal 2016 expense   
 
4.38 %   
 
4.20%   
 
3.55 %  
Obligations as of May 25, 2014, and fiscal 2015 expense   
 
4.54 %   
 
4.51%   
 
3.82 %  
Fiscal 2014 expense 
  
 
4.54 %   
 
4.52%   
 
3.70 %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
One 
Percentage 
Point  
Increase    
One 
Percentage 
Point  
Decrease  
Effect on the aggregate of the service and interest cost components in fiscal 2016 
  
 
$  3.7   
 
$  (3.2)   
Effect on the other postretirement accumulated benefit obligation as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
77.1   
 
(68.9 )  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Assumed mortality rates of plan participants are a critical estimate in measuring the expected payments a participant will receive over their 
lifetime and the amount of expense we recognize. On October 27, 2014, the Society of Actuaries published RP-2014 Mortality Tables and 
Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2014, which both reflect improved longevity. We adopted the change to the mortality assumptions to 
remeasure our defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans obligations, which increased the total of these obligations by 
$437 million. In addition, these assumptions increased the fiscal 2016 expense associated with these plans by $72 million.  
Actual future net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan income or expense will depend on 
investment performance, changes in future discount rates, changes in health care cost trend rates, and other factors related to the populations 
participating in these plans.  
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS  
In May 2015, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued new accounting requirements for the presentation of certain 
investments using the net asset value, providing a practical expedient to exclude such investments from categorization within the fair value 
hierarchy and make a separate disclosure. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after 
December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2017. We do not expect this 
guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.  
In April 2015, the FASB issued new accounting requirements that permit reporting entities with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a 
month-end to apply a practical expedient to measure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the 
entity’s fiscal year-end and apply the practice consistently to all plans. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2017. We 
do not expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.  
In May 2014, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for the recognition of revenue from contracts with customers. The requirements of 
the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual 
periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2018. We do not expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or 
financial position.  
In June 2014, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for share-based payment awards issued based upon specific performance targets. 
The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within 
those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2017. We do not expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of 
operations or financial position.  
NON-GAAP MEASURES  
We have included in this report measures of financial performance that are not defined by GAAP. We believe that these measures provide 
useful information to investors, and include these measures in other communications to investors.  
For each of these non-GAAP financial measures, we are providing below a reconciliation of the differences between the non-GAAP measure 
and the most directly comparable GAAP measure, an explanation of why our management or the Board of Directors believes the non-GAAP 
measure provides useful information to investors and any additional purposes for which our management or Board of Directors uses the non-
GAAP measure. These non-GAAP measures should be viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, the comparable GAAP measure.  
   
40 

Table of Contents  
Constant-Currency Net Sales Growth Rates  
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our 
performance for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides 
transparency to underlying performance in our consolidated net sales by excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations 
have on the year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.  
Net sales growth rates on a constant-currency basis is calculated as follows:  
   
   
41 
 
  
Fiscal 
 
   
  2015    2014  
Percentage change in total net sales 
   (2)%     1%   
Impact of foreign currency exchange 
   (3)pts     (1)pts   
Percentage change in total net sales on a constant-currency basis 
   1%     2%   
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Diluted EPS Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability and Related Constant-Currency Growth Rate  
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our 
performance for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the 
profitability measure we use to evaluate earnings performance on a comparable year-over-year basis. The adjustments are either items resulting 
from infrequently occurring events or items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the year-over-year assessment of operating 
results.  
The reconciliation of our GAAP measure, diluted EPS, to diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability and the related constant-
currency growth rate follows:  
   
Total Segment Operating Profit and Related Constant-Currency Growth Rate  
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our 
performance for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the 
profitability measure we use to evaluate segment performance. A reconciliation of total segment operating profit to operating profit, the 
relevant GAAP measure, is included in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
   
42 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
Per Share Data 
  2015    2014   Change  
 
2013   2012    2011  
Diluted earnings per share, as reported 
  $ 1.97    $ 2.83   
 
(30 )%   $ 2.79   $ 2.35   $ 2.70  
Mark-to-market effects (a) 
   0.09     (0.05)   
 
 
—   
 0.10    (0.09)  
Divestiture gain, net (b) 
    —     (0.06)   
 
 
—   
 —    
—  
Tax items (c) 
   0.13     
—   
 
 (0.13 )  
 —    (0.13)  
Acquisition integration costs (d) 
   0.02     
—   
 
 0.01   
 0.01    
—  
Venezuela currency devaluation (e) 
   0.01     0.09   
 
 0.03   
 —    
—  
Restructuring costs (f) 
    0.35     0.01   
 
 0.02   
 0.10    
—  
Project-related costs (f) 
   0.01     
—   
 
 
—   
 —    
—  
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (g) 
   0.28     
—   
 
 
—   
 —    
—  
Diluted earnings per share, excluding certain items affecting comparability 
  $ 2.86    $ 2.82   
 
1 %   $ 2.72   $ 2.56   $ 2.48  
Foreign currency exchange impact 
  
  
   
  
  
 
(3 )pts   
  
  
  
   
  
 
Diluted earnings per share growth, excluding certain items affecting 
comparability, on a constant-currency basis 
  
  
 
 
4 %   
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. 
(b) 
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. 
(c) 
The fiscal 2015 tax item is related to the one-time repatriation of foreign earnings in fiscal 2015. The fiscal 2013 tax items consist of a 
reduction to income taxes related to the restructuring of our GMC subsidiary and an increase to income taxes related to the liquidation of 
a corporate investment. Additionally, fiscal 2013 includes changes in deferred taxes associated with the Medicare Part D subsidies related 
to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. The fiscal 
2011 tax item represents the effects of court decisions and audit settlements on uncertain tax matters. 
(d) 
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015, Yoki in fiscal 2013, and Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques 
SNC in fiscal 2012. 
(e) 
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. 
(f) 
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. 
(g) 
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. 

Table of Contents  
Total segment operating profit growth rate on a constant-currency basis is calculated as follows:  
   
Net Sales Growth Rates for Our International Segment on Constant-Currency Basis  
We believe this measure of our International segment and region net sales provides useful information to investors because it provides 
transparency to the underlying performance by excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year 
comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.  
   
Constant-Currency International Segment Operating Profit Growth Rate  
We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance of the 
International segment by excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given 
volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.  
   
43 
   
  
Fiscal 
 
   
  
2015   2014  
Percentage change in total segment operating profit as reported 
  
(4)%    (2) %  
Impact of foreign currency exchange 
  
(2)pts    (1) pt  
Percentage change in total segment operating profit on a constant-currency basis 
  
(2)%    (1) %  
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal 2015 
 
   
  
Percentage 
Change in Net 
 
Sales  
as Reported  
 
Impact of 
 
Foreign 
Currency 
 
Exchange  
 
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales on Constant-
 
Currency Basis 
 
Europe 
  
 
(3 )%   
 
(8) pts   
 
5 %  
Canada 
  
 
(8 )  
 
 
(8)   
 
 
Flat   
Asia/Pacific 
  
 
4  
 
 
(1)   
 
 
5  
Latin America 
  
  
(14 )  
 
  
(31)    
 
  
17   
Total International 
  
 
(5 )%   
 
(11) pts   
 
6 %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal 2014 
 
   
  
Percentage 
Change in Net 
 
Sales  
as Reported  
 
Impact of 
 
Foreign 
Currency 
 
Exchange  
 
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales on Constant-
 
Currency Basis 
 
Europe 
  
 
(1 )%   
 
3 pts  
 
(4 )%  
Canada 
  
 
(1 )  
 
 
(6)   
 
 
5  
Asia/Pacific 
  
 
9  
 
 
—   
 
 
9  
Latin America 
  
 
16  
 
 
(22)   
 
 
38  
Total International 
  
 
4  %   
 
(4) pts   
 
8  %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
International segment operating profit growth rate on a constant-currency basis is calculated as follows:  
   
   
44 
   
  
Fiscal 
 
   
  
2015  
 2014  
Percentage change in International segment operating profit as reported 
  
 (2) %   
 4  %  
Impact of foreign currency exchange 
  
 (11) pts   
 (6) pts  
Percentage change in International segment operating profit on a constant-currency basis 
  
 9 %   
 
 10  %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Return on Average Total Capital  
Change in return on average total capital is a measure used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of 
Director’s measurement of our performance for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to 
investors because it is important for assessing the utilization of capital and it eliminates certain items that affect year-to-year comparability.  
   
   
45 
   
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
 
2013 
 
 
2012 
 
 
2011 
   
2010 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to 
redeemable and noncontrolling interests 
  $ 1,259.4             $ 1,861.3    $ 1,892.5    $ 1,589.1    $ 1,803.5       
Interest, net, after-tax 
   
199.8              
190.9  
 
 
201.2  
 
 
238.9  
 
 
243.5       
Earnings before interest, after-tax 
   1,459.2              2,052.2  
 
 2,093.7  
 
 1,828.0  
 
 2,047.0       
Mark-to-market effects 
   
56.5              
(30.5)   
 
(2.8 )   
 
65.6  
 
 
(60.0)       
Divestiture gain, net 
   
—              
(36.0 )   
 
—  
 
 
—  
 
 
—       
Tax items 
   
78.6              
—  
 
 
(85.4 )   
 
—  
 
 
(88.9)       
Acquisition integration costs 
   
10.4              
—  
 
 
8.8  
 
 
9.7  
 
 
—       
Venezuela currency devaluation 
   
8.0              
57.8  
 
 
20.8  
 
 
—  
 
 
—       
Restructuring costs 
   
217.7              
3.6  
 
 
15.9  
 
 
64.3  
 
 
—       
Project-related costs 
   
8.3              
—  
 
 
—  
 
 
—  
 
 
—       
Indefinite-lived intangible impairment 
   
176.9              
—  
 
 
—  
 
 
—  
 
 
—       
Earnings before interest, after-tax for return on 
capital calculation 
  $ 2,015.6             $ 2,047.1    $ 2,051.0    $ 1,967.6    $ 1,898.1       
   
  
   
Current portion of long-term debt 
  $ 1,000.4             $ 1,250.6    $ 1,443.3    $ 
741.2    $ 1,031.3        $ 
107.3  
Notes payable 
   
615.8              1,111.7  
 
 
599.7  
 
 
526.5  
 
 
311.3        1,050.1  
Long-term debt 
   7,607.7              6,423.5  
 
 5,926.1  
 
 6,161.9  
 
 5,542.5        5,268.5  
Total debt 
   9,223.9              8,785.8  
 
 7,969.1  
 
 7,429.6  
 
 6,885.1        6,425.9  
Redeemable interest 
   
778.9              
984.1  
 
 
967.5  
 
 
847.8  
 
 
—        
—  
Noncontrolling interests 
   
396.0              
470.6  
 
 
456.3  
 
 
461.0  
 
 
246.7        
245.1  
Stockholders’ equity 
   4,996.7              6,534.8  
 
 6,672.2  
 
 6,421.7  
 
 6,365.5        5,402.9  
Total capital 
   15,395.5              16,775.3  
 
 16,065.1  
 
 15,160.1  
 
 13,497.3        12,073.9  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 
   2,310.7              1,340.3  
 
 1,585.3  
 
 1,743.7  
 
 1,010.8        1,486.9  
After-tax earnings adjustments (a) 
   
347.1              
(209.3)   
 
(204.2)   
 
(161.5)   
 
(301.1)        
(152.2)  
Adjusted total capital 
  $18,053.3             $17,906.3    $ 17,446.2    $ 16,742.3    $ 14,207.0        $ 13,408.6  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Adjusted average total capital 
  $17,979.8             $17,676.2    $ 17,094.2    $ 15,474.6    $ 13,807.8       
   
  
   
Return on average total capital 
   
11.2%          
11.6 %   
 
12.0 %   
 
12.7 %   
 
13.7%     
   
  
   
Change in return on average total capital 
   
(40)bps     
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency exchange impact 
   
(20)bps     
 
 
 
  
Change in return on average total capital on a 
constant-currency basis 
   
(20)bps     
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
(a) 
Sum of current year and previous year after-tax adjustments. 

Table of Contents  
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT RELEVANT TO FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF “SAFE 
HARBOR” PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995  
This report contains or incorporates by reference forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform 
Act of 1995 that are based on our current expectations and assumptions. We also may make written or oral forward-looking statements, 
including statements contained in our filings with the SEC and in our reports to stockholders.  
The words or phrases “will likely result,” “are expected to,” “will continue,” “is anticipated,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” or similar 
expressions identify “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements 
are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results and those currently 
anticipated or projected. We wish to caution you not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements.  
In connection with the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we are identifying important factors 
that could affect our financial performance and could cause our actual results in future periods to differ materially from any current opinions or 
statements.  
Our future results could be affected by a variety of factors, such as: competitive dynamics in the consumer foods industry and the markets for 
our products, including new product introductions, advertising activities, pricing actions, and promotional activities of our competitors; 
economic conditions, including changes in inflation rates, interest rates, tax rates, or the availability of capital; product development and 
innovation; consumer acceptance of new products and product improvements; consumer reaction to pricing actions and changes in promotion 
levels; acquisitions or dispositions of businesses or assets; changes in capital structure; changes in the legal and regulatory environment, 
including labeling and advertising regulations and litigation; impairments in the carrying value of goodwill, other intangible assets, or other 
long-lived assets, or changes in the useful lives of other intangible assets; changes in accounting standards and the impact of significant 
accounting estimates; product quality and safety issues, including recalls and product liability; changes in consumer demand for our products; 
effectiveness of advertising, marketing, and promotional programs; changes in consumer behavior, trends, and preferences, including weight 
loss trends; consumer perception of health-related issues, including obesity; consolidation in the retail environment; changes in purchasing and 
inventory levels of significant customers; fluctuations in the cost and availability of supply chain resources, including raw materials, packaging, 
and energy; disruptions or inefficiencies in the supply chain; effectiveness of restructuring and cost savings initiatives; volatility in the market 
value of derivatives used to manage price risk for certain commodities; benefit plan expenses due to changes in plan asset values and discount 
rates used to determine plan liabilities; failure or breach of our information technology systems; foreign economic conditions, including 
currency rate fluctuations; and political unrest in foreign markets and economic uncertainty due to terrorism or war.  
You should also consider the risk factors that we identify in Item 1A of this report, which could also affect our future results.  
We undertake no obligation to publicly revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of those 
statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.  
   
We are exposed to market risk stemming from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates and commodity and equity prices. Changes in 
these factors could cause fluctuations in our earnings and cash flows. In the normal course of business, we actively manage our exposure to 
these market risks by entering into various hedging transactions, authorized under established policies that place clear controls on these 
activities. The counterparties in these transactions are generally highly rated institutions. We establish credit limits for each counterparty. Our 
hedging transactions include but are not limited to a variety of derivative financial instruments. For information on interest rate, foreign 
exchange, commodity price, and equity instrument risk, please see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.  
   
46 
ITEM 7A Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 

Table of Contents  
VALUE AT RISK  
The estimates in the table below are intended to measure the maximum potential fair value we could lose in one day from adverse changes in 
market interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, and equity prices under normal market conditions. A Monte Carlo value-at-risk 
(VAR) methodology was used to quantify the market risk for our exposures. The models assumed normal market conditions and used a 95 
percent confidence level.  
The VAR calculation used historical interest and foreign exchange rates, and commodity and equity prices from the past year to estimate the 
potential volatility and correlation of these rates in the future. The market data were drawn from the RiskMetrics™ data set. The calculations 
are not intended to represent actual losses in fair value that we expect to incur. Further, since the hedging instrument (the derivative) inversely 
correlates with the underlying exposure, we would expect that any loss or gain in the fair value of our derivatives would be generally offset by 
an increase or decrease in the fair value of the underlying exposure. The positions included in the calculations were: debt; investments; interest 
rate swaps; foreign exchange forwards; commodity swaps, futures and options; and equity instruments. The calculations do not include the 
underlying foreign exchange and commodities or equity-related positions that are offset by these market-risk-sensitive instruments.  
The table below presents the estimated maximum potential VAR arising from a one-day loss in fair value for our interest rate, foreign currency, 
commodity, and equity market-risk-sensitive instruments outstanding as of May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014, and the average fair value impact 
during the year ended May 31, 2015.  
   
   
47 
 
  
Fair Value Impact 
 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
Average 
during  
fiscal 2015    
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Interest rate instruments 
  
$ 
25.1    
$ 
23.7    
$ 
32.7  
Foreign currency instruments 
  
  
17.9    
 
8.8    
 
7.2  
Commodity instruments 
  
 
3.7    
 
3.7    
 
3.0  
Equity instruments 
  
 
1.2    
 
1.2    
 
1.1  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
REPORT OF MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
The management of General Mills, Inc. is responsible for the fairness and accuracy of the consolidated financial statements. The statements 
have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the United States, using management’s best 
estimates and judgments where appropriate. The financial information throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K is consistent with our 
consolidated financial statements.  
Management has established a system of internal controls that provides reasonable assurance that assets are adequately safeguarded and 
transactions are recorded accurately in all material respects, in accordance with management’s authorization. We maintain a strong audit 
program that independently evaluates the adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls. Our internal controls provide for appropriate 
separation of duties and responsibilities, and there are documented policies regarding use of our assets and proper financial reporting. These 
formally stated and regularly communicated policies demand highly ethical conduct from all employees.  
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors meets regularly with management, internal auditors, and our independent registered public 
accounting firm to review internal control, auditing, and financial reporting matters. The independent registered public accounting firm, 
internal auditors, and employees have full and free access to the Audit Committee at any time.  
The Audit Committee reviewed and approved the Company’s annual financial statements. The Audit Committee recommended, and the Board 
of Directors approved, that the consolidated financial statements be included in the Annual Report. The Audit Committee also appointed 
KPMG LLP to serve as the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm for fiscal 2016.  
   
July 6, 2015  
   
48 
ITEM 8 
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
/s/ K. J. Powell 
 
 /s/ D. L. Mulligan 
K. J. Powell 
 
 D. L. Mulligan 
Chairman of the Board 
 
 Executive Vice President 
and Chief Executive Officer 
 
 and Chief Financial Officer 

Table of Contents  
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  
The Board of Directors and Stockholders  
General Mills, Inc.:  
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of General Mills, Inc. and subsidiaries as of May 31, 2015 and May 25, 2014, 
and the related consolidated statements of earnings, comprehensive income, total equity and redeemable interest, and cash flows for each of the 
fiscal years in the three-year period ended May 31, 2015. In connection with our audits of the consolidated financial statements, we have 
audited the accompanying financial statement schedule. We also have audited General Mills, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as 
of May 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013)  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). General Mills, Inc.’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial 
statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the 
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Item 9A, Management’s Report on Internal Control 
over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements and financial statement 
schedule and an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits.  
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material 
misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the 
consolidated financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial 
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial 
statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over 
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of 
internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the 
circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.  
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of 
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of 
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide 
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of 
management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any 
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or 
that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  
   
49 

Table of Contents  
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of General 
Mills, Inc. and subsidiaries as of May 31, 2015 and May 25, 2014, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscal 
years in the three-year period ended May 31, 2015, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also in our opinion, the 
accompanying financial statement schedule, when considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, 
presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. Also in our opinion, General Mills, Inc. maintained, in all material 
respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated 
Framework (2013)  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.  
/s/ KPMG LLP  
Minneapolis, Minnesota  
July 6, 2015  
   
50 

Table of Contents  
Consolidated Statements of Earnings  
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES  
(In Millions, Except per Share Data)  
   
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
51 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
  
2015 
   
2014 
  
2013 
 
Net sales 
  $17,630.3    $ 17,909.6   
$17,774.1  
Cost of sales 
  
 11,681.1    
 11,539.8   
 11,350.2  
Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
  
 3,328.0    
 3,474.3   
 3,552.3  
Divestiture (gain) 
  
 
—    
 
(65.5 )  
 
—  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs 
  
 
543.9    
 
3.6   
 
19.8  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Operating profit 
  
 2,077.3    
 2,957.4   
 2,851.8  
Interest, net 
  
 
315.4    
 
302.4   
 
316.9  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings 
from joint ventures 
  
 1,761.9    
 2,655.0   
 2,534.9  
Income taxes 
  
 
586.8    
 
883.3   
 
741.2  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures 
  
 
84.3    
 
89.6   
 
98.8  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and  
noncontrolling interests 
  
 1,259.4    
 1,861.3   
 1,892.5  
Net earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests 
  
 
38.1    
 
36.9   
 
37.3  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills 
  $ 1,221.3    $ 1,824.4   
$ 1,855.2  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Earnings per share - basic 
  $
2.02    $ 
2.90   
$
2.86  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Earnings per share - diluted 
  $
1.97    $ 
2.83   
$
2.79  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Dividends per share 
  $
1.67    $ 
1.55   
$
1.32  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income  
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES  
(In Millions)  
   
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
52 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests 
  $ 1,259.4   $ 1,861.3   $ 1,892.5  
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax: 
  
 
 
Foreign currency translation 
  
 (957.9 )   
 
(11.3 )   
 
0.8  
Net actuarial income (loss) 
  
 (358.4 )   
 206.0   
 
45.0  
Other fair value changes: 
  
 
 
Securities 
  
 
0.8   
 
0.3   
 
0.8  
Hedge derivatives 
  
 
4.1   
 
5.0   
 
24.6  
Reclassification to earnings: 
  
 
 
Hedge derivatives 
  
 
4.9   
 
(4.6 )   
 
12.2  
Amortization of losses and prior service costs 
  
 
105.1   
 107.6   
 
98.8  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax 
  
 (1,201.4 )   
 303.0   
 182.2  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total comprehensive income 
  
 
58.0   
 2,164.3   
 2,074.7  
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests 
  
 (192.9 )   
 
94.9   
 
61.1  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Comprehensive income attributable to General Mills 
  $
250.9    $ 2,069.4   $ 2,013.6  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
Consolidated Balance Sheets  
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES  
(In Millions, Except Par Value)  
   
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
53 
 
  
May 31, 
2015 
  
May 25, 
2014 
 
ASSETS 
  
 
Current assets: 
  
 
Cash and cash equivalents 
  $
334.2   $ 
867.3  
Receivables 
  
 1,386.7   
 1,483.6  
Inventories 
  
 1,540.9    
 1,559.4  
Deferred income taxes 
  
 
100.1   
 
74.1  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
  
 
423.8   
 
409.1  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total current assets 
  
 3,785.7    
 4,393.5  
Land, buildings, and equipment 
  
 3,783.3   
 3,941.9  
Goodwill 
  
 8,874.9   
 8,650.5  
Other intangible assets 
  
 4,677.0   
 5,014.3  
Other assets 
  
 
843.6   
 1,145.5  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total assets 
  $21,964.5   $ 23,145.7  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 
  
 
Current liabilities: 
  
 
Accounts payable 
  $ 1,684.0   $ 1,611.3  
Current portion of long-term debt 
  
 1,000.4    
 1,250.6  
Notes payable 
  
 
615.8   
 1,111.7  
Other current liabilities 
  
 1,589.9   
 1,449.9  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total current liabilities 
  
 4,890.1    
 5,423.5  
Long-term debt 
  
 7,607.7   
 6,423.5  
Deferred income taxes 
  
 1,550.3   
 1,666.0  
Other liabilities 
  
 1,744.8   
 1,643.2  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total liabilities 
  
 15,792.9   
 15,156.2  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Redeemable interest 
  
 
778.9   
 
984.1  
Stockholders’ equity: 
  
 
Common stock, 754.6 shares issued, $0.10 par value 
  
 
75.5   
 
75.5  
Additional paid-in capital 
  
 1,296.7   
 1,231.8  
Retained earnings 
  
 11,990.8   
 11,787.2  
Common stock in treasury, at cost, shares of 155.9 and 142.3 
  
 (6,055.6 )   
 (5,219.4)  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 
  
 (2,310.7 )   
 (1,340.3)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total stockholders’ equity 
  
 4,996.7   
 6,534.8  
Noncontrolling interests 
  
 
396.0   
 
470.6  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total equity 
  
 5,392.7   
 7,005.4  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total liabilities and equity 
  $21,964.5   $ 23,145.7  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
Consolidated Statements of Total Equity, and Redeemable Interest  
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES  
(In Millions, Except per Share Data)  
   
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
54 
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
$.10 Par Value Common Stock 
(One Billion Shares Authorized) 
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
Issued 
  
Treasury 
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
 Shares   
Par 
Amount   
Additional
 
Paid-In 
Capital   Shares   Amount   
Retained 
Earnings   
Accumulated 
Other  
Comprehensive 
 
Loss 
  
Non-
controlling 
 
Interests   
Total 
Equity   
Redeemable 
Interest 
 
Balance as of May 27, 2012 
  754.6    
75.5    
1,308.4    (106.1 )   (3,177.0 )   
9,958.5    
(1,743.7)    
461.0   
6,882.7   $ 
847.8  
Total comprehensive income 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,855.2    
158.4    
18.3   
2,031.9    
42.8  
Cash dividends declared ($1.70 per share) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(1,111.1)   
 
 
(1,111.1 )   
Shares purchased 
 
 
  
(30.0 )    (24.2 )   (1,014.9 )  
 
 
 
(1,044.9 )   
Stock compensation plans (includes income tax benefits 
of $103.0) 
 
 
  
(38.6 )    16.5    
504.7   
 
 
 
466.1   
Unearned compensation related to restricted stock unit 
awards 
 
 
  
(80.5 )   
 
 
 
 
 
(80.5 )   
Earned compensation 
 
 
  
100.4   
 
 
 
 
 
100.4   
Increase in redemption value of redeemable interest 
 
 
  
(93.1 )   
 
 
 
 
 
(93.1 )    
93.1  
Distributions to noncontrolling interest holders 
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
(23.0 )   
(23.0 )    
(16.2 )  
Balance as of May 26, 2013 
  754.6    
75.5    
1,166.6    (113.8 )   (3,687.2 )   10,702.6    
(1,585.3)    
456.3   
7,128.5    
967.5  
Total comprehensive income 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,824.4    
245.0    
24.9   
2,094.3    
70.0  
Cash dividends declared ($1.17 per share) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(739.8 )   
 
 
(739.8)   
Shares purchased 
 
 
  
30.0    (35.6 )   (1,775.3 )  
 
 
 
(1,745.3 )   
Stock compensation plans (includes income tax benefits 
of $69.3) 
 
 
  
13.8    
7.1    
243.1   
 
 
 
256.9   
Unearned compensation related to restricted stock unit 
awards 
 
 
  
(91.3 )   
 
 
 
 
 
(91.3 )   
Earned compensation 
 
 
  
108.5   
 
 
 
 
 
108.5   
Decrease in redemption value of redeemable interest 
 
 
  
4.2   
 
 
 
 
 
4.2    
(4.2)  
Addition of noncontrolling interest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
17.6   
17.6   
Distributions to noncontrolling interest holders 
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
(28.2 )   
(28.2 )    
(49.2 )  
Balance as of May 25, 2014 
  754.6    
75.5    
1,231.8    (142.3 )   (5,219.4 )   11,787.2    
(1,340.3)    
470.6   
7,005.4    
984.1  
Total comprehensive income (loss) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,221.3    
(970.4)    
(70.0 )   
180.9    
(122.9)  
Cash dividends declared ($1.67 per share) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(1,017.7)   
 
 
(1,017.7 )   
Shares purchased 
 
 
 
  (22.3 )   (1,161.9 )  
 
 
 
(1,161.9 )   
Stock compensation plans (includes income tax benefits 
of $74.6) 
 
 
  
(38.1 )    
8.7    
325.7   
 
 
 
287.6   
Unearned compensation related to restricted stock unit 
awards 
 
 
  
(80.8 )   
 
 
 
 
 
(80.8 )   
Earned compensation 
 
 
  
111.1   
 
 
 
 
 
111.1   
Decrease in redemption value of redeemable interest 
 
 
  
83.2   
 
 
 
 
 
83.2    
(83.2 )  
Addition of noncontrolling interest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20.7   
20.7   
Acquisition of interest in subsidiary 
 
 
  
(10.5 )   
 
 
 
  
0.6   
(9.9 )   
Distributions to redeemable and noncontrolling interest 
holders 
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
(25.9 )   
(25.9 )    
0.9  
Balance as of May 31, 2015 
  754.6    $  75.5    $  1,296.7    (155.9 )  $ (6,055.6 )   $  11,990.8   $ 
(2,310.7)    
$  396.0   $  5,392.7    
$  778.9  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES  
(In Millions)  
   
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Cash Flows - Operating Activities 
  
 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests 
  $ 1,259.4   $ 1,861.3   $ 1,892.5  
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities: 
  
 
 
Depreciation and amortization 
    
588.3   
 
585.4   
 
588.0  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures 
  
 
(84.3)   
 
(89.6)   
 
(98.8)  
Distributions of earnings from joint ventures 
  
 
72.6   
 
90.5   
 
115.7  
Stock-based compensation 
  
 
106.4   
 
108.5   
 
100.4  
Deferred income taxes 
    
25.3   
 
172.5   
 
81.8  
Tax benefit on exercised options 
  
 
(74.6)   
 
(69.3)   
 (103.0 )  
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions 
  
 
(49.5)   
 
(49.7)   
 (223.2 )  
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan costs 
  
 
91.3   
 
124.1   
 
131.2  
Divestiture (gain) 
    
—   
 
(65.5)   
 
—  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs 
  
 
531.1   
 
(18.8)   
 
(60.2)  
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions 
  
 
214.7   
 
(32.2)   
 
471.1  
Other, net 
  
 (137.9 )   
 
(76.2)   
 
30.5  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net cash provided by operating activities 
  
 2,542.8   
 2,541.0   
 2,926.0  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash Flows - Investing Activities 
  
 
 
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment 
  
 (712.4 )   
 (663.5 )   
 (613.9 )  
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
    (822.3 )   
 
—   
 (898.0)  
Investments in affiliates, net 
  
 (102.4 )   
 
(54.9)   
 
(40.4)  
Proceeds from disposal of land, buildings, and equipment 
  
 
11.0   
 
6.6   
 
24.2  
Proceeds from divestiture 
  
 
—   
 
121.6   
 
—  
Exchangeable note 
    
27.9   
 
29.3   
 
16.2  
Other, net 
  
 
(4.0 )   
 
(0.9 )   
 
(3.5 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net cash used by investing activities 
  
 (1,602.2)   
 (561.8 )   
 (1,515.4)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash Flows - Financing Activities 
  
 
 
Change in notes payable 
  
 (509.8 )   
 
572.9   
 
(44.5)  
Issuance of long-term debt 
  
 2,253.2   
 1,673.0   
 1,001.1  
Payment of long-term debt 
    (1,145.8)   
 (1,444.8)   
 (542.3 )  
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options 
  
 
163.7   
 
108.1   
 
300.8  
Tax benefit on exercised options 
  
 
74.6   
 
69.3   
 
103.0  
Purchases of common stock for treasury 
  
 (1,161.9)   
 (1,745.3)   
 (1,044.9)  
Dividends paid 
    (1,017.7)   
 (983.3 )   
 (867.6 )  
Addition of noncontrolling interest 
  
 
—   
 
17.6   
 
—  
Distributions to noncontrolling and redeemable interest holders 
  
 
(25.0)   
 
(77.4)   
 
(39.2)  
Other, net 
  
 
(16.1)   
 
(14.2)   
 
(6.6 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net cash used by financing activities 
  
 (1,384.8)   
 (1,824.1)   
 (1,140.2)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 
  
 
(88.9)   
 
(29.2)   
 
(0.2 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
    (533.1 )   
 
125.9   
 
270.2  
Cash and cash equivalents - beginning of year 
  
 
867.3   
 
741.4   
 
471.2  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash and cash equivalents - end of year 
  $ 
334.2   $ 
867.3   $ 
741.4  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash Flow from Changes in Current Assets and Liabilities, excluding the effects of 
acquisitions: 
  
 
 
Receivables 
  $ 
6.8   $ 
(41.0)   $ 
(44.6)  

See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
55 
Inventories 
  
 
(24.2)   
 
(88.3)   
 
18.7  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
  
 
(50.5)   
 
10.5   
 
(64.3)  
Accounts payable 
    
145.8   
 
191.5   
 
263.6  
Other current liabilities 
  
 
136.8   
 (104.9 )   
 
297.7  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Changes in current assets and liabilities 
  $ 
214.7   $ 
(32.2)   $ 
471.1  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements  
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES  
NOTE 1. BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND RECLASSIFICATIONS  
Basis of Presentation  
Our Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of General Mills, Inc. and all subsidiaries in which we have a controlling financial 
interest. Intercompany transactions and accounts, including any noncontrolling and redeemable interests’ share of those transactions, are 
eliminated in consolidation.  
Our fiscal year ends on the last Sunday in May. Fiscal year 2015 consisted of 53 weeks, while fiscal years 2014 and 2013 consisted of 52 
weeks.  
Change in Reporting Period  
As part of a long-term plan to conform the fiscal year ends of all our operations, in fiscal 2013 we changed the reporting period of Europe and 
Australia within our International segment from an April fiscal year end to a May fiscal year end to match our fiscal calendar. Accordingly, in 
the year of change, our results included 13 months of results from the affected operations compared to 12 months in following fiscal years. The 
impact of these changes was not material to our consolidated results of operations. Our Yoplait SAS, Yoplait Marques SNC, Yoki Alimentos 
S.A. (Yoki), and India businesses remain on an April fiscal year end.  
Certain reclassifications to our previously reported financial information have been made to conform to the current period presentation.  
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  
Cash and Cash Equivalents  
We consider all investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.  
Inventories  
All inventories in the United States other than grain are valued at the lower of cost, using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method, or market. Grain 
inventories and all related cash contracts and derivatives are valued at market with all net changes in value recorded in earnings currently.  
Inventories outside of the United States are generally valued at the lower of cost, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, or market.  
Shipping costs associated with the distribution of finished product to our customers are recorded as cost of sales, and are recognized when the 
related finished product is shipped to and accepted by the customer.  
Land, Buildings, Equipment, and Depreciation  
Land is recorded at historical cost. Buildings and equipment, including capitalized interest and internal engineering costs, are recorded at cost 
and depreciated over estimated useful lives, primarily using the straight-line method. Ordinary maintenance and repairs are charged to cost of 
sales. Buildings are usually depreciated over 40 to 50 years, and equipment, furniture, and software are usually depreciated over 3 to 10 years. 
Fully depreciated assets are retained in buildings and equipment until disposal. When an item is sold or retired, the accounts are relieved of its 
cost and related accumulated depreciation and the resulting gains and losses, if any, are recognized in earnings. As of May 31, 2015, assets held 
for sale were insignificant.  
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or 
asset group) may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows from the 
operation and disposition of the asset group are less than the carrying amount of the asset group. Asset groups have identifiable cash flows and 
are largely independent of other asset groups. Measurement of an impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the 
asset  
   
56 

Table of Contents  
group over its fair value. Fair value is measured using a discounted cash flow model or independent appraisals, as appropriate.  
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets  
Goodwill is not subject to amortization and is tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that 
impairment may have occurred. Impairment testing is performed for each of our reporting units. We compare the carrying value of a reporting 
unit, including goodwill, to the fair value of the unit. Carrying value is based on the assets and liabilities associated with the operations of that 
reporting unit, which often requires allocation of shared or corporate items among reporting units. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit 
exceeds its fair value, we revalue all assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, excluding goodwill, to determine if the fair value of the net 
assets is greater than the net assets including goodwill. If the fair value of the net assets is less than the carrying amount of net assets including 
goodwill, impairment has occurred. Our estimates of fair value are determined based on a discounted cash flow model. Growth rates for sales 
and profits are determined using inputs from our long-range planning process. We also make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth 
assumptions, market comparables, and other factors.  
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, mainly brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a 
determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, 
other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or 
changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the 
expected lives of other related groups of assets. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, 
over their useful lives, generally ranging from 4 to 30 years.  
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets, mainly intangible assets primarily associated with the Pillsbury , Totino’s , Progresso , Green Giant , 
Yoplait , Old El Paso , Yoki , Häagen-Dazs , and Annie’s brands, are also tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in 
circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Our estimate of the fair value of the brands is based on a discounted 
cash flow model using inputs which included projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we 
did not own the brands, and a discount rate.  
Our finite-lived intangible assets, primarily acquired franchise agreements and customer relationships, are reviewed for impairment whenever 
events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be 
recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows from the operation and disposition of the asset are less than the carrying amount of 
the asset. Assets generally have identifiable cash flows and are largely independent of other assets. Measurement of an impairment loss would 
be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its fair value. Fair value is measured using a discounted cash flow model or 
other similar valuation model, as appropriate.  
Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures  
Our investments in companies over which we have the ability to exercise significant influence are stated at cost plus our share of undistributed 
earnings or losses. We receive royalty income from certain joint ventures, incur various expenses (primarily research and development), and 
record the tax impact of certain joint venture operations that are structured as partnerships. In addition, we make advances to our joint ventures 
in the form of loans or capital investments. We also sell certain raw materials, semi-finished goods, and finished goods to the joint ventures, 
generally at market prices.  
In addition, we assess our investments in our joint ventures if we have reason to believe an impairment may have occurred including, but not 
limited to, ongoing operating losses, projected decreases in earnings, increases in the weighted average cost of capital or significant business 
disruptions. The significant assumptions used to estimate fair value include revenue growth and profitability, royalty rates, capital spending, 
depreciation and taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate. By their nature, these projections and assumptions are uncertain. If 
we were to determine the current fair value of our investment was less than the carrying value of the investment, then we would assess if the 
shortfall was of a temporary or permanent nature and write down the investment to its fair value if we concluded the impairment is other than 
temporary.  
   
57 

Table of Contents  
Redeemable Interest  
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS, a consolidated entity. Sodiaal International (Sodiaal) holds the remaining 49 percent 
interest in Yoplait SAS. Sodiaal has the ability to put a limited portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value through a maximum term 
expiring December 2020. This put option requires us to classify Sodiaal’s interest as a redeemable interest outside of equity on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets for as long as the put is exercisable by Sodiaal. When the put is no longer exercisable, the redeemable interest will 
be reclassified to noncontrolling interests on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We adjust the value of the redeemable interest through 
additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets quarterly to the redeemable interest’s redemption value, which approximates its 
fair value. During the third quarter of fiscal 2015, we adjusted the redeemable interest’s redemption value based on a discounted cash flow 
model. The significant assumptions used to estimate the redemption value include projected revenue growth and profitability from our long-
range plan, capital spending, depreciation, taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate.  
Revenue Recognition  
We recognize sales revenue when the shipment is accepted by our customer. Sales include shipping and handling charges billed to the customer 
and are reported net of consumer coupon redemption, trade promotion and other costs, including estimated allowances for returns, unsalable 
product, and prompt pay discounts. Sales, use, value-added, and other excise taxes are not recognized in revenue. Coupons are recorded when 
distributed, based on estimated redemption rates. Trade promotions are recorded based on estimated participation and performance levels for 
offered programs at the time of sale. We generally do not allow a right of return. However, on a limited case-by-case basis with prior approval, 
we may allow customers to return product. In limited circumstances, product returned in saleable condition is resold to other customers or 
outlets. Receivables from customers generally do not bear interest. Terms and collection patterns vary around the world and by channel. The 
allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of probable non-payments and credit losses in our existing receivables, as determined 
based on a review of past due balances and other specific account data. Account balances are written off against the allowance when we deem 
the amount is uncollectible.  
Environmental  
Environmental costs relating to existing conditions caused by past operations that do not contribute to current or future revenues are expensed. 
Liabilities for anticipated remediation costs are recorded on an undiscounted basis when they are probable and reasonably estimable, generally 
no later than the completion of feasibility studies or our commitment to a plan of action.  
Advertising Production Costs  
We expense the production costs of advertising the first time that the advertising takes place.  
Research and Development  
All expenditures for research and development (R&D) are charged against earnings in the year incurred. R&D includes expenditures for new 
product and manufacturing process innovation, and the annual expenditures are comprised primarily of internal salaries, wages, consulting, and 
other supplies attributable to time spent on R&D activities. Other costs include depreciation and maintenance of research facilities, including 
assets at facilities that are engaged in pilot plant activities.  
Foreign Currency Translation  
For all significant foreign operations, the functional currency is the local currency. Assets and liabilities of these operations are translated at the 
period-end exchange rates. Income statement accounts are translated using the average exchange rates prevailing during the period. Translation 
adjustments are reflected within accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCI) in stockholders’ equity. Gains and losses from foreign currency 
transactions are included in net earnings for the period, except for gains and losses on investments in subsidiaries for which settlement is not 
planned for the foreseeable future and foreign exchange gains and losses on instruments designated as net investment hedges. These gains and 
losses are recorded in AOCI.  
   
58 

Table of Contents  
Derivative Instruments  
All derivatives are recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value based on quoted market prices or our estimate of their fair 
value, and are recorded in either current or noncurrent assets or liabilities based on their maturity. Changes in the fair values of derivatives are 
recorded in net earnings or other comprehensive income, based on whether the instrument is designated and effective as a hedge transaction 
and, if so, the type of hedge transaction. Gains or losses on derivative instruments reported in AOCI are reclassified to earnings in the period 
the hedged item affects earnings. If the underlying hedged transaction ceases to exist, any associated amounts reported in AOCI are reclassified 
to earnings at that time. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings in the current period.  
Stock-based Compensation  
We generally measure compensation expense for grants of restricted stock units using the value of a share of our stock on the date of grant. We 
estimate the value of stock option grants using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Stock compensation is recognized straight line over the 
vesting period. Our stock compensation expense is recorded in selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses and cost of sales in the 
Consolidated Statements of Earnings and allocated to each reportable segment in our segment results.  
Certain equity-based compensation plans contain provisions that accelerate vesting of awards upon retirement, termination, or death of eligible 
employees and directors. We consider a stock-based award to be vested when the employee’s retention of the award is no longer contingent on 
providing subsequent service. Accordingly, the related compensation cost is recognized immediately for awards granted to retirement-eligible 
individuals or over the period from the grant date to the date retirement eligibility is achieved, if less than the stated vesting period.  
We report the benefits of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation cost as a financing cash flow, thereby reducing net operating 
cash flows and increasing net financing cash flows.  
Defined Benefit Pension, Other Postretirement Benefit, and Postemployment Benefit Plans  
We sponsor several domestic and foreign defined benefit plans to provide pension, health care, and other welfare benefits to retired employees. 
Under certain circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits to former or inactive employees in the United States and Canada and members 
of our Board of Directors, including severance and certain other benefits payable upon death. We recognize an obligation for any of these 
benefits that vest or accumulate with service. Postemployment benefits that do not vest or accumulate with service (such as severance based 
solely on annual pay rather than years of service) are charged to expense when incurred. Our postemployment benefit plans are unfunded.  
We recognize the underfunded or overfunded status of a defined benefit pension plan as an asset or liability and recognize changes in the 
funded status in the year in which the changes occur through AOCI.  
Use of Estimates  
Preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us 
to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the 
date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates include our 
accounting for promotional expenditures, valuation of long-lived assets, intangible assets, redeemable interest, stock-based compensation, 
income taxes, and defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit and postemployment benefit plans. Actual results could differ from our 
estimates.  
NOTE 3. ACQUISITION AND DIVESTITURE  
On October 21, 2014, we acquired Annie’s, Inc. (Annie’s), a publicly traded food company headquartered in Berkeley, California, for an 
aggregate purchase price of $821.2 million, which we funded by issuing debt. We consolidated Annie’s into our Consolidated Balance Sheets 
and recorded goodwill of $589.8 million, an indefinite lived intangible asset for the Annie’s brand of $244.5 million, and a finite lived customer 
relationship asset of $23.9 million. The pro forma effects of this acquisition were not material.  
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014, we sold certain grain elevators in our U.S. Retail segment for $124.0 million in cash and recorded a 
pre-tax gain of $65.5 million.  
   
59 

Table of Contents  
NOTE 4. RESTRUCTURING, IMPAIRMENT, AND OTHER EXIT COSTS  
INTANGIBLE ASSET IMPAIRMENT  
In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $260 million charge related to the impairment of our Green Giant brand intangible asset in restructuring, 
impairment, and other exit costs. See Note 6 for additional information.  
RESTRUCTURING INITIATIVES  
We view our restructuring activities as actions that help us meet our long-term growth targets. Activities we undertake must meet internal rate 
of return and net present value targets. Each restructuring action normally takes one to two years to complete. At completion (or as each major 
stage is completed in the case of multi-year programs), the project begins to deliver cash savings and/or reduced depreciation. These activities 
result in various restructuring costs, including asset write-offs, exit charges including severance, contract termination fees, and 
decommissioning and other costs. Accelerated depreciation associated with restructured assets, as used in the context of our disclosures 
regarding restructuring activity, refers to the increase in depreciation expense caused by shortening the useful life or updating the salvage value 
of depreciable fixed assets to coincide with the end of production under an approved restructuring plan. Any impairment of the asset is 
recognized immediately in the period the plan is approved.  
We are currently pursuing several multi-year restructuring initiatives designed to increase our efficiency and focus our business behind our key 
growth strategies. Charges recorded in fiscal 2015 related to these initiatives were as follows:  
   
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved Project Catalyst, a restructuring plan to increase organizational effectiveness and reduce 
overhead expense. In connection with this project, we expect to eliminate approximately 800 positions primarily in the United States. We 
expect to incur approximately $148 million of net expenses relating to these actions of which approximately $118 million will be cash. These 
actions were largely completed in fiscal 2015.  
Project Century (Century) is a review of our North American manufacturing and distribution network to streamline operations and identify 
potential capacity reductions. In addition to the actions taken at certain facilities described below, we incurred $17.2 million of restructuring 
charges in fiscal 2015 related to Century of which $6.0 million was cash.  
As part of Century, we approved actions in the third quarter of fiscal 2015 to reduce our refrigerated dough capacity and exit our Midland, 
Ontario, Canada and New Albany, Indiana facilities, which support our U.S. Retail, International, and Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
supply chains. The Midland action will affect approximately 100 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $21 million of net expenses 
relating to this action, of which approximately $12 million will be cash. We recorded $6.5 million of restructuring charges relating to this 
action in fiscal 2015. The New Albany action will affect approximately 400 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $84 million of net 
expenses relating to this action of which approximately $44 million will be cash. We recorded  
   
60 
Expense, in Millions 
  
Severance    
Asset 
Write-
 
offs    
Pension
 
Related    
Accelerated 
Depreciation    
Other    
Total  
Project Catalyst 
  
$ 
121.5    
$ 12.3    
$ 
6.6    
$ 
—    
$ 8.0   
$ 148.4  
Project Century 
  
 
44.3    
 42.3    
 
31.2    
 
53.1    
 10.9   
 181.8  
Combination of certain operational facilities 
  
 
13.0    
 
0.7    
 
—    
 
—    
 0.2   
 13.9  
Charges associated with restructuring actions 
previously announced 
  
 
(0.6 )    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—   
 (0.6)  
Total 
  
$ 
178.2    
$ 55.3    
$ 
37.8    
$ 
53.1    
$ 19.1   
$ 343.5  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
$51.3 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2015. We anticipate these actions will be completed by the end of fiscal 
2018.  
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to consolidate yogurt manufacturing capacity and exit our Methuen, 
Massachusetts facility in our U.S. Retail and Convenience Stores and Foodservice supply chains as part of Century. This action will affect 
approximately 250 positions. We recorded $43.6 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2015. We expect to incur approximately $69 million 
of net expenses relating to this action of which approximately $18 million will be cash. We expect this action to be completed by the end of 
fiscal 2016.  
Also as part of Century, during the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to eliminate excess cereal and dry mix 
capacity and exit our Lodi, California facility in our U.S. Retail supply chain. This action will affect approximately 430 positions. We recorded 
$63.2 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2015. We expect to incur approximately $102 million of net expenses relating to this action of 
which approximately $41 million will be cash. We expect this action to be completed by the end of fiscal 2016.  
During the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a plan to combine certain Yoplait and General Mills operational facilities within our 
International segment to increase efficiencies and reduce costs. This action will affect approximately 240 positions. We recorded $13.9 million 
of restructuring charges in fiscal 2015. We expect to incur approximately $15 million of net expenses relating to this action and to make 
approximately $14 million in cash payments. We expect this action to be completed by the end of fiscal 2016.  
In fiscal 2015, we paid $63.6 million in cash related to restructuring initiatives.  
In addition to restructuring charges, we expect to incur approximately $65 million of additional project-related costs, which will be recorded in 
cost of sales, all of which will be cash. We recorded $13.2 million in cost of sales for project-related costs in fiscal 2015.  
Subsequent to our fiscal 2015 year end, in the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved Project Compass, a restructuring plan designed to enable 
our International segment to accelerate long-term growth through increased organizational effectiveness and reduced administrative expense. In 
connection with this initiative, we expect to eliminate approximately 675 to 725 positions. We expect to record total restructuring charges of 
approximately $57 to $62 million, primarily reflecting one-time employee termination benefits, of which approximately $54 to $57 million will 
be recorded in the first quarter of fiscal 2016. We expect approximately $54 to $59 million of the total expense will result in future cash 
expenditures. These restructuring actions are expected to be completed by the end of fiscal 2017.  
Restructuring charges and project-related costs are classified in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings as follows:  
   
   
61 
 
  
Fiscal 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Cost of sales 
  
$ 59.6   
$ —    
$ —  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs 
  
 283.9   
 3.6    
 19.8  
Total restructuring charges 
  
 343.5   
 3.6    
 19.8  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Project-related costs classified in cost of sales 
  
$ 13.2   
$ —    
$ —  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
In fiscal 2014, we recorded restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs pursuant to approved plans as follows:  
   
In fiscal 2014, the restructuring charge related to a productivity and cost savings plan approved in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. These 
restructuring actions were completed in fiscal 2014. In fiscal 2014, we paid $22.4 million in cash related to restructuring actions.  
In fiscal 2013, we recorded restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs pursuant to approved plans as follows:  
   
In fiscal 2013, the restructuring charge was primarily related to a productivity and cost savings plan approved in the fourth quarter of fiscal 
2012, consisting of $10.6 million of employee severance expense and other exit costs of $8.0 million. In fiscal 2013, we paid $79.9 million in 
cash related to restructuring actions.  
The roll forward of our restructuring and other exit cost reserves, included in other current liabilities, is as follows:  
   
The charges recognized in the roll forward of our reserves for restructuring and other exit costs do not include items charged directly to 
expense (e.g., asset impairment charges, the gain or loss on the sale of restructured assets, and the write-off of spare parts) and other periodic 
exit costs recognized as incurred, as those items are not reflected in our restructuring and other exit cost reserves on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets.  
NOTE 5. INVESTMENTS IN UNCONSOLIDATED JOINT VENTURES  
We have a 50 percent equity interest in Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW), which manufactures and markets ready-to-eat cereal products in 
more than 130 countries outside the United States and Canada. CPW also markets cereal bars in several European countries and manufactures 
private label cereals for customers in the United Kingdom. We have guaranteed a portion of CPW’s debt and its pension obligation in the 
United Kingdom.  
   
62 
Expense, in Millions 
  
   
 
Charges associated with restructuring actions previously announced 
  
$ 3.6  
Total 
  
$ 3.6  
  
   
  
  
  
Expense, in Millions 
  
   
 
Charges associated with restructuring actions previously announced 
  
$19.8  
Total 
  
$19.8  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
Severance   
Contract 
Termination    
Other 
Exit 
Costs   
Total  
Reserve balance as of May 27, 2012 
  
 
$83.1   
 
$2.7    
 $0.1   
 $85.9  
2013 charges, including foreign  
currency translation 
  
 
10.6   
 
—      
 —     
 10.6  
Utilized in 2013 
  
 
(74.2)   
 
(2.7 )   
 (0.1 )   
 (77.0 )  
Reserve balance as of May 26, 2013 
  
 
19.5   
 
—      
 —     
 19.5  
2014 charges, including foreign  
currency translation 
  
 
6.4   
 
—      
 —     
 
6.4  
Utilized in 2014 
  
 
(22.4)   
 
—      
 —     
 (22.4)  
Reserve balance as of May 25, 2014 
  
 
3.5   
 
—      
 —     
 
3.5  
2015 charges, including foreign  
currency translation 
  
 
176.4   
 
0.6    
 
8.1   
 185.1  
Utilized in 2015 
  
 
(61.3)   
 
—      
 (6.5 )   
 (67.8 )  
Reserve balance as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
$118.6    
  
$0.6     
 $1.6    
 $120.8   
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
We also have a 50 percent equity interest in Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ). This joint venture manufactures and markets Häagen-Dazs ice 
cream products and frozen novelties.  
Results from our CPW and HDJ joint ventures are reported for the 12 months ended March 31.  
Joint venture related balance sheet activity follows:  
   
Joint venture earnings and cash flow activity follows:  
   
Summary combined financial information for the joint ventures on a 100 percent basis follows:  
   
   
   
63 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Cumulative investments 
  
$ 530.6   
$ 507.5  
Goodwill and other intangibles 
  
 465.1   
 563.2  
Aggregate advances included in cumulative investments 
  
  390.3   
 332.0  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Sales to joint ventures 
  
 $11.6    
$ 12.1    
$ 12.3  
Net advances 
  
 102.4    
 54.9    
 36.7  
Dividends received 
  
 72.6    
 90.5    
 115.7  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Net sales: 
  
  
  
CPW 
  
$ 1,894.5    
$ 2,107.9   
$ 2,132.2  
HDJ 
  
 370.2    
 386.9   
 420.5  
Total net sales 
  
  2,264.7    
 2,494.8   
 2,552.7  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Gross margin 
  
 925.4    
 1,030.3   
 1,057.3  
Earnings before income taxes 
  
 220.9    
 219.1   
 260.3  
Earnings after income taxes 
  
  170.7    
 168.8   
 201.6  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Current assets 
  
$ 800.1    
$ 1,031.1  
Noncurrent assets 
  
 962.1    
 1,129.8  
Current liabilities 
  
 1,484.8    
 1,779.0  
Noncurrent liabilities 
  
 118.2    
 110.3  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
NOTE 6. GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS  
The components of goodwill and other intangible assets are as follows:  
   
Based on the carrying value of finite-lived intangible assets as of May 31, 2015, amortization expense for each of the next five fiscal years is 
estimated to be approximately $28 million.  
The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for fiscal 2013, 2014, and 2015 are as follows:  
   
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we reorganized certain reporting units within our U.S. Retail operating segment. Our chief operating 
decision maker continues to assess performance and make decisions about resources to be allocated to our segments at the U.S. Retail, 
International, and Convenience Stores and Foodservice operating segment level.  
We performed our fiscal 2015 impairment assessment as of the first day of the third quarter of fiscal 2015, and determined there was no 
impairment of goodwill for any of our reporting units as their related fair values were substantially in excess of their carrying values.  
   
64 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
2015 
   
May 25, 
2014 
 
Goodwill 
  
$ 8,874.9    
$ 8,650.5  
Other intangible assets: 
  
  
Intangible assets not subject to amortization: 
  
  
Brands and other indefinite-lived intangibles 
  
 4,262.1    
 4,504.1  
Intangible assets subject to amortization: 
  
  
Franchise agreements, customer relationships, and other finite-lived intangibles 
  
 
544.0    
 
630.7  
Less accumulated amortization 
  
 
(129.1)    
 
(120.5)  
Intangible assets subject to amortization 
  
 
414.9    
 
510.2  
Other intangible assets 
  
 4,677.0    
 5,014.3  
Total 
  
$ 13,551.9    
$ 13,664.8  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
U.S. 
Retail   
International   
Convenience
 
Stores and 
Foodservice    
Joint 
Ventures   
Total  
Balance as of May 27, 2012 
  
$ 5,813.2   
$ 
989.9   
$ 
921.1    
$ 
458.3   
$8,182.5  
Acquisitions 
  
 
28.2   
 
378.8   
 
—    
 
—   
 407.0  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation 
  
 
—   
 
18.3   
 
—    
 
14.4   
 
32.7  
Balance as of May 26, 2013 
  
 5,841.4   
 
1,387.0   
 
921.1    
 
472.7   
 8,622.2  
Divestiture 
  
 
(12.2 )   
 
—   
 
—    
 
—   
 
(12.2)  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation 
  
 
—   
 
15.0   
 
—    
 
25.5   
 
40.5  
Balance as of May 25, 2014 
  
 5,829.2   
 
1,402.0   
 
921.1    
 
498.2   
 8,650.5  
Acquisition 
  
 589.8   
 
—   
 
—    
 
—   
 589.8  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation 
  
 
—   
 
(268.7)   
 
—    
 
(96.7)   
 (365.4 )  
Balance as of May 31, 2015 
  
$ 6,419.0   
$ 
1,133.3   
$ 
921.1    
$ 
401.5   
$8,874.9  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
The changes in the carrying amount of other intangible assets for fiscal 2013, 2014, and 2015 are as follows:  
   
We performed our fiscal 2015 impairment assessment as of the first day of the third quarter of fiscal 2015. As of our assessment date, there was 
no impairment of any of our indefinite-lived intangible assets as their related fair values were substantially in excess of the carrying values, 
except for the  Mountain High, Uncle Toby’s, and Green Giant  brands. As of the annual assessment date, excess fair value above the carrying 
value of these brand assets was as follows:  
   
At the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in 
our U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within the segment. Therefore, future sales and profitability projections in our long-range plan for 
this business declined. As a result of this triggering event, and in connection with the preparation of this report, we performed an interim 
impairment assessment of the Green Giant brand intangible asset as of May 31, 2015, and determined that the fair value of the brand asset no 
longer exceeded the carrying value of the asset. Significant assumptions used in that assessment included our updated long- range cash flow 
projections for the Green Giant business, an updated royalty rate, a weighted-average cost of capital, and a tax rate. We recorded a $260 million 
impairment charge in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015 related to this asset.  
We will continue to monitor these businesses for potential impairment.  
   
65 
In Millions 
  
U.S. 
Retail    
International    
Joint 
Ventures    
Total  
Balance as of May 27, 2012 
  
$3,297.0    
$ 
1,344.1    
$ 
63.8    
$4,704.9  
Acquisitions 
  
 
20.0    
 
290.7    
 
—    
 310.7  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation 
  
 
(4.6 )    
 
3.4    
 
0.7    
 
(0.5 )  
Balance as of May 26, 2013 
  
 3,312.4    
 
1,638.2    
 
64.5    
 5,015.1  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation 
  
 
(4.9 )    
 
3.6    
 
0.5    
 
(0.8 )  
Balance as of May 25, 2014 
  
 3,307.5    
 
1,641.8    
 
65.0    
 5,014.3  
Acquisition 
  
 268.4    
 
—    
 
—    
 268.4  
Impairment charge 
  
 (260.0 )    
 
—    
 
—    
 (260.0 )  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation 
  
 
(4.0 )    
 
(340.3)    
 
(1.4 )    
 (345.7 )  
Balance as of May 31, 2015 
  
$3,311.9    
$ 
1,301.5    
$ 
63.6    
$4,677.0  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
Carrying
 
Value 
   
Excess 
Fair  
Value 
Above 
Carrying 
 
Value 
 
Mountain High 
  
$ 
35.4    
 
3 % 
Uncle Toby’s 
  
$ 
57.7    
 
7 % 
Green Giant 
  
$ 
425.9    
 
13 % 
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
NOTE 7. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES, AND FAIR VALUES  
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  
The carrying values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, accounts payable, other current liabilities, and notes payable approximate fair 
value. Marketable securities are carried at fair value. As of May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014, a comparison of cost and market values of our 
marketable debt and equity securities is as follows:  
   
There were no realized gains or losses from sales of available-for-sale marketable securities. Gains and losses are determined by specific 
identification. Classification of marketable securities as current or noncurrent is dependent upon our intended holding period, the security’s 
maturity date, or both. The aggregate unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities, net of tax effects, are classified in AOCI 
within stockholders’ equity.  
Scheduled maturities of our marketable securities are as follows:  
   
As of May 31, 2015, cash and cash equivalents totaling $40.1 million were pledged as collateral for derivative contracts. As of May 31, 2015, 
$4.1 million of certain accounts receivable were pledged as collateral against a foreign uncommitted line of credit.  
The fair value and carrying amounts of long-term debt, including the current portion, were $8,996.6 million and $8,608.1 million, respectively, 
as of May 31, 2015. The fair value of long-term debt was estimated using market quotations and discounted cash flows based on our current 
incremental borrowing rates for similar types of instruments. Long-term debt is a Level 2 liability in the fair value hierarchy.  
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES  
As a part of our ongoing operations, we are exposed to market risks such as changes in interest and foreign currency exchange rates and 
commodity and equity prices. To manage these risks, we may enter into various derivative transactions (e.g., futures, options, and swaps) 
pursuant to our established policies.  
COMMODITY PRICE RISK  
Many commodities we use in the production and distribution of our products are exposed to market price risks. We utilize derivatives to 
manage price risk for our principal ingredients and energy costs, including grains (oats, wheat, and corn), oils (principally soybean), dairy 
products, natural gas, and diesel fuel. Our primary objective when entering into these derivative contracts is to achieve certainty with regard to 
the future price of commodities  
   
66 
   
  
Cost 
   Market Value    
Gross 
Gains 
   
Gross 
Losses 
 
   
  
Fiscal Year    
Fiscal Year 
   Fiscal Year    Fiscal Year  
In Millions 
  2015    2014    2015    2014    2015    2014    2015    2014  
Available for sale: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Debt securities 
  $ 2.6   $318.6    $ 2.6    $ 318.8    $ —    $ 0.2    $ —    $ —  
Equity securities 
   1.8    
1.8     8.3     
7.2     6.5     5.4     —     —  
Total 
  $ 4.4   $320.4    $ 10.9    $ 326.0    $ 6.5    $ 5.6    $ —    $ —  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
Available for Sale 
 
In Millions 
  
Cost    
Market 
Value  
Under 1 year (current) 
  
$ 
2.5    
$ 
2.5  
From 1 to 3 years 
  
 
—    
 
—  
From 4 to 7 years 
  
 
0.1    
 
0.1  
Equity securities 
  
 
1.8    
 
8.3  
Total 
  
$ 
4.4    
$ 
10.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
purchased for use in our supply chain. We manage our exposures through a combination of purchase orders, long-term contracts with suppliers, 
exchange-traded futures and options, and over-the-counter options and swaps. We offset our exposures based on current and projected market 
conditions and generally seek to acquire the inputs at as close to our planned cost as possible.  
We use derivatives to manage our exposure to changes in commodity prices. We do not perform the assessments required to achieve hedge 
accounting for commodity derivative positions. Accordingly, the changes in the values of these derivatives are recorded currently in cost of 
sales in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings.  
Although we do not meet the criteria for cash flow hedge accounting, we nonetheless believe that these instruments are effective in achieving 
our objective of providing certainty in the future price of commodities purchased for use in our supply chain. Accordingly, for purposes of 
measuring segment operating performance these gains and losses are reported in unallocated corporate items outside of segment operating 
results until such time that the exposure we are managing affects earnings. At that time we reclassify the gain or loss from unallocated 
corporate items to segment operating profit, allowing our operating segments to realize the economic effects of the derivative without 
experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in unallocated corporate items.  
Unallocated corporate items for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013 included:  
   
As of May 31, 2015, the net notional value of commodity derivatives was $384.0 million, of which $214.7 million related to agricultural inputs 
and $169.3 million related to energy inputs. These contracts relate to inputs that generally will be utilized within the next 12 months.  
INTEREST RATE RISK  
We are exposed to interest rate volatility with regard to future issuances of fixed-rate debt, and existing and future issuances of floating-rate 
debt. Primary exposures include U.S. Treasury rates, LIBOR, Euribor, and commercial paper rates in the United States and Europe. We use 
interest rate swaps, forward-starting interest rate swaps, and treasury locks to hedge our exposure to interest rate changes, to reduce the 
volatility of our financing costs, and to achieve a desired proportion of fixed versus floating-rate debt, based on current and projected market 
conditions. Generally under these swaps, we agree with a counterparty to exchange the difference between fixed-rate and floating-rate interest 
amounts based on an agreed upon notional principal amount.  
Floating Interest Rate Exposures — Floating-to-fixed interest rate swaps are accounted for as cash flow hedges, as are all hedges of forecasted 
issuances of debt. Effectiveness is assessed based on either the perfectly effective hypothetical derivative method or changes in the present 
value of interest payments on the underlying debt. Effective gains and losses deferred to AOCI are reclassified into earnings over the life of the 
associated debt. Ineffective gains and losses are recorded as net interest. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less than $1 million in each 
of fiscal 2015, 2014, and 2013.  
Fixed Interest Rate Exposures — Fixed-to-floating interest rate swaps are accounted for as fair value hedges with effectiveness assessed based 
on changes in the fair value of the underlying debt and derivatives, using incremental borrowing rates currently available on loans with similar 
terms and maturities. Ineffective gains and losses on these derivatives and the underlying hedged items are recorded as net interest. The amount 
of hedge ineffectiveness was a $1.6 million gain in fiscal 2015 and less than $1 million in fiscal 2014 and 2013.  
   
67 
   
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Net loss on mark-to-market valuation of commodity positions 
  
$(163.7 )   
$ (4.9 )   
$ (7.6 )  
Net loss on commodity positions reclassified from 
unallocated corporate items to segment operating profit 
  
 
84.4    
 51.2    
 13.7  
Net mark-to-market revaluation of certain grain inventories 
  
 (10.4 )   
 2.2    
 (1.7 )  
Net mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions 
recognized in unallocated corporate items 
  
$ (89.7 )   
$ 48.5    
$ 4.4  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
In advance of planned debt financing, we entered into €600.0 million of forward starting swaps with an average fixed rate of 0.5 percent. All of 
these forward starting swaps were cash settled for $6.5 million during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, coincident with the issuance of our 
€500 million 8-year fixed-rate notes and €400 million 12-year fixed-rate notes.  
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we entered into swaps to convert $500.0 million of 1.4 percent fixed-rate notes due October 20, 2017, 
and $500.0 million of 2.2 percent fixed-rate notes due October 21, 2019, to floating rates.  
In advance of planned debt financing, we entered into $250.0 million of treasury locks with an average fixed rate of 1.99 percent. All of these 
treasury locks were cash settled for $17.9 million during the third quarter of fiscal 2014, coincident with the issuance of our $500.0 million 10-
year fixed-rate notes.  
During the third quarter of fiscal 2013, we entered into swaps to convert $250.0 million of 0.875 percent fixed-rate notes due January 29, 2016, 
to floating rates.  
As of May 31, 2015, the pre-tax amount of cash-settled interest rate hedge gain or loss remaining in AOCI which will be reclassified to 
earnings over the remaining term of the related underlying debt follows:  
   
The following table summarizes the notional amounts and weighted-average interest rates of our interest rate derivatives. Average floating rates 
are based on rates as of the end of the reporting period.  
   
The swap contracts mature at various dates from fiscal 2016 to 2020 as follows:  
   
   
68 
In Millions 
  
Gain/(Loss)  
5.7% notes due February 15, 2017 
  
$ 
(3.8 )  
5.65% notes due February 15, 2019 
  
 
1.8  
3.15% notes due December 15, 2021 
  
 
(64.7)  
1.0% notes due April 27, 2023 
  
 
(1.9 )  
3.65% notes due February 15, 2024 
  
  
15.5  
1.5% notes due April 27, 2027 
  
 
(3.9 )  
5.4% notes due June 15, 2040 
  
 
(14.0)  
4.15% notes due February 15, 2043 
  
 
10.9  
Net pre-tax hedge loss in AOCI 
  
$ 
(60.1)  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
 
 
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Pay-floating swaps - notional amount 
  
$1,250.0  
 
$ 250.0  
Average receive rate 
  
 
1.6 %  
 
0.9 % 
Average pay rate 
  
 
0.7 %  
 
0.5 % 
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
Pay Floating  
2016 
  
$ 
250.0  
2017 
  
 
—  
2018 
  
 
500.0  
2019 
  
 
—  
2020 
  
 
500.0  
Total 
  
$ 
1,250.0  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
The following tables reconcile the net fair values of assets and liabilities subject to offsetting arrangements that are recorded in the 
Consolidated Balance Sheets to the net fair values that could be reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheets:  
   
   
69 
 
 
May 31, 2015 
 
 
 
Assets 
  
Liabilities 
 
 
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the  
Balance Sheet (e) 
   
   
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the  
Balance Sheet (e) 
   
 
In Millions 
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of  
Recognized
 
Assets 
  
Gross 
Liabilities 
 
Offset in 
the  
Balance 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts
 
of Assets 
 
(b) 
  
Financial 
Instruments   
Cash 
Collateral 
 
Received   
Net 
Amount 
 
(c) 
  
Gross 
Amounts 
of  
Recognized 
 
Liabilities   
Gross 
Assets  
Offset in 
the Balance
 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts of
 
Liabilities 
(b) 
  
Financial 
Instruments   
Cash 
Collateral 
 
Pledged   
Net 
Amount 
 
(d) 
 
Commodity contracts 
  
$10.1    
$  —    
$10.1    
$(1.3)     
$  —    
$8.8    
$(59.4)     
$  —    
$(59.4)     
$1.3    
$40.1    $(18.0)   
Interest rate contracts 
  
4.0    
 —    
4.0    
 —    
 —    
4.0    
 —    
 —    
 —    
 —    
 —    
 —  
Foreign exchange contracts   
25.9    
 —    
25.9    
(12.5)     
 —    
13.4    
(65.3)     
 —    
(65.3)     
12.5    
 —    (52.8)   
Total 
  
$40.0    
$  —    
$40.0    
$(13.8)     
$  —    $26.2    
$(124.7)     
$  —    
$(124.7)     
$13.8    
$40.1    $(70.8)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(a) 
Includes related collateral offset in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(b) 
Net fair value as recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(c) 
Fair value of assets that could be reported net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(d) 
Fair value of liabilities that could be reported net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(e) 
Fair value of assets and liabilities reported on a gross basis in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Table of Contents  
FOREIGN EXCHANGE RISK  
Foreign currency fluctuations affect our net investments in foreign subsidiaries and foreign currency cash flows related to third party purchases, 
intercompany loans, product shipments, and foreign-denominated debt. We are also exposed to the translation of foreign currency earnings to 
the U.S. dollar. Our principal exposures are to the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Chinese renminbi, 
euro, Japanese yen, Mexican peso, and Swiss franc. We mainly use foreign currency forward contracts to selectively hedge our foreign 
currency cash flow exposures. We also generally swap our foreign-denominated commercial paper borrowings and nonfunctional currency 
intercompany loans back to U.S. dollars or the functional currency of the entity with foreign exchange exposure; the gains or losses on these 
derivatives offset the foreign currency revaluation gains or losses recorded in earnings on the associated borrowings. We generally do not 
hedge more than 18 months forward.  
As of May 31, 2015, the net notional value of foreign exchange derivatives was $1,448.5 million. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less 
than $1 million in each of fiscal 2015, 2014, and 2013.  
We also have many net investments in foreign subsidiaries that are denominated in euros. We previously hedged a portion of these net 
investments by issuing euro-denominated commercial paper and foreign exchange forward contracts. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, 
we entered into a net investment hedge for a portion of our net investment in foreign operations denominated in euros by issuing €900.0 million 
of euro-denominated bonds. During the second quarter of fiscal 2014, we entered into a net investment hedge for a portion of our net 
investment in foreign operations denominated in euros by issuing €500.0 million of euro-denominated bonds. As of May 31, 2015, we had 
deferred net foreign currency transaction gains of $10.7 million in AOCI associated with hedging activity.  
Venezuela is a highly inflationary economy and we remeasure the value of the assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary based on the 
exchange rate at which we expect to remit dividends in U.S. dollars. In February  
   
70 
 
 
May 25, 2014 
 
 
 
Assets 
 
Liabilities 
 
 
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the  
Balance Sheet (e) 
   
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the  
Balance Sheet (e) 
   
 
In Millions 
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of  
Recognized 
 
Assets 
  
Gross 
Liabilities 
 
Offset in 
the  
Balance 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts
 
of Assets 
 
(b) 
  
Financial 
Instruments   
Cash 
Collateral 
 
Received   
Net 
Amount 
 
(c) 
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of  
Recognized 
 
Liabilities   
Gross 
Assets  
Offset in 
the Balance
 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts 
of  
Liabilities 
 
(b) 
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral 
 
Pledged   
Net 
Amount 
 
(d) 
 
Commodity contracts 
  
$19.1    
$  —    
$19.1    
$(3.4)     
$  —    $15.7   
$(4.0)     
$  —    
$(4.0)     
$3.4   
$  —    $(0.6)   
Interest rate contracts 
  
0.7    
 —    
0.7    
 —    
 —    
0.7   
 —    
 —    
 —    
 —   
 —    
 —  
Foreign exchange 
contracts 
  
10.5    
 —    
10.5    
(8.0)     
 —    
2.5   
(19.1)     
 —    
(19.1)     
8.0   
 —    (11.1)   
Total 
  
$30.3    
$  —    
$30.3    
$(11.4)     
$  —    $18.9   
$(23.1)     
$  —    
$(23.1)     
$11.4   
$  —    $(11.7)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
(a) 
Includes related collateral offset in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(b) 
Net fair value as recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(c) 
Fair value of assets that could be reported net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(d) 
Fair value of liabilities that could be reported net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
(e) 
Fair value of assets and liabilities reported on a gross basis in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 

Table of Contents  
2014, the Venezuelan government established a new foreign exchange market mechanism (SICAD 2) and at that time indicated that it would be 
the market through which U.S. dollars would be obtained for the remittance of dividends. On February 12, 2015, the Venezuelan government 
replaced SICAD 2 with a new foreign exchange market mechanism (SIMADI). We expect to be able to access U.S. dollars through the 
SIMADI market. SIMADI has significantly higher foreign exchange rates than those available through the other foreign exchange mechanisms. 
In fiscal 2015, we recorded an $8.0 million foreign exchange loss in unallocated corporate items resulting from the remeasurement of assets 
and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary at the SIMADI rate of 199 bolivars per U.S. dollar. Our Venezuela operations represent less than 
1 percent of our consolidated assets, liabilities, net sales, and segment operating profit. As of May 31, 2015, we had $0.3 million of non-U.S. 
dollar cash balances in Venezuela.  
EQUITY INSTRUMENTS  
Equity price movements affect our compensation expense as certain investments made by our employees in our deferred compensation plan are 
revalued. We use equity swaps to manage this risk. As of May 31, 2015, the net notional amount of our equity swaps was $124.2 million. 
These swap contracts mature in fiscal 2016.  
   
71 

Table of Contents  
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT PRESENTATION  
The fair values of our assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair value and their respective levels in the fair value hierarchy as 
of May 31, 2015 and May 25, 2014, were as follows:  
   
   
72 
 
  
May 31, 2015 
   
May 31, 2015 
 
 
  
Fair Values of Assets 
   
Fair Values of Liabilities 
 
In Millions 
  Level 1    Level 2    Level 3    Total    Level 1    Level 2   Level 3    
Total  
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Interest rate contracts (a) (b) 
  $ 
—    $ 
4.0   $ 
—    $
4.0    $ 
—    $
—   $ 
—    $ 
—  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d) 
   
—     
25.5    
—     25.5     
—     (23.3 )  
 
—     (23.3)  
Total 
   
—     
29.5    
—     29.5     
—     (23.3 )  
 
—     (23.3)  
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d) 
   
—     
0.4    
—     
0.4     
—     (42.0 )  
 
—     (42.0)  
Commodity contracts (c) (e) 
   
7.2     
2.9    
—     10.1     
—     (59.4 )  
 
—     (59.4)  
Grain contracts (c) (e) 
    
—      
3.3     
—     
3.3      
—     
(7.8 )    
—      
(7.8 )  
Total 
   
7.2     
6.6    
—     13.8     
—     (109.2 )  
 
—     (109.2 )  
Other assets and liabilities reported at fair value: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Marketable investments (a) (f) 
   
8.3     
2.6    
—     10.9     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Long-lived assets (g) 
   
—     
37.8    
—     37.8     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Indefinite-lived intangible asset (h) 
   
—     
—    154.3     154.3     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Total 
   
8.3     
40.4    154.3     203.0     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Total assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded 
at fair value 
  $ 15.5    $ 76.5   $ 154.3    $246.3    $ 
—    $(132.5 )  $ 
—    $ (132.5 )  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
These contracts and investments are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities or other 
liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss position. Certain marketable investments are recorded as cash and cash 
equivalents. 
(b) 
Based on LIBOR and swap rates. 
(c) 
These contracts are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets or as other current liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether 
in a gain or loss position. 
(d) 
Based on observable market transactions of spot currency rates and forward currency prices. 
(e) 
Based on prices of futures exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace. 
(f) 
Based on prices of common stock and bond matrix pricing. 
(g) 
We recorded $30.3 million in non-cash impairment charges in fiscal 2015 to write down certain long-lived assets to their fair value. Fair 
value was based on recently reported transactions for similar assets in the marketplace. These assets had a carrying value of $68.1 million 
and were associated with the restructuring actions described in Note 4. 
(h) 
We recorded a $260.0 million non-cash impairment charge in fiscal 2015 to write down our Green Giant brand asset to its fair value of 
$154.3 million. This asset had a carrying value of $414.3 million. See Note 6 for additional information. 

Table of Contents  
We did not significantly change our valuation techniques from prior periods.  
   
73 
 
  
May 25, 2014 
   
May 25, 2014 
 
 
  
Fair Values of Assets 
   
Fair Values of Liabilities 
 
In Millions 
  Level 1    Level 2    Level 3    Total    Level 1    Level 2   Level 3    Total  
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Interest rate contracts (a) (b) 
   $    —     $  0.7     $    —     $  0.7     $    —     $    —   
 $    —     $    —  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d) 
   
—     
9.9     
—     
9.9     
—     (12.6 )  
 
—     (12.6)  
Total 
   
—     
10.6     
—     10.6     
—     (12.6 )  
 
—     (12.6)  
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d) 
   
—     
0.6     
—     
0.6     
—     
(6.5 )  
 
—     (6.5 )  
Commodity contracts (c) (e) 
   
11.1     
8.0     
—     19.1     
—     
(4.0 )  
 
—     (4.0 )  
Grain contracts (c) (e) 
   
—     
7.5     
—     
7.5     
—     
(4.9 )  
 
—     (4.9 )  
Total 
   
11.1     
16.1     
—     27.2     
—     (15.4 )  
 
—     (15.4)  
Other assets and liabilities reported at fair value: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Marketable investments (a) (f) 
   
7.2     318.8     
—     326.0     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Total 
   
7.2     318.8     
—     326.0     
—     
—   
 
—     
—
Total assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded 
at fair value 
   $18.3     $345.5     $    —     $363.8     $    —     $(28.0 )  
 $    —     $(28.0)  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
These contracts and investments are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities or other 
liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss position. Certain marketable investments are recorded as cash and cash 
equivalents. 
(b) 
Based on LIBOR and swap rates. 
(c) 
These contracts are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets or as other current liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether 
in a gain or loss position. 
(d) 
Based on observable market transactions of spot currency rates and forward currency prices. 
(e) 
Based on prices of futures exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace. 
(f) 
Based on prices of common stock and bond matrix pricing. 

Table of Contents  
Information related to our cash flow hedges, fair value hedges, and other derivatives not designated as hedging instruments for the fiscal years 
ended May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014, follows:  
   
AMOUNTS RECORDED IN ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS  
As of May 31, 2015, the after-tax amounts of unrealized gains and losses in AOCI related to hedge derivatives follows:  
   
The net amount of pre-tax gains and losses in AOCI as of May 31, 2015, that we expect to be reclassified into net earnings within the next 12 
months is $2.3 million of gain.  
   
74 
 
  
Interest Rate 
Contracts 
  
Foreign Exchange 
Contracts 
  
Equity 
Contracts 
   
Commodity 
Contracts 
  
Total 
 
 
  Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
  Fiscal Year    
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  2015   2014   
2015   2014   2015   2014    2015   2014   2015   2014  
Derivatives in Cash Flow Hedging  
Relationships: 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Amount of gain (loss) recognized in other  
comprehensive income (OCI) (a) 
  $  (5.9 )   $  10.6   $ 
 13.3   $ 
  0.6   $    —   $    —     $    —   $    —   $    7.4   $  11.2  
Amount of net gain (loss) reclassified from  
AOCI into earnings (a) (b) 
   (10.6 )    (11.7 )    
5.0    
16.4    
—    
—     
—    
—    
(5.6 )    
4.7  
Amount of net gain (loss) recognized in  
earnings (c) 
   (0.6 )    
—    
0.1    
(0.1 )    
—    
—     
—    
—    
(0.5 )    (0.1)  
Derivatives in Fair Value Hedging  
Relationships: 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Amount of net gain recognized  
in earnings (d) 
   
1.6    
0.2    
—    
—    
—    
—     
—    
—    
1.6    
0.2  
Derivatives in Net Investment Hedging  
Relationships: 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Amount of loss recognized in OCI (a) 
   
—    
—    
(6.9 )    
—    
—    
—     
—    
—    
(6.9 )    
—  
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging  
Instruments: 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Amount of net gain (loss) recognized in earnings (d) 
   
—    
—    
(54.3)    (20.0 )    9.6    9.8     (163.7 )   (4.9)    (208.4 )    (15.1 )  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(a) 
Effective portion. 
(b) 
Gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A 
expenses for foreign exchange contracts. 
(c) 
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings is related to the ineffective portion of the hedging relationship, including SG&A expenses for foreign 
exchange contracts and interest, net for interest rate contracts. No amounts were reported as a result of being excluded from the 
assessment of hedge effectiveness. 
(d) 
Gain recognized in earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate contracts, in cost of sales for commodity contracts, and in SG&A 
expenses for equity contracts and foreign exchange contracts. 
In Millions 
  
After-Tax Gain/(Loss)  
Unrealized losses from interest rate cash flow hedges 
  
 
$(36.5)   
Unrealized gains from foreign currency cash flow hedges 
  
 
7.7  
After-tax loss in AOCI related to hedge derivatives 
  
  
$(28.8)   
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
CREDIT-RISK-RELATED CONTINGENT FEATURES  
Certain of our derivative instruments contain provisions that require us to maintain an investment grade credit rating on our debt from each of 
the major credit rating agencies. If our debt were to fall below investment grade, the counterparties to the derivative instruments could request 
full collateralization on derivative instruments in net liability positions. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-
related contingent features that were in a liability position on May 31, 2015, was $81.5 million. We have posted $25.0 million of collateral 
under these contracts. If the credit-risk-related contingent features underlying these agreements had been triggered on May 31, 2015, we would 
have been required to post $56.5 million of collateral to counterparties.  
CONCENTRATIONS OF CREDIT AND COUNTERPARTY CREDIT RISK  
During fiscal 2015, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates (Wal-Mart) accounted for 21 percent of our consolidated net sales and 30 percent of 
our net sales in the U.S. Retail segment. No other customer accounted for 10 percent or more of our consolidated net sales. Wal-Mart also 
represented 7 percent of our net sales in the International segment and 9 percent of our net sales in the Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
segment. As of May 31, 2015, Wal-Mart accounted for 29 percent of our U.S. Retail receivables, 6 percent of our International receivables, and 
9 percent of our Convenience Stores and Foodservice receivables. The five largest customers in our U.S. Retail segment accounted for 54 
percent of its fiscal 2015 net sales, the five largest customers in our International segment accounted for 24 percent of its fiscal 2015 net sales, 
and the five largest customers in our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment accounted for 44 percent of its fiscal 2015 net sales.  
We enter into interest rate, foreign exchange, and certain commodity and equity derivatives, primarily with a diversified group of highly rated 
counterparties. We continually monitor our positions and the credit ratings of the counterparties involved and, by policy, limit the amount of 
credit exposure to any one party. These transactions may expose us to potential losses due to the risk of nonperformance by these 
counterparties; however, we have not incurred a material loss. We also enter into commodity futures transactions through various regulated 
exchanges.  
The amount of loss due to the credit risk of the counterparties, should the counterparties fail to perform according to the terms of the contracts, 
is $16.7 million against which we do not hold collateral. Under the terms of our swap agreements, some of our transactions require collateral or 
other security to support financial instruments subject to threshold levels of exposure and counterparty credit risk. Collateral assets are either 
cash or U.S. Treasury instruments and are held in a trust account that we may access if the counterparty defaults.  
We offer certain suppliers access to a third party service that allows them to view our scheduled payments online. The third party service also 
allows suppliers to finance advances on our scheduled payments at the sole discretion of the supplier and the third party. We have no economic 
interest in these financing arrangements and no direct relationship with the suppliers, the third party, or any financial institutions concerning 
this service. All of our accounts payable remain as obligations to our suppliers as stated in our supplier agreements. As of May 31, 2015, 
$448.6 million of our total accounts payable is payable to suppliers who utilize this third party service.  
   
75 

Table of Contents  
NOTE 8. DEBT  
Notes Payable  
The components of notes payable and their respective weighted-average interest rates at the end of the periods were as follows:  
   
To ensure availability of funds, we maintain bank credit lines sufficient to cover our outstanding notes payable. Commercial paper is a 
continuing source of short-term financing. We have commercial paper programs available to us in the United States and Europe. We also have 
uncommitted and asset-backed credit lines that support our foreign operations.  
The following table details the fee-paid committed and uncommitted credit lines we had available as of May 31, 2015:  
   
In June 2014, our subsidiary, Yoplait S.A.S. entered into a €200.0 million fee-paid committed credit facility that is scheduled to expire in June 
2019.  
In May 2014, we entered into a $1.0 billion fee-paid committed credit facility that is scheduled to expire in May 2019. Concurrent with the 
execution of this credit facility, we terminated our credit facility that provided $1.0 billion of revolving credit which was scheduled to expire in 
April 2015.  
The credit facilities contain covenants, including a requirement to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5 times. We were in 
compliance with all credit facility covenants as of May 31, 2015.  
Long-Term Debt  
In April 2015, we issued €500.0 million principal amount of 1.0 percent fixed-rate notes due April 27, 2023 and €400.0 million principal 
amount of 1.5 percent fixed-rate notes due April 27, 2027. Interest on the notes is payable annually in arrears. The notes due April 27, 2023 
may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at any time prior to January 27, 2023 for a specified make whole amount and any time on 
or after that date at par. The notes due April 27, 2027 may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at any time prior to January 27, 2027 
for a specified make whole amount and any time on or after that date at par. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change 
of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes and to reduce our commercial paper borrowings.  
   
76 
 
  
May 31, 2015 
 
 
May 25, 2014 
 
In Millions 
  
Notes 
Payable    
Weighted-
Average  
Interest Rate  
 
Notes 
Payable    
Weighted- 
Average  
Interest Rate  
U.S. commercial paper 
  
 $432.0   
 
   0.3 %   
 $1,007.6    
 
   0.2 %  
Financial institutions 
  
 183.8   
  
9.5  
 
 
104.1    
 
12.1  
Total 
  
 $615.8   
 
   3.0 %   
 $1,111.7    
 
   1.3 %  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Billions 
  
Facility 
Amount    
Borrowed 
 
Amount  
Credit facility expiring: 
  
  
April 2017 
  
 
$1.7    
 
$ —  
May 2019 
  
 
1.0    
 
—  
June 2019 
  
 
0.2    
 
0.1  
Total committed credit facilities 
  
 
2.9    
 
0.1  
Uncommitted credit facilities 
  
 
0.5    
 
0.1  
Total committed and uncommitted credit facilities 
  
 
$3.4    
 
$0.2  
  
  

Table of Contents  
In March 2015, we repaid $750.0 million of 5.2 percent notes.  
In October 2014, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.4 percent fixed-rate notes due October 20, 2017 and $500.0 million 
aggregate principal amount of 2.2 percent fixed-rate notes due October 21, 2019. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in arrears. The 
notes may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at any time at the applicable redemption price. The notes are senior unsecured 
obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used to fund our acquisition of Annie’s and for 
general corporate purposes.  
In June 2014, we issued €200.0 million principal amount of 2.2 percent fixed-rate senior unsecured notes due June 24, 2021 in a private 
placement offering. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in arrears. The notes may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at 
any time for a specific make-whole amount and include a change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used to refinance 
existing debt.  
In June 2014, we repaid €290.0 million of floating-rate notes.  
In May 2014, we repaid $400.0 million of floating-rate notes and $300.0 million of 1.55 percent notes.  
In January 2014, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.65 percent fixed-rate notes due February 15, 2024 and $250.0 
million aggregate principal amount of floating-rate notes due January 28, 2016. Interest on the fixed-rate notes is payable semi-annually in 
arrears. The fixed-rate notes may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at any time prior to November 15, 2023 for a specified make 
whole amount and any time on or after that date at par. The floating-rate notes bear interest equal to three-month LIBOR plus 20 basis points, 
subject to quarterly reset. Interest on the floating-rate notes is payable quarterly in arrears. The floating-rate notes are not redeemable prior to 
maturity. The fixed-rate and floating-rate notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net 
proceeds were used for general corporate purposes and to reduce our commercial paper borrowings.  
In November 2013, we issued €500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.1 percent fixed-rate notes due November 16, 2020. Interest on 
the notes is payable annually in arrears. The notes may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at any time prior to August 16, 2020 for 
a specified make whole amount and any time on or after that date at par. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of 
control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes and to reduce our commercial paper borrowings.  
In August 2013, we repaid $700.0 million of 5.25 percent notes.  
   
77 

Table of Contents  
A summary of our long-term debt is as follows:  
   
Principal payments due on long-term debt in the next five years based on stated contractual maturities, our intent to redeem, or put rights of 
certain note holders are $1,000.4 million in fiscal 2016, $1,103.4 million in fiscal 2017, $604.5 million in fiscal 2018, $1,150.2 million in fiscal 
2019, and $500.1 million in fiscal 2020.  
Certain of our long-term debt agreements contain restrictive covenants. As of May 31, 2015, we were in compliance with all of these 
covenants.  
As of May 31, 2015, the $60.1 million pre-tax loss recorded in AOCI associated with our previously designated interest rate swaps will be 
reclassified to net interest over the remaining lives of the hedged transactions. The amount expected to be reclassified from AOCI to net 
interest in fiscal 2016 is a $10.6 million pre-tax loss.  
NOTE 9. REDEEMABLE AND NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS  
Our principal redeemable and noncontrolling interests relate to our Yoplait SAS, Yoplait Marques SNC, Liberté Marques Sàrl, and General 
Mills Cereals, LLC (GMC) subsidiaries. In addition, we have six foreign subsidiaries that have noncontrolling interests totaling $8.2 million as 
of May 31, 2015.  
   
78 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
2015 
  
May 25, 
2014 
 
5.65% notes due February 15, 2019 
  $ 1,150.0   $ 1,150.0  
5.7% notes due February 15, 2017 
   1,000.0   
 1,000.0  
3.15% notes due December 15, 2021 
    1,000.0   
 1,000.0  
5.2% notes due March 17, 2015 
   
—   
 
750.0  
Euro-denominated 2.1% notes due November 16, 2020 
   
549.4   
 
681.5  
Euro-denominated 1.0% notes due April 27, 2023 
   
549.4   
 
—  
1.4% notes due October 20, 2017 
    
500.0   
 
—  
5.4% notes due June 15, 2040 
   
500.0   
 
500.0  
4.15% notes due February 15, 2043 
   
500.0   
 
500.0  
3.65% notes due February 15, 2024 
   
500.0   
 
500.0  
2.2% notes due October 21, 2019 
    
500.0   
 
—  
Floating-rate notes due January 29, 2016 
   
500.0   
 
500.0  
Euro-denominated 1.5% notes due April 27, 2027 
   
439.5   
 
—  
Floating-rate notes due December 15, 2014 
   
—   
 
395.3  
0.875% notes due January 29, 2016 
    
250.0   
 
250.0  
Floating-rate notes due January 28, 2016 
   
250.0   
 
250.0  
Euro-denominated 2.2% notes due June 24, 2021 
   
219.7   
 
—  
Medium-term notes, 0.02% to 6.44%, due fiscal 2017 or later 
   
204.2   
 
204.2  
Other, including capital leases 
    
(4.1 )  
 
(6.9 )  
   8,608.1   
 7,674.1  
Less amount due within one year 
   (1,000.4 )  
 (1,250.6)  
Total long-term debt 
  $ 7,607.7   $ 6,423.5  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS and a 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl. Sodiaal 
holds the remaining interests in each of the entities. On the acquisition date, we recorded the $904.4 million fair value of Sodiaal’s 49 percent 
euro-denominated interest in Yoplait SAS as a redeemable interest on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Sodiaal has the ability to put a limited 
portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per year through a maximum term expiring December 2020. We adjust the value of 
the redeemable interest through additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets quarterly to the redeemable interest’s redemption 
value, which approximates its fair value. Yoplait SAS pays dividends annually if it meets certain financial metrics set forth in its shareholders 
agreement. As of May 31, 2015, the redemption value of the euro-denominated redeemable interest was $778.9 million.  
In addition, a subsidiary of Yoplait SAS has entered into an exclusive milk supply agreement for its European operations with Sodiaal at 
market-determined prices through July 1, 2021. Net purchases totaled $271.3 million for fiscal 2015 and $311.2 million for fiscal 2014.  
On the acquisition dates, we recorded the $281.4 million fair value of Sodiaal’s 50 percent euro-denominated interest in Yoplait Marques SNC 
and 50 percent Canadian dollar-denominated interest in Liberté Marques Sàrl as noncontrolling interests on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Yoplait Marques SNC earns a royalty stream through a licensing agreement with Yoplait SAS for the rights to  Yoplait and related trademarks. 
Liberté Marques Sàrl earns a royalty stream through licensing agreements with certain Yoplait group companies for the rights to  Liberté  and 
related trademarks. These entities pay dividends annually based on their available cash as of their fiscal year end.  
During fiscal 2015, we paid $17.7 million of dividends to Sodiaal under the terms of the Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC shareholder 
agreements.  
The holder of the GMC Class A Interests receives quarterly preferred distributions from available net income based on the application of a 
floating preferred return rate, to the holder’s capital account balance established in the most recent mark-to-market valuation (currently $251.5 
million). In fiscal 2015, the floating preferred return rate was equal to the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 110 basis points. The preferred 
return rate is adjusted every three years through a negotiated agreement with the Class A Interest holder or through a remarketing auction. On 
June 1, 2015, subsequent to our year-end, the floating preferred return rate on GMC’s Class A interests was reset to the sum of three-month 
LIBOR plus 125 basis points.  
For financial reporting purposes, the assets, liabilities, results of operations, and cash flows of our non-wholly owned subsidiaries are included 
in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The third-party investor’s share of the net earnings of these subsidiaries is reflected in net earnings 
attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings.  
Our noncontrolling interests contain restrictive covenants. As of May 31, 2015, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.  
NOTE 10. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY  
Cumulative preference stock of 5.0 million shares, without par value, is authorized but unissued.  
On May 6, 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 100 million shares of our common stock. Purchases under the 
authorization can be made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative 
instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, and accelerated repurchase programs. The authorization has no specified termination date.  
During fiscal 2015, we repurchased 22.3 million shares of common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $1,161.9 million. During fiscal 
2014, we repurchased 35.6 million shares of common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $1,774.4 million. During fiscal 2013, we 
repurchased 24.2 million shares of common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $1,014.9 million.  
   
79 

Table of Contents  
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013, we entered into an Accelerated Share Repurchase (ASR) agreement with an unrelated third party 
financial institution to repurchase an aggregate of $300.0 million of our outstanding common stock. Under the ASR agreement, we paid $300.0 
million to the financial institution and received 5.5 million shares of common stock with a fair value of $270.0 million during the fourth quarter 
of 2013. We received an additional 0.6 million shares of common stock upon completion of the ASR agreement during the first quarter of fiscal 
2014. As of May 26, 2013, we recorded this transaction as an increase in treasury stock of $270.0 million, and recorded the remaining $30.0 
million as a decrease to additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon completion of the ASR agreement in the first 
quarter of fiscal 2014, we reclassified the $30.0 million to treasury stock from additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.  
The following table provides details of total comprehensive income:  
   
   
80 
   
  
Fiscal 2015 
 
   
  
General Mills 
  
Noncontrolling 
 
Interests 
  
Redeemable 
 
Interest 
 
In Millions 
  
Pretax   
Tax   
Net 
  
Net 
  
Net 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable 
and noncontrolling interests 
  
  
  
  
  
$1,221.3   
 
$   8.2   
 
$   29.9  
Other comprehensive income (loss): 
  
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation 
  
$ (727.9 )   
$ 
—   
 (727.9 )   
 
(78.2)   
 
(151.8 )  
Net actuarial loss 
  
 (561.1 )   
 202.7   
 (358.4 )   
 
—   
 
—  
Other fair value changes: 
  
 
 
 
 
Securities 
  
 
1.3   
 (0.5 )  
 
0.8   
 
—   
 
—  
Hedge derivatives 
  
 
13.6   
 (4.8 )  
 
8.8   
 
—   
 
(4.7 )  
Reclassification to earnings: 
  
 
 
 
 
Hedge derivatives (a) 
  
 
0.7   
 
0.5   
 
1.2   
 
—   
 
3.7  
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b) 
  
 
170.2   
 (65.1 )  
 105.1   
 
—   
 
—  
Other comprehensive loss 
  
  (1,103.2)   
  132.8    
 (970.4 )   
  
(78.2)   
  
(152.8 )  
Total comprehensive income (loss) 
  
 
 
$ 250.9   
$ 
(70.0)   
$ 
(122.9 )  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(a) 
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for 
foreign exchange contracts. 
(b) 
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expense. 

Table of Contents  
   
   
81 
   
  
Fiscal 2014 
 
   
  
General Mills 
  
Noncontrolling 
 
Interests 
   
Redeemable 
 
Interest 
 
In Millions 
  
Pretax   
Tax 
  
Net 
  
Net 
   
Net 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable 
and noncontrolling interests 
  
  
  
  
  
$1,824.4   
 
$  5.8    
 
$31.1  
Other comprehensive income (loss): 
  
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency translation 
  
$ (71.8 )  
$
—   
 
(71.8 )   
 
19.1    
 
41.4  
Net actuarial income 
  
 327.2   
 (121.2 )  
 206.0   
 
—    
 
—  
Other fair value changes: 
  
 
 
 
  
Securities 
  
 
0.5   
 
(0.2 )  
 
0.3   
 
—    
 
—  
Hedge derivatives 
  
 14.4   
 
(7.0 )  
 
7.4   
 
—    
 
(2.4 )  
Reclassification to earnings: 
  
 
 
 
  
Hedge derivatives (a) 
  
 (4.7 )  
 
0.2   
 
(4.5 )   
 
—    
 
(0.1 )  
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b) 
  
 172.7   
 (65.1 )  
 107.6   
 
—    
 
—  
Other comprehensive income 
  
 438.3   
 (193.3 )  
 245.0   
 
19.1    
 
38.9  
Total comprehensive income 
  
 
 
$2,069.4   
 
$24.9    
 
$70.0  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Gain reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for 
foreign exchange contracts. 
(b) 
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expense. 
   
  
Fiscal 2013 
 
   
  
General Mills 
  
Noncontrolling 
 
Interests 
   
Redeemable 
 
Interest 
 
In Millions 
  
Pretax   
Tax 
  
Net 
  
Net 
   
Net 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and 
noncontrolling interests 
  
  
  
  
  
$ 1,855.2   
 
$  8.0    
 
$29.3  
Other comprehensive income (loss): 
  
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency translation 
  
$ (19.8 )   
$
—   
 
(19.8 )  
 
10.3    
 
10.3  
Net actuarial income 
  
 76.3   
 (31.3 )  
 
45.0   
 
—    
 
—  
Other fair value changes: 
  
 
 
 
  
Securities 
  
 
1.2   
 
(0.4 )  
 
0.8   
 
—    
 
—  
Hedge derivatives 
  
 33.5   
 (10.4 )  
 
23.1   
 
—    
 
1.5  
Reclassification to earnings: 
  
 
 
 
  
Hedge derivatives (a) 
  
 15.0   
 
(4.5 )  
 
10.5   
 
—    
 
1.7  
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b) 
  
 159.9   
 (61.1 )  
 
98.8   
 
—    
 
—  
Other comprehensive income 
  
 266.1   
 (107.7 )  
 158.4   
 
10.3    
 
13.5  
Total comprehensive income 
  
 
 
$ 2,013.6   
 
$18.3    
 
$42.8  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for 
foreign exchange contracts. 
(b) 
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expense. 

Table of Contents  
In fiscal 2015, 2014, and 2013, except for reclassifications to earnings, changes in other comprehensive income (loss) were primarily non-cash 
items.  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss balances, net of tax effects, were as follows:  
   
NOTE 11. STOCK PLANS  
We use broad-based stock plans to help ensure that management’s interests are aligned with those of our stockholders. As of May 31, 2015, a 
total of 27.1 million shares were available for grant in the form of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and shares of 
unrestricted stock under the 2011 Stock Compensation Plan (2011 Plan) and the 2011 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors. The 
2011 Plan also provides for the issuance of cash-settled share-based units, stock appreciation rights, and performance based stock awards. 
Stock-based awards now outstanding include some granted under the 2001, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2009 stock plans, under which no further 
awards may be granted. The stock plans provide for accelerated vesting of awards upon retirement, termination, or death of eligible employees 
and directors.  
Stock Options  
The estimated fair values of stock options granted and the assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were as follows:  
   
The valuation of stock options is a significant accounting estimate that requires us to use judgments and assumptions that are likely to have a 
material impact on our financial statements. We estimate the fair value of each option on the grant date using a Black-Scholes option-pricing 
model, which requires us to make predictive assumptions regarding future stock price volatility, employee exercise behavior, dividend yield, 
and the forfeiture rate. We estimate our future stock price volatility using the historical volatility over the expected term of the option, 
excluding time periods of volatility we believe a marketplace participant would exclude in estimating our stock price volatility. We also have 
considered, but did not use, implied volatility in our estimate, because trading activity in options on our stock, especially those with tenors of 
greater than 6 months, is insufficient to provide a reliable measure of expected volatility.  
   
82 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
2015 
   
May 25, 
2014 
 
Foreign currency translation adjustments 
  
$ (536.6 )    
$ 
191.3  
Unrealized gain (loss) from: 
  
  
Securities 
  
 
3.7    
 
2.9  
Hedge derivatives 
  
 
(28.8 )    
 
(38.8)  
Pension, other postretirement, and postemployment benefits: 
  
  
Net actuarial loss 
  
 (1,756.1 )    
 (1,469.2)  
Prior service credits (costs) 
  
 
7.1    
 
(26.5)  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 
  
$(2,310.7 )    
$ (1,340.3)  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
   
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Estimated fair values of stock options granted 
  
 $  7.22            
 $  6.03           
 $  3.65         
Assumptions: 
  
  
  
Risk-free interest rate 
  
 2.6%          
 2.6%         
 1.6%       
Expected term 
  
 8.5 years    
 9.0 years    
 9.0 years  
Expected volatility 
  
 17.5%          
 17.4%          
 17.3%        
Dividend yield 
  
 3.1%          
 3.1%         
 3.5%       
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Our expected term represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding based on historical data to estimate option 
exercises and employee terminations within the valuation model. Separate groups of employees have similar historical exercise behavior and 
therefore were aggregated into a single pool for valuation purposes. The weighted-average expected term for all employee groups is presented 
in the table above. The risk-free interest rate for periods during the expected term of the options is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon 
yield curve in effect at the time of grant.  
Any corporate income tax benefit realized upon exercise or vesting of an award in excess of that previously recognized in earnings (referred to 
as a windfall tax benefit) is presented in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as a financing cash flow.  
Realized windfall tax benefits are credited to additional paid-in capital within the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Realized shortfall tax benefits 
(amounts which are less than that previously recognized in earnings) are first offset against the cumulative balance of windfall tax benefits, if 
any, and then charged directly to income tax expense, potentially resulting in volatility in our consolidated effective income tax rate. We 
calculated a cumulative memo balance of windfall tax benefits for the purpose of accounting for future shortfall tax benefits.  
Options may be priced at 100 percent or more of the fair market value on the date of grant, and generally vest four years after the date of grant. 
Options generally expire within 10 years and one month after the date of grant.  
Information on stock option activity follows:  
   
Stock-based compensation expense related to stock option awards was $18.1 million in fiscal 2015, $18.2 million in fiscal 2014, and $17.5 
million in fiscal 2013. Compensation expense related to stock-based payments recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings includes 
amounts recognized in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs for fiscal 2015.  
   
83 
   
  
Options 
Exercisable 
(Thousands)    
Weighted-
 
Average 
Exercise 
Price Per 
Share 
   
Options 
Outstanding
 
(Thousands)    
Weighted-
 
Average 
Exercise 
Price Per 
Share 
 
Balance as of May 27, 2012 
  
 
39,564.9    
 
$25.27    
 
60,942.7    
 
$27.96  
Granted 
  
  
  
 
3,407.7    
 
38.15  
Exercised 
  
  
  
 
(16,534.6 )    
 
23.49  
Forfeited or expired 
  
  
   
  
   
 
(143.7 )    
 
34.06  
Balance as of May 26, 2013 
  
 
29,290.3    
 
27.69    
 
47,672.1    
 
30.22  
Granted 
  
  
  
 
2,789.8    
 
48.33  
Exercised 
  
  
  
 
(6,181.3 )    
 
24.78  
Forfeited or expired 
  
  
   
  
   
 
(111.6 )    
 
38.74  
Balance as of May 25, 2014 
  
 
29,452.8    
 
28.37    
 
44,169.0    
 
32.10  
Granted 
  
  
  
 
2,253.1    
 
53.70  
Exercised 
  
  
  
 
(7,297.2 )    
 
26.68  
Forfeited or expired 
  
  
   
  
   
 
(47.7 )    
 
43.73  
Balance as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
26,991.5    
 
$30.44    
 
39,077.2    
 
$34.35  

Table of Contents  
Net cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options less shares used for minimum withholding taxes and the intrinsic value of options 
exercised were as follows:  
   
Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units, and Performance Share Units  
Stock and units settled in stock subject to a restricted period and a purchase price, if any (as determined by the Compensation Committee of the 
Board of Directors), may be granted to key employees under the 2011 Plan. Restricted stock and restricted stock units generally vest and 
become unrestricted four years after the date of grant. Performance share units are earned based on our future achievement of three-year goals 
for average organic net sales growth and cumulative free cash flow. Performance share units are subject to a four year vesting period and will 
be settled with common stock one year following the completion of the three-year performance period. The sale or transfer of these awards is 
restricted during the vesting period. Participants holding restricted stock, but not restricted stock units or performance share units, are entitled 
to vote on matters submitted to holders of common stock for a vote. These awards accumulate dividends from the date of grant, but participants 
only receive payment if the awards vest.  
Information on restricted stock unit, performance share units, and cash-settled share-based units activity follows:  
   
   
The total grant-date fair value of restricted stock unit awards that vested during fiscal 2015 was $133.7 million, and $104.6 million vested 
during fiscal 2014.  
As of May 31, 2015, unrecognized compensation expense related to non-vested stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share 
units was $101.9 million. This expense will be recognized over 17 months, on average.  
Stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock units, performance share units, and cash-settled share-based payment awards was 
$96.6 million for fiscal 2015, $107.0 million for fiscal 2014, and $128.9 million for fiscal 2013. Compensation expense related to stock-based 
payments recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings includes amounts recognized in restructuring, impairment, and other exit 
costs for fiscal 2015.  
   
84 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Net cash proceeds 
  
$ 163.7   
$108.1    
$ 300.8  
Intrinsic value of options exercised 
  
$ 201.9   
$166.6    
$ 297.2  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Equity Classified 
   
Liability Classified 
 
   
  
Share-Settled 
 
Units  
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average  
Grant-Date 
Fair Value    
Share-Settled 
 
Units  
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average  
Grant-Date 
Fair Value    
Cash-Settled
 
Share-Based 
 
Units  
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average  
Grant-Date
Fair Value  
Non-vested as of May 25, 
2014 
  
 
7,893.7   
 
$40.81    
 
249.5   
 
$25.67    
 
822.8   
 
$36.52  
Granted 
  
 
1,658.7   
 
53.44    
 
49.5   
 
53.70    
 
—   
 
—  
Vested 
  
 
(2,978.7 )  
 
35.19    
 
(55.7 )  
 
37.68    
 
(822.1)   
 
37.40  
Forfeited, expired, or 
reclassified 
  
 
(338.1 )  
 
46.13    
 
(6.3 )  
 
45.41    
 
(0.7 )   
 
37.40  
Non-vested as of May 31, 
2015 
  
 
6,235.6    
 
$46.44    
  
237.0    
 
$44.84    
 
—   
 
$    —  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
   
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Number of units granted (thousands) 
  
 1,708.2    
 2,144.1   
 2,404.9  
Weighted average price per unit 
  
$ 53.45    
$ 48.49   
$ 38.41  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
NOTE 12. EARNINGS PER SHARE  
Basic and diluted EPS were calculated using the following:  
   
   
NOTE 13. RETIREMENT BENEFITS AND POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS  
Defined Benefit Pension Plans  
We have defined benefit pension plans covering many employees in the United States, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. Benefits for 
salaried employees are based on length of service and final average compensation. Benefits for hourly employees include various monthly 
amounts for each year of credited service. Our funding policy is consistent with the requirements of applicable laws. We made no voluntary 
contributions to our principal U.S. plans in fiscal 2015 and 2014, and made a $200.0 million voluntary contribution in fiscal 2013. We do not 
expect to be required to make any contributions in fiscal 2016. Our principal domestic retirement plan covering salaried employees has a 
provision that any excess pension assets would be allocated to active participants if the plan is terminated within five years of a change in 
control. In fiscal 2012, we announced changes to our U.S. defined benefit pension plans. All new salaried employees hired on or after June 1, 
2013 are eligible for a new retirement program that does not include a defined benefit pension plan. Current salaried employees remain in the 
existing defined benefit pension plan with adjustments to benefits.  
Other Postretirement Benefit Plans  
We also sponsor plans that provide health care benefits to many of our retirees in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. The United States 
salaried health care benefit plan is contributory, with retiree contributions based on years of service. We make decisions to fund related trusts 
for certain employees and retirees on an annual basis. We made $24.0 million in voluntary contributions to these plans in fiscal 2015 and 
$24.0 million in voluntary contributions to these plans in fiscal 2014.  
   
85 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions, Except per Share Data 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Net earnings attributable to General Mills 
  
$ 1,221.3    
$ 1,824.4   
$ 1,855.2  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Average number of common shares—basic EPS 
  
 603.3    
 628.6   
 648.6  
Incremental share effect from: (a) 
  
  
  
Stock options 
  
 
11.3    
 
12.3   
 
12.0  
Restricted stock, restricted stock units, and other 
  
 
4.2    
 
4.8   
 
5.0  
Average number of common shares—diluted EPS 
  
  618.8    
 645.7   
 665.6  
Earnings per share—basic 
  
$ 
2.02    
$ 
2.90   
$ 
2.86  
Earnings per share—diluted 
  
$ 
1.97    
$ 
2.83   
$ 
2.79  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Incremental shares from stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units are computed by the treasury stock method. 
Stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units excluded from our computation of diluted EPS because they were not 
dilutive were as follows: 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Anti-dilutive stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units 
  
 2.1    
 1.7    
 0.6  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Health Care Cost Trend Rates  
Assumed health care cost trends are as follows:  
   
We review our health care cost trend rates annually. Our review is based on data we collect about our health care claims experience and 
information provided by our actuaries. This information includes recent plan experience, plan design, overall industry experience and 
projections, and assumptions used by other similar organizations. Our initial health care cost trend rate is adjusted as necessary to remain 
consistent with this review, recent experiences, and short-term expectations. Our initial health care cost trend rate assumption is 7.3 percent for 
retirees age 65 and over and 6.5 percent for retirees under age 65 at the end of fiscal 2015. Rates are graded down annually until the ultimate 
trend rate of 5.0 percent is reached in 2025 for all retirees. The trend rates are applicable for calculations only if the retirees’ benefits increase 
as a result of health care inflation. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view on the 
rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate health care cost premium. Assumed trend rates for health care costs have an important effect on 
the amounts reported for the other postretirement benefit plans.  
A one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:  
   
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the 
Act) was signed into law in March 2010. The Act codifies health care reforms with staggered effective dates from 2010 to 2018. Estimates of 
the future impacts of several of the Act’s provisions are incorporated into our postretirement benefit liability.  
Postemployment Benefit Plans  
Under certain circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits to former or inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and 
members of our Board of Directors, including severance and certain other benefits payable upon death. We recognize an obligation for any of 
these benefits that vest or accumulate with service. Postemployment benefits that do not vest or accumulate with service (such as severance 
based solely on annual pay rather than years of service) are charged to expense when incurred. Our postemployment benefit plans are 
unfunded.  
We use our fiscal year end as the measurement date for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans.  
   
86 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
   
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
Health care cost trend rate for next year 
   6.5% and 7.3%     6.5% and 7.3%   
Rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (ultimate rate) 
   
5.0%     
5.0%   
Year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate 
   
2025         
2025      
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
One 
Percentage 
Point  
Increase    
One 
Percentage 
Point  
Decrease  
Effect on the aggregate of the service and interest cost components in fiscal 2016 
  
 
$  3.7    
 
$  (3.2)   
Effect on the other postretirement accumulated benefit obligation as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
77.1    
 
(68.9)   
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Summarized financial information about defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans is presented 
below:  
   
Assumed mortality rates of plan participants are a critical estimate in measuring the expected payments a participant will receive over their 
lifetime and the amount of expense we recognize. On October 27, 2014, the Society of Actuaries published RP-2014 Mortality Tables and 
Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2014, which both reflect improved longevity. We adopted the change to the mortality assumptions to 
remeasure our defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans obligations, which increased the total of these obligations by 
$436.7 million.  
The accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit pension plans was $5,750.4 million as of May 31, 2015, and $5,093.1 million as of 
May 25, 2014.  
   
87 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 
  
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans 
  
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  2015 
  
2014 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  2015   2014  
Change in Plan Assets: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fair value at beginning of year 
  $ 5,611.8   $ 5,066.1   $ 517.3   $ 436.9    
 
Actual return on assets 
   373.6    740.2    
44.0    
59.1   
 
Employer contributions 
   
24.1    
25.6    
24.1    
24.1   
 
Plan participant contributions 
    
10.3     
6.7     
13.6     
13.5   
 
Benefits payments 
   (244.9 )   (231.4 )   
(16.2)    (16.3)    
 
Foreign currency 
   
(16.4 )   
4.6    
—    
—   
 
   
  
  
  
Fair value at end of year 
  $ 5,758.5    $ 5,611.8   $ 582.8    $ 517.3    
 
   
  
  
  
Change in Projected Benefit Obligation: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Benefit obligation at beginning of year 
  $ 5,618.0   $ 5,381.4   $ 1,074.8   $1,148.2   $ 145.3   $ 145.4  
Service cost 
   137.0    133.0    
22.4    
22.7    
7.5    
7.7  
Interest cost 
   249.2    239.5    
46.9    
50.5    
4.3    
4.1  
Plan amendment 
    
1.9     
17.8     
(42.4)    
18.2     
—    
—  
Curtailment/other 
   
19.9    
—    
3.4    
(2.9 )    
9.5    
3.7  
Plan participant contributions 
   
10.3    
6.7    
13.6    
13.5    
—    
—  
Medicare Part D reimbursements 
   
—    
—    
3.2    
4.3    
—    
—  
Actuarial loss (gain) 
    479.7     
67.6     
23.5     (119.4 )     
(0.4 )    
1.8  
Benefits payments 
   (245.5 )   (231.6 )   
(62.8)    
(59.3)    (19.1 )    (17.2 )  
Foreign currency 
   
(18.4 )   
3.6    
(3.0 )    
(1.0 )    
(0.5 )    
(0.2 )  
Projected benefit obligation at end of year 
  $ 6,252.1    $ 5,618.0   $ 1,079.6    $1,074.8   $ 146.6    $ 145.3  
Plan assets less than benefit obligation as of fiscal year end 
  $ (493.6 )  $ 
(6.2 )  $ (496.8 )   $ (557.5 )   $ (146.6 )   $ (145.3 )  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Amounts recognized in AOCI as of May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014, are as follows:  
   
Plans with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets are as follows:  
   
Components of net periodic benefit expense are as follows:  
   
We expect to recognize the following amounts in net periodic benefit expense in fiscal 2016:  
   
   
88 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 
  
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans   
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
  
Total 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  2015   2014   2015   2014   
2015 
  
2014 
 
Net actuarial loss 
  $(1,674.9 )   $(1,389.2 )   $ (72.2)   $ (70.2)   $ 
(9.0)   $ 
(9.8 )   $ (1,756.1)   $ (1,469.2)  
Prior service (costs) credits 
   
(13.8)    
(26.1)     23.8    
4.0     
(2.9)    
(4.4 )     
7.1     
(26.5)  
Amounts recorded in accumulated other 
comprehensive loss 
  $(1,688.7 )   $(1,415.3 )   $ (48.4)   $ (66.2)   $ (11.9)   $ (14.2)   $ (1,749.0)   $ (1,495.7)  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Defined  
Benefit  
Pension  Plans    
Other  
Postretirement 
Benefit  Plans 
   
Postemployment 
Benefit  Plans 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
   
Fiscal Year 
   
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  2015    2014    
2015 
   
2014 
   
2015    
2014  
Projected benefit obligation 
  $ 512.3    $ 433.1    $ 
—   $ 
—    $ 
—    $ 
—  
Accumulated benefit obligation 
   440.6     375.6     1,074.8    1,070.0     143.5     145.3  
Plan assets at fair value 
   
—     
—     582.8    517.3     
—     
—  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 
  
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans 
  
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015   
2014   
2013   2015   2014   2013   2015    2014    2013  
Service cost 
  $ 137.0   $ 133.0   $ 124.4   $ 22.4   $ 22.7   $ 21.6   $ 7.5    $ 7.7    $ 7.8  
Interest cost 
   249.2    239.5    237.3    46.9    50.5    52.1    4.3     4.1     4.4  
Expected return on plan assets 
   (476.4 )    (455.6 )   (428.0 )    (40.2)    (34.6)    (32.1)    —     —     —  
Amortization of losses 
    141.7     151.0    136.0     
4.9    15.4    17.1    0.7     0.6     2.1  
Amortization of prior service costs (credits) 
   
7.4    
5.6    
6.2    (1.6 )    (3.4 )    (3.4 )    2.4     2.4     1.9  
Other adjustments 
   
15.1    
—    
—    
3.3    
—    
—    9.5     3.7     11.4  
Settlement or curtailment losses 
   
18.0    
—    
—    
1.3    (2.9 )    
—    —     —     —  
Net expense 
  $ 92.0   $
73.5   $ 75.9   $ 37.0   $ 47.7   $ 55.3   $24.4    $ 18.5    $27.6  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans    
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans   
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
 
Amortization of losses 
  
 
$189.9    
 
$ 6.7   
 
$0.7  
Amortization of prior service costs (credits) 
  
 
4.7    
 
(5.4 )  
 
2.4  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Assumptions  
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine fiscal year-end benefit obligations are as follows:  
   
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine fiscal year net periodic benefit expense are as follows:  
   
Discount Rates  
Our discount rate assumptions are determined annually as of the last day of our fiscal year for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement 
benefit, and postemployment benefit plan obligations. We also use the same discount rates to determine defined benefit pension, other 
postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan income and expense for the following fiscal year. We work with our outside actuaries 
to determine the timing and amount of expected future cash outflows to plan participants and, using the Aa Above Median corporate bond 
yield, to develop a forward interest rate curve, including a margin to that index based on our credit risk. This forward interest rate curve is 
applied to our expected future cash outflows to determine our discount rate assumptions.  
   
89 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 
 
 
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans 
 
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
Fiscal Year 
 
 
Fiscal Year 
 
   
  2015  
 
2014  
 
2015  
 
2014  
 
2015  
 
2014  
Discount rate 
   4.38%   
 4.54 %   
 4.20 %   
 4.51 %   
 3.55 %   
 3.82 %  
Rate of salary increases 
   4.09  
 
 4.44  
 
 
—  
 
 
—  
 
 4.36  
 
 4.44  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 
 
 
Other  
Postretirement  
Benefit Plans 
 
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
Fiscal Year 
 
 
Fiscal Year 
 
   
  2015  
 2014  
 2013  
 2015  
 2014  
 2013  
 2015  
 2014  
 2013  
Discount rate 
   4.54 %    4.54 %    4.85%    4.51%    4.52 %    4.70 %    3.82 %    3.70 %    3.86 %  
Rate of salary increases 
   4.44  
  4.44  
  4.44  
  —  
  —  
  —  
  4.44  
  4.44  
  4.45  
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets 
   8.53  
  8.53  
  8.53  
  8.13  
  8.11  
  8.13  
  —  
  —  
  —  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Fair Value of Plan Assets  
The fair values of our pension and postretirement benefit plans’ assets and their respective levels in the fair value hierarchy at May 31, 2015 
and May 25, 2014, by asset category were as follows:  
   
   
90 
 
  
May 31, 2015 
   
May 25, 2014 
 
In Millions 
  Level 1    Level 2    Level 3    
Total 
Assets    Level 1    Level 2    Level 3    
Total 
Assets  
Fair value measurement of pension plan 
assets: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Equity (a) 
  $ 1,634.4    $ 1,010.3    $ 542.9    $ 3,187.6    $ 1,305.4    $ 793.9    $ 568.2    $ 2,667.5  
Fixed income (b) 
   486.3     1,158.5     
—     1,644.8     586.3     1,347.7     
—     1,934.0  
Real asset investments (c) 
   124.3     116.7     498.1     739.1     
98.2     128.3     602.9     829.4  
Other investments (d) 
   
—     
—     
0.4     
0.4     
—     
—     
0.3     
0.3  
Cash and accruals 
    186.6      
—      
—      186.6     180.6     
—     
—     180.6  
Total fair value measurement of pension 
plan assets 
  $ 2,431.6    $ 2,285.5    $ 1,041.4    $ 5,758.5    $ 2,170.5    $ 2,269.9    $ 1,171.4    $ 5,611.8  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Fair value measurement of postretirement 
benefit plan assets: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Equity (a) 
  $ 134.0    $ 120.6    $ 
23.7    $ 278.3    $ 
86.6    $ 129.1    $ 
21.1    $ 236.8  
Fixed income (b) 
   
14.0     
73.7     
—     
87.7     
18.5     
65.8     
—     
84.3  
Real asset investments (c) 
   
0.2     
25.7     
16.6     
42.5     
—     
19.3     
17.9     
37.2  
Other investments (d) 
   
—     168.9     
—     168.9     
—     152.4     
—     152.4  
Cash and accruals 
    
5.4      
—      
—      
5.4     
6.6     
—     
—     
6.6  
Fair value measurement of postretirement 
benefit plan assets 
  $ 153.6    $ 388.9    $ 
40.3    $ 582.8    $ 111.7    $ 366.6    $ 
39.0    $ 517.3  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Primarily publicly traded common stock and private equity partnerships for purposes of total return and to maintain equity exposure 
consistent with policy allocations. Investments include: United States and international equity securities, mutual funds, and equity futures 
valued at closing prices from national exchanges; and commingled funds, privately held securities, and private equity partnerships valued 
at unit values or net asset values provided by the investment managers, which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments. 
Various methods are used to determine fair values and may include the cost of the investment, most recent financing, and expected cash 
flows. For some of these investments, realization of the estimated fair value is dependent upon transactions between willing sellers and 
buyers. 
(b) 
Primarily government and corporate debt securities for purposes of total return and managing fixed income exposure to policy 
allocations. Investments include: fixed income securities and bond futures generally valued at closing prices from national exchanges, 
fixed income pricing models, and independent financial analysts; and fixed income commingled funds valued at unit values provided by 
the investment managers, which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments. 
(c) 
Publicly traded common stock and limited partnerships in the energy and real estate sectors for purposes of total return. Investments 
include: energy and real estate securities generally valued at closing prices from national exchanges; and commingled funds, private 
securities, and limited partnerships valued at unit values or net asset values provided by the investment managers, which are generally 
based on the fair value of the underlying investments. 
(d) 
Global balanced fund of equity, fixed income, and real estate securities for purposes of meeting Canadian pension plan asset allocation 
policies, and insurance and annuity contracts to provide a stable stream of income for retirees and to fund postretirement medical benefits. 
Fair values are derived from unit values provided by the investment managers, which are generally based on the fair value of the 
underlying investments and contract fair values from the providers. 

Table of Contents  
The following table is a roll forward of the Level 3 investments of our pension and postretirement benefit plans’ assets during the years ended 
May 31, 2015 and May 25, 2014:  
   
   
The net change in level 3 assets attributable to unrealized losses at May 31, 2015, was $113.4 million for our pension plan assets, and $1.5 
million for our postretirement benefit plan assets.  
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets  
Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by our asset allocation, our historical long-term investment performance, our estimate 
of future long-term returns by asset class (using input from our actuaries, investment services, and investment managers), and long-term 
inflation assumptions. We review this assumption annually for each plan, however, our annual investment performance for one particular year 
does not, by itself, significantly influence our evaluation.  
   
91 
 
  
Fiscal 2015 
 
In Millions 
  
Balance as of 
 
May 25, 2014    
Net 
Transfers 
 
Out 
   
Net Purchases, 
Sales Issuances, 
 
and Settlements    
Net 
Gain 
(Loss)   
Balance as of 
 
May 31, 2015  
Pension benefit plan assets: 
  
  
  
  
 
Equity 
  
 
$   568.2    
 
$  —    
 
$(61.0)     
$ 35.7   
 
$   542.9  
Real asset investments 
  
 
602.9    
 
   —    
 
(18.2)     
 (86.6 )   
 
498.1  
Other investments 
  
 
0.3    
 
   —    
 
0.2     
 (0.1 )   
 
0.4  
Fair value activity of level 3 pension plan assets 
  
 
$1,171.4    
 
$  —    
 
$(79.0)     
$ (51.0 )   
 
$1,041.4  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Postretirement benefit plan assets: 
  
  
  
  
 
Equity 
  
 
$     21.1    
 
$  —    
 
$   0.3     
$ 2.3   
 
$     23.7  
Real asset investments 
  
 
17.9    
 
   —    
 
0.5     
 (1.8 )   
 
16.6  
Fair value activity of level 3 postretirement benefit 
plan assets 
  
 
$     39.0    
 
$  —    
 
$   0.8     
$ 0.5   
 
$     40.3  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal 2014 
 
In Millions 
  
Balance as of 
May 26, 2013    
Net 
Transfers 
Out 
   
Net Purchases, 
Sales Issuances, 
 
and Settlements    
Net 
Gain    
Balance as of 
May 25, 2014  
Pension benefit plan assets: 
  
  
  
  
  
Equity 
  
 
$559.3   
 
$    —     
 
$(59.0)     
 $  67.9    
 
$   568.2  
Real asset investments 
  
 
430.4   
 
—     
 
(25.5)     
 198.0    
 
602.9  
Other investments 
  
 
0.3   
 
—     
 
—     
 
—    
 
0.3  
Fair value activity of level 3 pension plan assets 
  
 
$990.0   
 
$    —     
 
$(84.5)     
 $265.9    
 
$1,171.4  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Postretirement benefit plan assets: 
  
  
  
  
  
Equity 
  
 
$  20.2   
 
$    —     
 
$  (0.7)     
 $    1.6    
 
$     21.1  
Real asset investments 
  
 
14.5   
 
(4.2)     
 
1.4     
 
6.2    
 
17.9  
Fair value activity of 
level 3 postretirement benefit plan assets 
  
 
$  34.7   
 $  (4.2)     
 
$   0.7     
 $    7.8    
 
$     39.0  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Weighted-average asset allocations for the past two fiscal years for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans are as 
follows:  
   
The investment objective for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans is to secure the benefit obligations to 
participants at a reasonable cost to us. Our goal is to optimize the long-term return on plan assets at a moderate level of risk. The defined 
benefit pension plan and other postretirement benefit plan portfolios are broadly diversified across asset classes. Within asset classes, the 
portfolios are further diversified across investment styles and investment organizations. For the defined benefit pension plans, the long-term 
investment policy allocation is: 25 percent to equities in the United States; 15 percent to international equities; 10 percent to private equities; 35 
percent to fixed income; and 15 percent to real assets (real estate, energy, and timber). For other postretirement benefit plans, the long-term 
investment policy allocations are: 30 percent to equities in the United States; 20 percent to international equities; 10 percent to private equities; 
30 percent to fixed income; and 10 percent to real assets (real estate, energy, and timber). The actual allocations to these asset classes may vary 
tactically around the long-term policy allocations based on relative market valuations.  
Contributions and Future Benefit Payments  
We do not expect to be required to make contributions to our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit 
plans in fiscal 2016. Actual fiscal 2016 contributions could exceed our current projections, as influenced by our decision to undertake 
discretionary funding of our benefit trusts and future changes in regulatory requirements. Estimated benefit payments, which reflect expected 
future service, as appropriate, are expected to be paid from fiscal 2016 to 2025 as follows:  
   
   
92 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans 
 
 
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
Fiscal Year 
 
 
  
2015  
 
2014  
 
2015 
 
 
2014 
 
  
  
Asset category: 
  
 
 
 
United States equities 
  
 28.9 %   
 25.5%   
 
38.7 %   
 
38.4 %  
International equities 
  
 18.4  
 
 13.9  
 
 
24.1  
 
 
24.0  
Private equities 
  
 9.5  
 
 10.3  
 
 
4.1  
 
 
4.1  
Fixed income 
  
 30.3  
 
 35.5  
 
 
26.3  
 
 
26.3  
Real assets 
  
 12.9   
 
 14.8  
 
 
6.8   
 
 
7.2  
  
  
Total 
  
 100.0 %   
 100.0 %   
 100.0 %   
 100.0 %  
  
  
In Millions 
  
Defined 
Benefit 
Pension 
Plans    
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans  
Gross Payments    
Medicare 
Subsidy 
Receipts    
Postemployment 
Benefit  
Plans 
 
  
  
2016 
  
$ 264.7    
 
$  60.8   
 
$  4.8    
 
$21.9  
2017 
  
 278.1    
 
64.8   
 
5.2    
 
18.5  
2018 
  
 288.3    
 
67.7   
 
5.6    
 
17.3  
2019 
  
 298.6    
 
69.6   
 
6.0    
 
16.1  
2020 
  
 309.3    
 
70.8   
 
5.5    
 
15.2  
2021-2025 
  
 1,700.0    
 
362.3   
 
23.6    
 
66.7  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Defined Contribution Plans  
The General Mills Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan that covers domestic salaried, hourly, nonunion, and certain union employees. 
This plan is a 401(k) savings plan that includes a number of investment funds, including a Company stock fund and an Employee Stock 
Ownership Plan (ESOP). We sponsor another money purchase plan for certain domestic hourly employees with net assets of $21.9 million as 
of May 31, 2015, and $20.6 million as of May 25, 2014. We also sponsor defined contribution plans in many of our foreign locations. Our total 
recognized expense related to defined contribution plans was $44.0 million in fiscal 2015, $44.8 million in fiscal 2014, and $46.0 million in 
fiscal 2013.  
We match a percentage of employee contributions to the General Mills Savings Plan. The Company match is directed to investment options of 
the participant’s choosing. The number of shares of our common stock allocated to participants in the ESOP was 7.5 million as of May 31, 
2015, and 8.4 million as of May 25, 2014. The ESOP’s only assets are our common stock and temporary cash balances.  
The Company stock fund and the ESOP held $655.6 million and $708.2 million of Company common stock as of May 31, 2015, and May 25, 
2014.  
NOTE 14. INCOME TAXES  
The components of earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures and the corresponding income taxes thereon are as 
follows:  
   
   
93 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
  
  
Earnings before income taxes and  
after-tax earnings from joint ventures: 
  
  
  
United States 
  
$ 1,338.6    
$ 2,181.4    
$2,051.2  
Foreign 
  
  423.3     
 473.6    
 483.7  
  
  
Total earnings before income taxes and  
after-tax earnings from joint ventures 
  
$ 1,761.9    
$ 2,655.0    
$2,534.9  
  
  
Income taxes: 
  
  
  
Currently payable: 
  
  
  
Federal 
  
$ 392.7     
$ 526.7    
$ 493.4  
State and local 
  
 
29.3    
 
37.8    
 
39.5  
Foreign 
  
 139.5    
 146.3    
 126.5  
  
  
Total current 
  
  561.5     
 710.8    
 659.4  
  
  
Deferred: 
  
  
  
Federal 
  
 
70.3    
 159.1    
 
68.8  
State and local 
  
 
(8.7 )   
 
21.3    
 
19.2  
Foreign 
  
 
(36.3 )   
 
(7.9 )    
 
(6.2 )  
  
  
Total deferred 
  
 
25.3    
 172.5    
 
81.8  
  
  
Total income taxes 
  
$ 586.8     
$ 883.3    
$ 741.2  
  
  

Table of Contents  
The following table reconciles the United States statutory income tax rate with our effective income tax rate:  
   
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities are as follows:  
   
We have established a valuation allowance against certain of the categories of deferred tax assets described above as current evidence does not 
suggest we will realize sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character (e.g., ordinary income versus capital gain income) within the 
carryforward period to allow us to realize these deferred tax benefits.  
   
94 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
 
  
2015  
 
2014  
 
2013  
  
  
United States statutory rate 
  
 35.0 %   
 35.0 %   
 35.0 %  
State and local income taxes, net of federal tax benefits 
  
 0.7   
 
 1.4  
 
 1.3  
Foreign rate differences 
  
 (3.1 )   
 (0.1 )   
 (0.6 )  
Repatriation of foreign earnings 
  
 4.5  
 
 —  
 
 —  
Deferred taxes for Medicare subsidies 
  
 —  
 
 —  
 
 (1.3 )  
GMC subsidiary restructure 
  
 —  
 
 —  
 
 (2.5 )  
Domestic manufacturing deduction 
  
 (2.9 )   
 (2.3 )   
 (2.1 )  
Other, net 
  
 (0.9 )   
 (0.7 )   
 (0.6 )  
Effective income tax rate 
  
 33.3 %   
 33.3 %   
 29.2 %  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
  
  
Accrued liabilities 
  
$ 
98.0    
$ 106.0  
Compensation and employee benefits 
  
 536.2    
 546.0  
Unrealized hedges 
  
 
0.8    
 
—  
Pension 
  
  169.0    
 
—  
Tax credit carryforwards 
  
 
5.6    
 
78.9  
Stock, partnership, and miscellaneous investments 
  
 384.1    
 427.9  
Capital losses 
  
 
6.1    
 
13.0  
Net operating losses 
  
  
89.3    
 
71.4  
Other 
  
 
74.5    
 117.7  
  
  
Gross deferred tax assets 
  
 1,363.6    
 1,360.9  
Valuation allowance 
  
  215.4    
 221.6  
  
  
Net deferred tax assets 
  
 1,148.2    
 1,139.3  
  
  
Brands 
  
 1,346.3    
 1,373.4  
Fixed assets 
  
  446.5    
 499.4  
Pension 
  
 
—    
 
2.0  
Intangible assets 
  
 208.4    
 204.2  
Tax lease transactions 
  
 
50.8    
 
53.1  
Inventories 
  
  
59.7    
 
60.6  
Stock, partnership, and miscellaneous investments 
  
 472.5    
 470.7  
Unrealized hedges 
  
 
—    
 
22.8  
Other 
  
 
14.2    
 
45.0  
  
  
Gross deferred tax liabilities 
  
 2,598.4    
 2,731.2  
  
  
Net deferred tax liability 
  
$ 1,450.2    
$ 1,591.9  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Of the total valuation allowance of $215.4 million, the majority relates to a deferred tax asset for losses recorded as part of the Pillsbury 
acquisition in the amount of $160.9 million and $47.8 million relates to various state and foreign loss carryforwards. As of May 31, 2015, we 
believe it is more-likely-than-not that the remainder of our deferred tax assets are realizable.  
We have $89.9 million of operating loss carryforwards. Of this amount, $78.7 million is foreign loss carryforwards and the carryforward 
periods are as follows: $50.2 million do not expire; $3.8 million expire in fiscal 2016 and 2017; and $24.7 million expire in fiscal 2018 and 
beyond. The remaining $11.2 million are state operating loss carryforwards, the majority of which expire after 2023.  
We have not recognized a deferred tax liability for unremitted earnings of approximately $1.9 billion from our foreign operations because our 
subsidiaries have invested or will invest the undistributed earnings indefinitely, or the earnings will be remitted in a tax-neutral transaction. It is 
not practicable for us to determine the amount of unrecognized deferred tax liabilities on these indefinitely reinvested earnings. Deferred taxes 
are recorded for earnings of our foreign operations when we determine that such earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested. In fiscal 2015, 
we approved a one-time repatriation of $606.1 million of foreign earnings to reduce the economic cost of funding current restructuring 
initiatives and the acquisition of Annie’s completed in fiscal 2015. We recorded a discrete tax charge of $78.6 million in fiscal 2015 related to 
this action. We have previously asserted that our foreign earnings are permanently reinvested and will only be repatriated in a tax-neutral 
manner, and this one-time repatriation does not change this on-going assertion.  
In fiscal 2010, we recorded a non-cash income tax charge and decrease to our deferred tax assets of $35.0 million related to a reduction of the 
tax deductibility of retiree health cost to the extent of any Medicare Part D subsidy received beginning in fiscal 2013 under the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. During fiscal 2013, we took 
certain actions to restore part of the tax benefits associated with Medicare Part D subsidies and recorded a $33.7 million discrete decrease to 
income tax expense and an increase to our deferred tax assets.  
During the first quarter of fiscal 2013, in conjunction with the consent of the Class A investor, we restructured our GMC subsidiary through the 
distribution of its manufacturing assets, stock, inventory, cash, and certain intellectual property to a wholly owned subsidiary. GMC retained 
the remaining intellectual property. Immediately following this restructuring, the Class A Interests were sold by the then current holder to 
another unrelated third party investor. As a result of these transactions, we recorded a $63.3 million decrease to deferred income tax liabilities 
related to the tax basis of the investment in GMC and certain distributed assets, with a corresponding discrete non-cash reduction to income 
taxes in fiscal 2013.  
We are subject to federal income taxes in the United States as well as various state, local, and foreign jurisdictions. A number of years may 
elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of 
resolution of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our liabilities for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust 
these liabilities, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position would usually 
require the use of cash.  
The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Our major taxing jurisdictions include the United States 
(federal and state) and Canada. Various tax examinations by United States state taxing authorities could be conducted for any open tax year, 
which vary by jurisdiction, but are generally from 3 to 5 years.  
Several state and foreign examinations are currently in progress. We do not expect these examinations to result in a material impact on our 
results of operations or financial position.  
During fiscal 2014, the Internal Revenue Service concluded its field examination of our 2011 and 2012 tax years. The audit closure and related 
adjustments did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position. As of May 31, 2015, we have effectively settled 
all issues with the Internal Revenue Service for fiscal years 2012 and prior.  
   
95 

Table of Contents  
We apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. Accordingly, we recognize the 
amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. Future changes in judgment 
related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions will affect earnings in the quarter of such change.  
The following table sets forth changes in our total gross unrecognized tax benefit liabilities, excluding accrued interest, for fiscal 2015 and 
2014. Approximately $84 million of this total in fiscal 2015 represents the amount that, if recognized, would affect our effective income tax 
rate in future periods. This amount differs from the gross unrecognized tax benefits presented in the table because certain of the liabilities 
below would impact deferred taxes if recognized. We also would record a decrease in U.S. federal income taxes upon recognition of the state 
tax benefits included therein.  
   
As of May 31, 2015, we expect to pay approximately $1.4 million of unrecognized tax benefit liabilities and accrued interest within the next 12 
months. We are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit 
outcomes. The remaining amount of our unrecognized tax liability was classified in other liabilities.  
We report accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefit liabilities in income tax expense. For fiscal 2015, we recognized a 
net benefit of $0.2 million of tax-related net interest and penalties, and had $35.2 million of accrued interest and penalties as of May 31, 2015. 
For fiscal 2014, we recognized a net benefit of $4.6 million of tax-related net interest and penalties, and had $42.0 million of accrued interest 
and penalties as of May 25, 2014.  
NOTE 15. LEASES, OTHER COMMITMENTS, AND CONTINGENCIES  
The Company’s leases are generally for warehouse space and equipment. Rent expense under all operating leases from continuing operations 
was $193.5 million, $189.0 million, and $187.9 million in fiscal 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively.  
Some operating leases require payment of property taxes, insurance, and maintenance costs in addition to the rent payments. Contingent and 
escalation rent in excess of minimum rent payments and sublease income netted in rent expense were insignificant.  
   
96 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014  
   
  
Balance, beginning of year 
  
$ 150.9    
$ 216.2  
Tax positions related to current year: 
  
  
Additions 
  
  34.8    
 26.5  
Tax positions related to prior years: 
  
  
Additions 
  
 17.4    
 15.1  
Reductions 
  
 (21.8)    
 (94.5)  
Settlements 
  
  (12.0)    
 (5.4 )  
Lapses in statutes of limitations 
  
 (8.2)    
 (7.0 )  
Balance, end of year 
  
$ 161.1    
$ 150.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Noncancelable future lease commitments are:  
   
These future lease commitments will be partially offset by estimated future sublease receipts of approximately $4 million. Depreciation on 
capital leases is recorded as depreciation expense in our results of operations.  
As of May 31, 2015, we have issued guarantees and comfort letters of $434.4 million for the debt and other obligations of consolidated 
subsidiaries, and guarantees and comfort letters of $258.5 million for the debt and other obligations of non-consolidated affiliates, mainly 
CPW. In addition, off-balance sheet arrangements are generally limited to the future payments under non-cancelable operating leases, which 
totaled $400.5 million as of May 31, 2015.  
NOTE 16. BUSINESS SEGMENT AND GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION  
We operate in the consumer foods industry. We have three operating segments by type of customer and geographic region as follows: U.S. 
Retail, 59.6 percent of our fiscal 2015 consolidated net sales; International, 29.1 percent of our fiscal 2015 consolidated net sales; and 
Convenience Stores and Foodservice, 11.3 percent of our fiscal 2015 consolidated net sales.  
Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we have changed how we assess operating segment performance to exclude the asset and liability 
remeasurement impact from hyperinflationary economies. This impact is now included in unallocated corporate items. All periods presented 
have been changed to conform to this presentation.  
Beginning with the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we realigned certain operating units within our U.S. Retail operating segment. We also 
changed the name of our Yoplait operating unit to Yogurt and our Big G operating unit to Cereal. Frozen Foods transitioned into Meals and 
Baking Products. Small Planet Foods transitioned into Snacks, Cereal, and Meals. The Yogurt operating unit was unchanged. We revised the 
amounts previously reported in the net sales and net sales percentage change by operating unit within our U.S. Retail segment to conform to the 
new operating unit structure. These realignments had no effect on previously reported consolidated net sales, operating segments’ net sales, 
operating profit, segment operating profit, net earnings attributable to General Mills, or EPS. In addition, results from the acquired Annie’s 
business are included in the Meals and Snacks operating units. Our chief operating decision maker continues to assess performance and make 
decisions about resources to be allocated to our segments at the U.S. Retail, International, and Convenience Stores and Foodservice operating 
segment level.  
Our U.S. Retail segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, 
and drug, dollar and discount chains operating throughout the United States. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat 
cereals, refrigerated yogurt, soup, meal kits, shelf stable and frozen vegetables, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking 
mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, grain, fruit and savory snacks, and a wide variety of organic products including meal kits, granola bars, 
and cereal.  
   
97 
In Millions 
  
 
 
Operating 
 
Leases 
 
   
Capital 
 
Leases 
  
  
Fiscal 2016 
  
 
$108.4    
$0.6  
Fiscal 2017 
  
 
76.2    
0.4  
Fiscal 2018 
  
 
56.9    
0.2  
Fiscal 2019 
  
 
45.0    
0.2  
Fiscal 2020 
  
 
32.4    
0.1  
After Fiscal 2020 
  
 
81.6    
—   
   
  
Total noncancelable future lease commitments 
  
 
$400.5    
$1.5  
   
  
   
Less: interest 
  
  
(0.1 )  
   
  
Present value of obligations under capital leases 
  
  
$1.4  
   
  

Table of Contents  
Our International segment consists of retail and foodservice businesses outside of the United States. Our product categories include ready-to-
eat cereals, shelf stable and frozen vegetables, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza snacks, 
refrigerated yogurt, grain and fruit snacks, and super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts. We also sell super-premium ice cream and frozen 
desserts directly to consumers through owned retail shops. Our International segment also includes products manufactured in the United States 
for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. 
Revenues from export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end customer is located.  
In our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment our major product categories are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen 
breakfasts, unbaked and fully baked frozen dough products, baking mixes, and flour. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and 
nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience 
stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries. Substantially all of this segment’s operations are located in the United States.  
Operating profit for these segments excludes unallocated corporate items and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs. Unallocated 
corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, contributions to the 
General Mills Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative project-related 
costs, and other items that are not part of our measurement of segment operating performance. These include gains and losses arising from the 
revaluation of certain grain inventories and gains and losses from mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions until passed back to 
our operating segments. These items affecting operating profit are centrally managed at the corporate level and are excluded from the measure 
of segment profitability reviewed by executive management. Under our supply chain organization, our manufacturing, warehouse, and 
distribution activities are substantially integrated across our operations in order to maximize efficiency and productivity. As a result, fixed 
assets and depreciation and amortization expenses are neither maintained nor available by operating segment.  
Our operating segment results were as follows:  
   
   
98 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Net sales: 
  
  
  
U.S. Retail 
  
$ 10,507.0    
$ 10,604.9    
$10,614.9  
International 
  
  5,128.2    
 5,385.9    
 5,200.2  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
  
 1,995.1    
 1,918.8    
 1,959.0  
Total 
  
$ 17,630.3    
$ 17,909.6    
$17,774.1  
Operating profit: 
  
  
  
U.S. Retail 
  
$ 2,159.3    
$ 2,311.5    
$ 2,392.9  
International 
  
 
522.6    
 
535.1    
 
515.4  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice 
  
  
353.1    
 
307.3    
 
314.6  
Total segment operating profit 
  
 3,035.0    
 3,153.9    
 3,222.9  
Unallocated corporate items 
  
 
413.8    
 
258.4    
 
351.3  
Divestiture (gain) 
  
  
—    
 
(65.5 )    
 
—  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs 
  
 
543.9    
 
3.6    
 
19.8  
Operating profit 
  
$ 2,077.3    
$ 2,957.4    
$ 2,851.8  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Net sales by class of similar products were as follows:  
   
The following table provides financial information by geographic area:  
   
   
   
NOTE 17. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION  
The components of certain Consolidated Balance Sheet accounts are as follows:  
   
   
99 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
  
  
Snacks 
  
$ 3,392.0    
$ 3,232.5    
$ 3,024.0  
Yogurt 
  
  2,938.3    
 2,964.7    
 2,908.4  
Convenient meals 
  
 2,810.3    
 2,844.2    
 2,802.9  
Cereal 
  
 2,771.3    
 2,860.1    
 2,889.2  
Dough 
  
 1,877.0    
 1,890.2    
 1,944.7  
Baking mixes and ingredients 
  
  1,867.7    
 1,996.4    
 1,999.5  
Vegetables 
  
 
937.3    
 1,014.7    
 1,089.5  
Super-premium ice cream 
  
 
769.5    
 
756.6    
 
717.1  
Other 
  
 
266.9    
 
350.2    
 
398.8  
Total 
  
$ 17,630.3    
$ 17,909.6    
$17,774.1  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Net sales: 
  
  
  
United States 
  
$ 12,501.8    
$ 12,523.0    
$12,573.1  
Non-United States 
  
  5,128.5    
 5,386.6    
 5,201.0  
Total 
  
$ 17,630.3    
$ 17,909.6    
$17,774.1  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Cash and cash equivalents: 
  
  
United States 
  
 $  22.9   
 $  27.2  
Non-United States 
  
 311.3   
 840.1  
Total 
  
 $334.2   
 $867.3  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Land, buildings, and equipment: 
  
  
United States 
  
$ 2,727.5    
$ 2,756.6  
Non-United States 
  
 1,055.8    
 1,185.3  
Total 
  
$ 3,783.3    
$ 3,941.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Receivables: 
  
  
From customers 
  
$ 1,412.0     
$1,504.6  
Less allowance for doubtful accounts 
  
 
(25.3)    
 
(21.0)  
Total 
  
$ 1,386.7    
$1,483.6  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
   
   
   
   
100 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Inventories: 
  
  
Raw materials and packaging 
  
$ 390.8    
$ 419.0  
Finished goods 
  
  1,268.6     
 1,260.2  
Grain 
  
 
95.7    
 
97.1  
Excess of FIFO over LIFO cost (a) 
  
 (214.2 )    
 (216.9 )  
Total 
  
$ 1,540.9     
$1,559.4  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) 
Inventories of $867.5 million as of May 31, 2015, and $904.2 million as of May 25, 2014, were valued at LIFO. During fiscal 2015, 
LIFO inventory layers were reduced. Results of operations were not materially affected by these liquidations of LIFO inventory. The 
difference between replacement cost and the stated LIFO inventory value is not materially different from the reserve for the LIFO 
valuation method. 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets: 
  
  
Other receivables 
  
 $148.8   
 $153.9  
Prepaid expenses 
  
 169.3   
 187.2  
Derivative receivables, primarily commodity-related 
  
 
80.9   
 
33.3  
Grain contracts 
  
 
3.3   
 
7.5  
Miscellaneous 
  
 
21.5   
 
27.2  
Total 
  
 $423.8   
 $409.1  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
2015 
   
May 25, 
2014 
 
Land, buildings, and equipment: 
  
  
Land 
  
$ 
96.0    
$ 
106.9  
Buildings 
  
 2,272.7    
 2,228.4  
Buildings under capital lease 
  
  
0.3    
 
0.3  
Equipment 
  
 6,091.1    
 5,979.7  
Equipment under capital lease 
  
 
9.8    
 
9.0  
Capitalized software 
  
 
499.0    
 
468.0  
Construction in progress 
  
  
622.2    
 
600.8  
Total land, buildings, and equipment 
  
 9,591.1    
 9,393.1  
Less accumulated depreciation 
  
 (5,807.8)    
 (5,451.2)  
Total 
  
$ 3,783.3    
$ 3,941.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Other assets: 
  
  
Investments in and advances to joint ventures 
  
$ 530.6    
$ 507.5  
Pension assets 
  
 138.2    
 432.2  
Exchangeable note with related party 
  
  
30.7    
 
68.2  
Life insurance 
  
 
26.6    
 
25.8  
Miscellaneous 
  
 117.5    
 111.8  
Total 
  
$ 843.6    
$ 1,145.5  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
   
Certain Consolidated Statements of Earnings amounts are as follows:  
   
The components of interest, net are as follows:  
   
Certain Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows amounts are as follows:  
   
   
101 
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Other current liabilities: 
  
  
Accrued trade and consumer promotions 
  
$ 564.7    
$ 578.2  
Accrued payroll 
  
  361.8    
 390.1  
Dividends payable 
  
 
27.9    
 
33.5  
Accrued taxes 
  
 
20.7    
 
63.1  
Accrued interest, including interest rate swaps 
  
 
91.8    
 
92.5  
Grain contracts 
  
  
7.8    
 
4.8  
Restructuring and other exit costs reserve 
  
 120.8    
 
3.5  
Derivative payable 
  
 122.9    
 
23.1  
Miscellaneous 
  
 271.5    
 261.1  
Total 
  
$ 1,589.9    
$ 1,449.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
In Millions 
  
May 31, 
 
2015 
   
May 25, 
 
2014 
 
Other noncurrent liabilities: 
  
  
Accrued compensation and benefits, including obligations for 
underfunded other postretirement benefit and postemployment 
benefit plans 
  
$ 1,451.4    
$ 1,341.9  
Accrued taxes 
  
 202.5    
 195.6  
Miscellaneous 
  
 
90.9    
 105.7  
Total 
  
$ 1,744.8    
$ 1,643.2  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Depreciation and amortization 
  
$ 588.3   
$585.4    
$ 588.0  
Research and development expense 
  
 229.4   
 243.6    
 237.9  
Advertising and media expense (including production and communication costs) 
  
 823.1   
 869.5    
 895.0  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
Expense (Income), in Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Interest expense 
  
$ 335.5    
$ 323.4    
$ 333.8  
Capitalized interest 
  
  (6.9 )    
 (4.9 )    
 (4.3 )  
Interest income 
  
 (13.2)    
 (16.1)    
 (12.6)  
Interest, net 
  
$ 315.4    
$ 302.4    
$ 316.9  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
2015    
2014    
2013  
Cash interest payments 
  
$ 305.3   
$288.3    
$ 293.0  
Cash paid for income taxes 
  
 562.6   
 757.2    
 569.4  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
NOTE 18. QUARTERLY DATA (UNAUDITED)  
Summarized quarterly data for fiscal 2015 and fiscal 2014 follows:  
   
At the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in 
our U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within the segment. Therefore, we recorded a $260 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter 
of fiscal 2015 related to the Green Giant brand intangible asset. See Note 6 for additional information.  
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a one-time repatriation of $606.1 million of foreign earnings and recorded a discrete 
income tax charge of $78.6 million.  
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014, we sold certain grain elevators in our U.S. Retail segment and recorded a pre-tax gain of $65.5 million. 
   
102 
In Millions, Except Per 
    Share Amounts 
  
First Quarter 
   
Second Quarter 
   
Third Quarter 
   
Fourth Quarter 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
   
Fiscal Year 
   
Fiscal Year 
   
Fiscal Year 
 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2015 
   
2014 
   
2015 
   
2014 
   
2015 
   
2014 
 
Net sales 
  $ 4,268.4    $ 4,372.7    $ 4,712.2    $ 4,875.7    $ 4,350.9    $ 4,377.4    $ 4,298.8    $ 4,283.8  
Gross margin 
   1,438.7     1,613.0     1,619.1     1,761.7     1,375.9     1,512.7     1,515.5     1,482.4  
Net earnings attributable 
to General Mills 
   345.2     459.3     346.1     549.9     343.2     410.6     186.8     404.6  
EPS: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Basic 
  $ 
0.56    $ 
0.71    $ 
0.58    $ 
0.87    $ 
0.57    $ 
0.66    $ 
0.31    $ 
0.66  
Diluted 
  $ 
0.55    $ 
0.70    $ 
0.56    $ 
0.84    $ 
0.56    $ 
0.64    $ 
0.30    $ 
0.65  
Dividends per share 
  $ 
0.41    $ 
0.38    $ 
0.41    $ 
0.38    $ 
0.41    $ 
0.38    $ 
0.44    $ 
0.41  
Market price of common stock: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
High 
  $ 55.56    $ 52.73    $ 53.82    $ 51.53    $ 55.11    $ 51.50    $ 57.14    $ 54.40  
Low 
  $ 50.15    $ 47.08    $ 48.86    $ 47.41    $ 51.13    $ 46.86    $ 51.70    $ 49.66  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Glossary  
Accelerated depreciation associated with restructured assets. The increase in depreciation expense caused by updating the salvage value 
and shortening the useful life of depreciable fixed assets to coincide with the end of production under an approved restructuring plan, but only 
if impairment is not present.  
AOCI . Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).  
Average total capital. Notes payable, long-term debt including current portion, redeemable interest, noncontrolling interests, and stockholders’
equity excluding AOCI, and certain after-tax earnings adjustments are used to calculate return on average total capital. The average is 
calculated using the average of the beginning of fiscal year and end of fiscal year Consolidated Balance Sheet amounts for these line items.  
Constant currency. Financial results translated to U.S. dollars using constant foreign currency exchange rates based on the rates in effect for 
the comparable prior-year period. To present this information, current period results for entities reporting in currencies other than United States 
dollars are translated into United States dollars at the average exchange rates in effect during the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, 
rather than the actual average exchange rates in effect during the current fiscal year. Therefore, the foreign currency impact is equal to current 
year results in local currencies multiplied by the change in the average foreign currency exchange rate between the current fiscal period and the 
corresponding period of the prior fiscal year.  
Core working capital. Accounts receivable plus inventories less accounts payable, all as of the last day of our fiscal year.  
Derivatives. Financial instruments such as futures, swaps, options, and forward contracts that we use to manage our risk arising from changes 
in commodity prices, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and stock prices.  
Euribor. European Interbank Offered Rate.  
Fair value hierarchy. For purposes of fair value measurement, we categorize assets and liabilities into one of three levels based on the 
assumptions (inputs) used in valuing the asset or liability. Level 1 provides the most reliable measure of fair value, while Level 3 generally 
requires significant management judgment. The three levels are defined as follows:  
   
   
   
Fixed charge coverage ratio. The sum of earnings before income taxes and fixed charges (before tax), divided by the sum of the fixed charges 
(before tax) and interest.  
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Guidelines, procedures, and practices that we are required to use in recording and 
reporting accounting information in our financial statements.  
Goodwill. The difference between the purchase price of acquired companies plus the fair value of any noncontrolling and redeemable interests 
and the related fair values of net assets acquired.  
Gross margin. Net sales less cost of sales.  
Hedge accounting. Accounting for qualifying hedges that allows changes in a hedging instrument’s fair value to offset corresponding changes 
in the hedged item in the same reporting period. Hedge accounting is permitted for  
   
103 
  
Level  1:       Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. 
  
Level  2:       Observable inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active 
markets or quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in inactive markets. 
  
Level  3:       Unobservable inputs reflecting management’s assumptions about the inputs used in pricing the asset or liability. 

Table of Contents  
certain hedging instruments and hedged items only if the hedging relationship is highly effective, and only prospectively from the date a 
hedging relationship is formally documented.  
Interest bearing instruments. Notes payable, long-term debt, including current portion, cash and cash equivalents, and certain interest bearing 
investments classified within prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets.  
LIBOR. London Interbank Offered Rate.  
Mark-to-market. The act of determining a value for financial instruments, commodity contracts, and related assets or liabilities based on the 
current market price for that item.  
Net mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on derivative contracts that will be 
allocated to segment operating profit when the exposure we are hedging affects earnings.  
Net price realization. The impact of list and promoted price changes, net of trade and other price promotion costs.  
Noncontrolling interests. Interests of subsidiaries held by third parties.  
Notional principal amount. The principal amount on which fixed-rate or floating-rate interest payments are calculated.  
OCI. Other comprehensive income (loss).  
Operating cash flow to debt ratio. Net cash provided by operating activities, divided by the sum of notes payable and long-term debt, 
including the current portion.  
Project-related costs.  Costs incurred related to our restructuring initiatives not included in restructuring charges.  
Redeemable interest. Interest of subsidiaries held by a third party that can be redeemed outside of our control and therefore cannot be 
classified as a noncontrolling interest in equity.  
Reporting unit. An operating segment or a business one level below an operating segment.  
Return on average total capital. Net earnings attributable to General Mills, excluding after-tax net interest, and adjusted for certain items 
affecting year-over-year comparability, divided by average total capital.  
Segment operating profit margin. Segment operating profit divided by net sales for the segment.  
Supply chain input costs. Costs incurred to produce and deliver product, including costs for ingredients and conversion, inventory 
management, logistics, and warehousing.  
Total debt. Notes payable and long-term debt, including current portion.  
Transaction gains and losses. The impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements of foreign exchange rate changes arising from specific 
transactions.  
Translation adjustments. The impact of the conversion of our foreign affiliates’ financial statements to U.S. dollars for the purpose of 
consolidating our financial statements.  
Variable interest entities (VIEs). A legal structure that is used for business purposes that either (1) does not have equity investors that have 
voting rights and share in all the entity’s profits and losses or (2) has equity investors that do not provide sufficient financial resources to 
support the entity’s activities.  
Working capital. Current assets and current liabilities, all as of the last day of our fiscal year.  
   
104 

Table of Contents  
None.  
   
We, under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, 
have evaluated the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) under the 
1934 Act). Based on that evaluation, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of May 31, 2015, our 
disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or submit 
under the 1934 Act is (1) recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in applicable rules and forms, and 
(2) accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, in a manner that 
allows timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the 1934 Act) during our fiscal 
quarter ended May 31, 2015, that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial 
reporting.  
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING  
The management of General Mills, Inc. is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as 
such term is defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the 1934 Act. The Company’s internal control system was designed to provide reasonable 
assurance to our management and the Board of Directors regarding the preparation and fair presentation of published financial statements. 
Under the supervision and with the participation of management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we 
conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015. In making this assessment, 
management used the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal 
Control – Integrated Framework (2013) .  
Based on our assessment using the criteria set forth by COSO in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) , management concluded that 
our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of May 31, 2015.  
KPMG LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, has issued a report on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over 
financial reporting.  
   
July 6, 2015  
Our independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our internal control over financial reporting is included in the “Report 
of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” in Item 8 of this report.  
   
None.  
   
105 
ITEM 9 
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
ITEM 9A Controls and Procedures 
/s/ K. J. Powell 
  /s/ D. L. Mulligan 
K. J. Powell 
  D. L. Mulligan 
Chairman of the Board and Chief 
  Executive Vice President and Chief 
Executive Officer 
  Financial Officer 
ITEM 9B 
Other Information 

Table of Contents  
PART III  
   
The information contained in the sections entitled “Proposal Number 1 — Election of Directors,” “Director Nominations,” and “Section 16(a) 
Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is 
incorporated herein by reference.  
Information regarding our executive officers is set forth in Item 1 of this report.  
The information regarding our Audit Committee, including the members of the Audit Committee and audit committee financial experts, set 
forth in the section entitled “Board Committees and Their Functions” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2015 Annual Meeting 
of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.  
We have adopted a Code of Conduct applicable to all employees, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, and 
principal accounting officer. A copy of the Code of Conduct is available on our website at www.generalmills.com. We intend to post on our 
website any amendments to our Code of Conduct and any waivers from our Code of Conduct for principal officers.  
   
The information contained in the sections entitled “Executive Compensation,” “Director Compensation,” and “Compensation Risk 
Assessment” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.  
   
106 
ITEM 10 
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 
ITEM 11 
Executive Compensation 

Table of Contents  
Matters  
The information contained in the section entitled “Ownership of General Mills Common Stock by Directors, Officers and Certain Beneficial 
Owners” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.  
EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN INFORMATION  
The following table provides certain information as of May 31, 2015 with respect to our equity compensation plans:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
The information set forth in the sections entitled “Board Independence and Accountability” and “Certain Relationships and Related 
Transactions” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.  
   
The information contained in the section entitled “Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm Fees” in our definitive Proxy Statement for 
our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.  
   
107 
ITEM 12 
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder 
Plan Category 
  
Number of Securities to 
 
be Issued upon  
Exercise of  
Outstanding Options, 
Warrants and Rights 
(1) 
 
 
Weighted-Average 
 
Exercise Price of 
Outstanding  
Options, Warrants 
 
and Rights  
(2)(a) 
   
Number of Securities 
Remaining Available for  
Future Issuance Under Equity 
 
Compensation Plans  
(Excluding Securities  
Reflected in Column (1))  
(3) 
 
Equity compensation plans 
approved by security 
holders 
  
 
47,740,687 (b)   
$ 
34.35   
 
27,121,101 (d)  
Equity compensation plans 
not approved by security 
holders 
  
 
158,598 (c)   
$ 
—   
 
—  
Total 
  
 
47,899,285  
 
$ 
34.35   
 
27,121,101  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
(a) Only includes the weighted-average exercise price of outstanding options, whose weighted-average term is 4.42 years. 
(b) Includes 39,075,964 stock options, 6,204,635 restricted stock units, 29,934 performance share units (assuming pay out for target 
performance), and 2,430,154 restricted stock units that have vested and been deferred. 
(c) Includes 158,598 restricted stock units that have vested and been deferred. These awards were made in lieu of salary increases and certain 
other compensation and benefits. We granted these awards under our 1998 Employee Stock Plan, which provided for the issuance of stock 
options, restricted stock and restricted stock units to attract and retain employees and to align their interests with those of stockholders. We 
discontinued the 1998 Employee Stock Plan in September 2003, and no future awards may be granted under that plan. 
(d) Includes stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, shares of unrestricted stock, stock appreciation rights, and performance awards 
that we may award under our 2011 Stock Compensation Plan, which had 26,032,767 shares available for grant at May 31, 2015. Also 
includes stock options and restricted stock units that we may award under our 2011 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors, which 
had 1,088,334 shares available for grant at fiscal year end. 
ITEM 13 
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
ITEM 14 
Principal Accounting Fees and Services 

Table of Contents  
PART IV  
   
   
The following financial statements are included in Item 8 of this report:  
Consolidated Statements of Earnings for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2015, May 25, 2014, and May 26, 2013.  
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2015, May 25, 2014, and May 26, 2013.  
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014.  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2015, May 25, 2014, and May 26, 2013.  
Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2015, May 25, 2014, and May 26, 
2013.  
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.  
Report of Management Responsibilities.  
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.  
   
For the fiscal years ended May 31, 2015, May 25, 2014, and May 26, 2013:  
II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts  
   
   
   
108 
ITEM 15 
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules 
1. 
Financial Statements: 
2. 
Financial Statement Schedule: 
3. 
Exhibits: 
Exhibit No.  
Description 
      3.1 
 
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Registrant’s Annual 
Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009). 
      3.2 
 
By-laws of the Registrant (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed 
June 30, 2014). 
      4.1 
 
Indenture, dated as of February 1, 1996, between the Registrant and U.S. Bank National Association (f/k/a First Trust of Illinois, 
National Association) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed 
February 6, 1996 (File no. 333-00745)). 
      4.2 
 
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 18, 2009, between the Registrant and U.S. Bank National Association 
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 
2009). 
      10.1* 
 
2001 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s 
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010). 
      10.2* 
 
2005 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q 
for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010). 

Table of Contents  
   
109 
      10.3* 
 
2006 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to Registrant’s Quarterly 
Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010). 
      10.4* 
 
2007 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q 
for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010). 
      10.5* 
 
2011 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q 
for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011). 
      10.6* 
 
2009 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q 
for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010). 
      10.7* 
 
2011 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Quarterly 
Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011). 
      10.8* 
 
Executive Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the 
fiscal quarter ended November 28, 2010). 
     10.9*  Separation Pay and Benefits Program for Officers. 
     10.10* 
 
Supplemental Savings Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for 
the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009). 
     10.11* 
 
Supplemental Retirement Plan (Grandfathered) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.12 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report 
on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009). 
     10.12* 
 
2005 Supplemental Retirement Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009). 
     10.13* 
 
Deferred Compensation Plan (Grandfathered) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report 
on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009). 
     10.14* 
 
2005 Deferred Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-
Q for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009). 
     10.15* 
 
Executive Survivor Income Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for 
the fiscal year ended May 29, 2005). 
     10.16* 
 
Aircraft Time Sharing Agreement, dated December 12, 2007, between General Mills Sales, Inc. and Kendall J. Powell 
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 14, 2007). 
     10.17* 
 
Supplemental Benefits Trust Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011). 
     10.18* 
 
Supplemental Benefits Trust Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011). 
     10.19* 
 
Form of Performance Share Unit Award Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly 
Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 24, 2014) 
      10.20 
 
Agreements, dated November 29, 1989, by and between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 
10.15 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2000). 
      10.21 
 
Protocol and Addendum No. 1 to Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated November 21, 1989, between the Registrant and 
Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year 
ended May 27, 2001). 

Table of Contents  
   
110 
      10.22 
 
Addendum No. 2 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated March 16, 1993, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. 
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.18 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 30, 
2004). 
      10.23 
 
Addendum No. 3 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, effective as of March 15, 1993, between the Registrant and Nestle 
S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 
28, 2000). 
       10.24 
 
Addenda Nos. 4 and 5 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein 
by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009). 
      10.25 
 
Addendum No. 10 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated January 1, 2010, among the Registrant, Nestle S.A. and 
CPW S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter 
ended February 28, 2010). 
       10.26 
 
Addendum No. 11 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated July 17, 2012, among the Registrant, Nestle S.A., and 
CPW S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter 
ended August 26, 2012). 
      10.27 
 
Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of April 16, 2012, as amended as of May 18, 2012 and September 19, 2014, among the 
Registrant, the several financial institutions from time to time party to the agreement, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as 
Administrative Agent (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the 
fiscal quarter ended November 23, 2014). 
      10.28 
 
Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of May 23, 2014, among the Registrant, the several financial institutions from time to time 
party to the agreement, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 
10.1 to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed May 30, 2014). 
      10.29 
 
Amendment No. 1 dated as of September 19, 2014 to the Five-Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 23, 2014 among the 
Registrant, the several financial institutions from time to time party to the agreement, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as 
Administrative Agent (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the 
fiscal quarter ended November 23, 2014). 
     12.1 
 Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges. 
     21.1 
 Subsidiaries of the Registrant. 
     23.1 
 Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. 
     31.1 
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
     31.2 
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
     32.1 
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
+ 
+ 

Table of Contents  
Pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of our long-term debt are not 
filed and, in lieu thereof, we agree to furnish copies to the SEC upon request.  
   
111 
     32.2   
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
      101 
  
The following materials from the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 formatted in 
eXtensible Business Reporting Language: (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Earnings; (iii) 
the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income; (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable 
Interest; (v) the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows; (vi) the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; and (vii) Schedule II 
– Valuation of Qualifying Accounts. 
* Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit pursuant to Item 15 of Form 10-K. 
Confidential information has been omitted from the exhibit and filed separately with the SEC pursuant to Rule 24b-2 of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934. 
+ 

Table of Contents  
Signatures  
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be 
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.  
   
   
112 
 
 
GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Dated: July 6, 2015 
 
 By:   /s/ Jerald A. Young 
 
 
 Name:    Jerald A. Young 
 
 
 Title:      Vice President, Controller 

Table of Contents  
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of 
the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.  
   
   
113 
Signature 
  
Title 
 
Date 
/s/ Kendall J. Powell 
Kendall J. Powell 
  
Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer 
and Director (Principal Executive Officer)  
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan 
Donal L. Mulligan 
  
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 
Officer (Principal Financial Officer)  
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Jerald A. Young 
Jerald A. Young 
  
Vice President, Controller 
(Principal Accounting Officer)  
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Bradbury H. Anderson 
Bradbury H. Anderson 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ R. Kerry Clark 
R. Kerry Clark 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ David M. Cordani 
David M. Cordani 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Paul Danos 
Paul Danos 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Henrietta H. Fore 
Henrietta H. Fore 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Raymond V. Gilmartin 
Raymond V. Gilmartin 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Judith Richards Hope 
Judith Richards Hope 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Heidi G. Miller 
Heidi G. Miller 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg 
Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Steve Odland 
Steve Odland 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Michael D. Rose 
Michael D. Rose 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Robert L. Ryan 
Robert L. Ryan 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 
/s/ Dorothy A. Terrell 
Dorothy A. Terrell 
  
Director 
 
July 6, 2015 

Table of Contents  
General Mills, Inc. and Subsidiaries  
Schedule II - Valuation of Qualifying Accounts  
   
   
114 
 
  
Fiscal Year 
 
In Millions 
  
   2015       
   2014       
   2013      
Allowance for doubtful accounts: 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year 
  
 $    21.0   
 $  19.9   
 $  21.7  
Additions charged to expense 
  
 
19.8   
 
12.5   
 
12.0  
Bad debt write-offs 
  
 
(12.5)   
 
(11.6 )  
 
(8.2 )  
Other adjustments and reclassifications 
  
 
(3.0 )   
 
0.2   
 
(5.6 )  
Balance at end of year 
  
 $    25.3   
 $  21.0   
 $  19.9  
  
  
Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets: 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year 
  
 $  221.6   
 $232.8   
 $384.4  
Additions charged to expense 
  
 
2.9   
 
0.1   
 
5.3  
Adjustments due to acquisition, translation of amounts, and other 
  
 
(9.1 )   
 
(11.3 )  
 
(156.9)  
Balance at end of year 
  
 $  215.4   
 $221.6   
 $232.8  
  
  
Reserve for restructuring and other exit charges: 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year 
  
 $      3.5   
 
$19.5   
 $  85.9  
Additions charged to expense, including translation amounts 
  
 
185.1   
 
6.4   
 
10.6  
Net amounts utilized for restructuring activities 
  
 
(67.8)   
 
(22.4 )  
 
(77.0)  
Balance at end of year 
  
 $  120.8   
 $    3.5   
 $  19.5  
  
  
Reserve for LIFO valuation: 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year 
  
 $  216.9   
 $221.8   
 $222.7  
Decrease 
  
 
(2.7 )   
 
(4.9 )  
 
(0.9 )  
  
  
Balance at end of year 
  
 $  214.2    
 $216.9   
 $221.8  
  
  

Table of Contents  
Exhibit Index  
   
   
115  
Exhibit No.   
Description 
10.6   
  
2011 Stock Compensation Plan. 
12.1   
  
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges. 
21.1   
  
Subsidiaries of the Registrant. 
23.1   
  
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. 
31.1   
  
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
31.2   
  
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
32.1   
  
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
32.2   
  
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
101    
  
The following materials from the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015 
formatted in eXtensible Business Reporting Language: (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the Consolidated 
Statements of Earnings; (iii) the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Earnings; (iv) the Consolidated Statements 
of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest; (v) the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows; (vi) the Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements; and (vii) Schedule II – Valuation of Qualifying Accounts. 

Exhibit 10.6 
GENERAL MILLS, INC.  
2011 STOCK COMPENSATION PLAN  
   
The purpose of the General Mills, Inc. 2011 Stock Compensation Plan (the “Plan”) is to attract and retain able individuals by rewarding 
employees of General Mills, Inc., its subsidiaries and affiliates (defined as entities in which General Mills, Inc. has a significant equity or 
other interest, collectively, the “Company”) and to align the interests of employees with those of the stockholders of the Company. The 
Company shall include any successors to General Mills, Inc. or any future parent corporations or similar entities.  
   
This Plan shall become effective as of September 26, 2011, subject to the approval of the stockholders of the Company at the Annual 
Meeting on that date. Awards may be made under the Plan until September 30, 2021.  
   
Only persons who are employees of the Company shall be eligible to receive grants of Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights, 
Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units, and/or Performance Awards (each defined below) and become “Participants” under the Plan. 
The Compensation Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Committee”) shall exercise the discretionary authority to 
determine from time to time the employees of the Company who are eligible to participate in this Plan. Individuals who are not classified 
by the Company as employees on its corporate books, records and systems are not eligible to receive Awards even if any individual is 
later reclassified (by the Company, any court, any government agency or otherwise) as an employee of the Company as of any date in 
particular.  
   
   
   
1. 
PURPOSE OF THE PLAN 
2. 
EFFECTIVE DATE AND DURATION OF PLAN 
3. 
ELIGIBLE PERSONS 
4. 
AWARD TYPES 
  
(a) 
Stock Option Awards.  The Committee may award Participants options (“Stock Options”) to purchase a fixed number of shares of 
common stock ($.10 par value) of the Company (“Common Stock”). The grant of a Stock Option entitles the Participant to purchase 
shares of Common Stock at an “Exercise Price” established by the Committee which, unless the Stock Option is granted through the 
assumption of, or in substitution for, outstanding awards previously granted to individuals who become employees of the Company 
as a result of a merger, consolidation, acquisition or other transaction involving the Company (in which case the assumption or 
substitution shall be accomplished in a manner that permits the Award to be exempt from Code Section 409A), shall not be less 
than 100% of the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock on the date of grant, and may exceed the Fair Market Value on the grant 
date, at the Committee’s discretion. “Fair Market Value” shall equal the closing price on the New York Stock Exchange of the 
Company’s Common Stock on the applicable date. 
  
(b) 
Stock Appreciation Rights.  The Committee may also award Participants Stock Appreciation Rights. A Stock Appreciation Right is 
a right to receive, upon exercise of that right, an amount, which may be paid in cash, shares of Common Stock, or a combination 
thereof in the complete discretion of the Committee, equal to or less than the difference between the Fair Market Value of one share 
of Common Stock as of the date of exercise and the Fair Market Value of one share of Common Stock on the date of grant, unless 
the Stock Appreciation Right was granted through the assumption of, or in substitution for, outstanding awards previously granted 
to individuals who become employees of the Company as a result of a merger, consolidation, acquisition, or other transaction 
involving the Company (in which case the assumption or substitution shall be accomplished in a manner that permits the Award to 
be exempt from Code Section 409A). 

   
Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights, Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units and Performance Awards are sometimes referred to 
as “Awards”. To the extent any Award is subject to section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (“Section 409A”), 
the terms and administration of such Award shall comply therewith and IRS guidance thereunder. If any provision of the Plan would 
otherwise conflict with or frustrate this intent, that provision will be interpreted and deemed amended so as to avoid the conflict. Further, 
for purposes of the limitations on nonqualified deferred compensation under Section 409A, each payment of compensation under this 
Plan shall be treated as a separate payment of compensation for purposes of applying the Section 409A deferral election rules and the 
exclusion from Section 409A for certain short-term deferral amounts.  
   
   
In addition, any Common Stock covered by a Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right granted under the Plan which is forfeited 
prior to the end of the vesting period, or which expires or otherwise terminates without being exercised, shall be deemed not to be 
granted for purposes of determining the maximum number of shares of Common Stock available for Awards under the Plan. In the 
event a Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right is settled for cash, the number of shares deducted against the maximum number 
of shares provided in Section 5(a) shall be restored and again be available for Awards. However, if (i) any Stock Option is exercised 
through the delivery of Common Stock in satisfaction of the Exercise Price, and (ii) withholding tax requirements arising upon 
exercise of any Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right are satisfied through the withholding of Common Stock otherwise 
deliverable in connection with such exercise, the full number of shares of Common Stock underlying any such Stock Option or 
Stock Appreciation Right, or portion thereof being so issued shall count against the maximum number of shares available for grants 
under the Plan.  
Upon forfeiture or termination of Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights, Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units and 
Performance Awards prior to vesting, the shares of Common Stock subject thereto shall again be available for Awards under the 
Plan added back in the same multiple as they were awarded pursuant to the first paragraph of this Section 5(a).  
   
  
(c) 
Restricted Stock Awards.  The Committee may grant Participants, subject to certain restrictions, shares of Common Stock 
(“Restricted Stock”) or the right to receive shares of Common Stock or cash (“Restricted Stock Units”). 
  
(d) 
Performance Awards.  Performance Awards may be made by the Committee granting a right to either the value of a number of 
shares of Common Stock (“Performance Share Units”) or a monetary amount, which could be settled in such shares or in cash or a 
combination thereof (“Performance Units”), determined based on the extent to which applicable performance goals are achieved. 
5. 
COMMON STOCK SUBJECT TO THE PLAN 
  
(a) 
Maximum Shares Available for Delivery.  Subject to Section 5(c), the maximum number of shares of Common Stock available for 
Awards to Participants under the Plan shall be 40,000,000. Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights awarded shall reduce the 
number of shares available for Awards by one share for every one share granted; provided that Stock Appreciation Rights that may 
be settled only in cash shall not reduce the number of shares available for Awards. Awards of Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock 
Units and Performance Awards settled in shares of Common Stock shall reduce the number of shares available for Awards by one 
share for every one share delivered, up to 30 percent of the total number of shares available; beyond that, Restricted Stock, 
Restricted Stock Units and Performance Awards settled in shares of Common Stock shall reduce the number of shares available for 
Awards by six shares for every one share delivered. Restricted Stock Units and Performance Awards that may be settled only in 
cash shall not reduce the number of shares available for Awards. 
  
(b) 
Individual Limits.  The number of shares of Common Stock subject to Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights or shares of 
Common Stock available for Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units and Performance Awards granted under the Plan to any single 
Participant shall not exceed, in the aggregate, 2,000,000 shares and/or units per fiscal year. The maximum dollar value of 
Performance Awards payable to any single Participant shall be $20,000,000 per fiscal year. These per-Participant limits shall be 
construed and applied consistently with Code section 162(m) and the regulations thereunder. 

   
   
   
   
   
   
  
(c) 
Adjustments for Corporate Transactions.  If a corporate transaction has occurred affecting the Common Stock such that an 
adjustment to outstanding Awards is required to preserve (or prevent enlargement of) the benefits or potential benefits intended at 
the time of grant, then in such manner as the Committee deems equitable, an appropriate adjustment shall be made to (i) the number 
and kind of shares which may be awarded under the Plan; (ii) the number and kind of shares subject to outstanding Awards; (iii) the 
number of shares credited to an account; (iv) the individual limits imposed under the Plan; and if applicable; (v) the Exercise Price 
of outstanding Options and Stock Appreciation Rights provided that the number of shares of Common Stock subject to any Stock 
Option or Stock Appreciation Right denominated in Common Stock shall always be a whole number. Any shares of Common Stock 
underlying Awards granted through the assumption of, or in substitution for, outstanding awards previously granted to individuals 
who become employees of the Company as a result of a corporate transaction involving the Company shall not, unless required by 
law or regulation, count against the reserve of available shares of Common Stock under the Plan. For purposes of this paragraph a 
corporate transaction includes, but is not limited to, any dividend (other than a cash dividend that is not an extraordinary cash 
dividend) or other distribution (whether in the form of cash, Common Stock, securities of a subsidiary of the Company, other 
securities or other property), recapitalization, stock split, reverse stock split, combination of shares, reorganization, merger, 
consolidation, acquisition, split-up, spin-off, combination, repurchase or exchange of Common Stock or other securities of the 
Company, issuance of warrants or other rights to purchase Common Stock or other securities of the Company, or other similar 
corporate transaction. Notwithstanding anything in this paragraph to the contrary, an adjustment to a Stock Option or Stock 
Appreciation Right under this paragraph shall be made in a manner that will not result in the grant of a new Stock Option or Stock 
Appreciation Right under Section 409A or cause the Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right to fail to be exempt from 
Section 409A. 
 
(d) 
Limits on Distribution. Distribution of shares of Common Stock or other amounts under the Plan shall be subject to the following: 
  
(i) 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan, the Company shall have no liability to deliver any shares of Common Stock 
under the Plan or make any other distribution of benefits under the Plan unless such delivery or distribution would comply 
with all applicable laws (including, without limitation, the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933), and the applicable 
requirements of any securities exchange or similar entity. 
  
(ii) 
To the extent that the Plan provides for issuance of stock certificates to reflect the issuance of shares of Common Stock or 
Restricted Stock, the issuance may be effected on a non-certificated basis, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law or 
the applicable rules of any stock exchange. 
  
(e) 
Stock Deposit Requirements and other Restrictions.  The Committee, in its discretion, may require as a condition to the grant of 
Awards, the deposit of Common Stock owned by the Participant receiving such grant, and the forfeiture of such grant, if such 
deposit is not made or maintained during the required holding period. Such shares of deposited Common Stock may not be 
otherwise sold or disposed of during the applicable holding period or restricted period. The Committee may also determine whether 
any shares issued upon exercise of a Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right, or attainment of any performance goal, shall be 
restricted in any manner. 
6. 
STOCK OPTIONS AND STOCK APPRECIATION RIGHTS TERMS AND TYPE 
  
(a) 
General.  Stock Options granted under the Plan shall be Non-Qualified Stock Options governed by Section 83 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). The term of any Stock Option and Stock Appreciation Right granted under the 
Plan shall be determined by the Committee, provided that said term shall not exceed 10 years and one month. 

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
For determining the amount of the payment, Common Stock delivered pursuant to (ii) or (iii) shall have a value equal to the Fair 
Market Value of the Common Stock on the date of exercise.  
   
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units may be awarded on either a discretionary or performance-based method.  
   
   
  
(b) 
No Reload Rights.  Neither Stock Options nor Stock Appreciation Rights granted under this Plan shall contain any provision 
entitling the optionee or right-holder to the automatic grant of additional options or rights in connection with any exercise of the 
original option or right. 
  
(c) 
No Repricing.  Subject to Section 5(c) and absent stockholder approval, the Exercise Price of an outstanding Stock Option may not 
be decreased after the grant date; the value of Common Stock used to determine the amount paid upon the exercise of a Stock 
Appreciation Right (i.e., the equivalent of an option’s exercise price) may not be decreased after the date of grant; no outstanding 
Stock Options or Stock Appreciation Rights may be surrendered to the Company as consideration or otherwise for the grant of a 
new Award with a lower exercise price; and no other modifications to any outstanding Stock Options or Stock Appreciation Rights 
may be made that would be treated as a “repricing” under the then applicable rules or listing requirements adopted by the New York 
Stock Exchange. 
7. 
GRANT, EXERCISE AND VESTING OF STOCK OPTIONS AND STOCK APPRECIATION RIGHTS 
  
(a) 
Grant.  Subject to the limits otherwise imposed by the terms of this Plan, the Committee has discretionary authority to determine 
the size of a Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right Award, which may be tied to meeting performance-based requirements. 
  
(b) 
Exercise.  Except as provided in Sections 11 and 12 (Change of Control and Termination of Employment), each Stock Option or 
Stock Appreciation Right may be exercised only in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Stock Option grant or Stock 
Appreciation Right and during the periods as may be established by the Committee. A Participant exercising a Stock Option or 
Stock Appreciation Right shall give notice to the Company of such exercise and of the number of shares elected to be purchased 
prior to 4:30 P.M. CST/CDT on the day of exercise. 
  
(c) 
Vesting.  Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights shall not be exercisable unless vested. Subject to Sections 11 and 12 Stock 
Options and Stock Appreciation Rights shall be fully vested only after at least four years of the Participant’s continued service with 
the Company following the date of the grant. 
  
(d) 
Payment of Exercise Price.  The Exercise Price for Stock Options shall be paid to the Company at the time of such exercise, 
subject to any applicable rule adopted by the Committee: 
 
(i) 
in cash (including check, draft, money order or wire transfer made payable to the order of the Company); 
 
(ii) 
through the tender of shares of Common Stock owned by the Participant (by either actual delivery or attestation); 
 
(iii) 
by a combination of (i) and (ii) above; or 
  
(iv) 
by authorizing a third party broker to sell a sufficient number of shares of Common Stock acquired upon exercise of the 
Stock Option and remit to the Company such sales proceeds to pay the entire Exercise Price and any tax withholding 
resulting from the exercise. 
8. 
RESTRICTED STOCK AND RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS 
 
(a) 
Discretionary.  With respect to discretionary Awards of Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units, the Committee shall: 
 
(i) 
Select Participants to whom Awards will be made; 

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Subject to the restrictions set forth in this Section, each Participant who receives Restricted Stock shall have certain rights as a 
stockholder with respect to such shares, as set forth in the applicable Award Agreement. Each Participant who is awarded Restricted 
Stock Units that are settled in shares of Common Stock shall be eligible to receive, at the expiration of the applicable restricted period (or 
such later time as provided herein), 
  
(ii) 
Subject to the otherwise applicable Plan limits, determine the number of shares of Restricted Stock or the number of 
Restricted Stock Units to be awarded to a Participant; 
  
(iii) 
Determine the length of the restricted period, which, other than as expressly allowed under the Plan, shall be no less than 
four years; 
 
(iv) 
Determine the purchase price, if any, to be paid by the Participant for Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units; 
  
(v) 
Determine whether Restricted Stock Unit Awards will be settled in shares of Common Stock, cash or a combination 
thereof; and 
 
(vi) 
Determine any restrictions other than those set forth in this Section. 
  
(b) 
Performance-Based.  With respect to Awards of performance-based Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units, the intent is to 
grant such Awards so as to satisfy the requirements for “qualified performance-based compensation” under Code Section 162(m). 
Performance-based Awards are subject to the following: 
  
(i) 
The Committee has exclusive authority to determine which Participants may be awarded performance-based Restricted 
Stock and Restricted Stock Units and whether any Restricted Stock Unit Awards will be settled in shares of Common Stock, 
cash, or a combination thereof. 
  
(ii) 
In order for any Participant to be awarded Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units for a Performance Period (defined 
below), the net earnings from continuing operations excluding items identified and disclosed by the Company as non-
recurring or special costs and after taxes (“Net Earnings”) of the Company for such Performance Period must be greater than 
zero. 
  
(iii) 
At the end of the Performance Period, if the Committee determines that the requirement of Section 8(b)(ii) has been met, 
each Participant eligible for a performance-based Award shall be deemed to have earned an Award equal in value to the 
Maximum Amount, or such lesser amount as the Committee shall determine in its discretion to be appropriate. The 
Committee may base this determination on performance-based criteria and in no case shall this have the effect of increasing 
an Award payable to any other Participant. For purposes of computing the value of Awards, each Restricted Stock or 
Restricted Stock Unit shall be deemed to have a value equivalent to the Fair Market Value of one share of Common Stock on 
the date the Award is granted. 
  
(iv) 
The total value and/or number of shares or units of the performance-based Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Unit Award 
granted to any Participant for any one Performance Period shall not exceed the lesser of 0.5 percent of the Company’s Net 
Earnings for that Performance Period (such amount is the “Maximum Amount”), or the number of shares of Common Stock 
available under Section 5(b) hereof. 
  
(v) 
The Committee shall determine the length of the restricted period which, other than as expressly allowed under the Plan, 
shall be no less than four years. 
  
(vi) 
“Performance Period” means a fiscal year of the Company, or such other period as the Committee may from time to time 
establish, which in no case shall be less than one year. 

one share of Common Stock for each Restricted Stock Unit awarded, and the Company shall issue to each such Participant that number of 
shares of Common Stock. Each Participant who is awarded Restricted Stock Units that are settled in cash shall receive an amount equal to 
the Fair Market Value of a share of Common Stock on the date the applicable restricted period ends, multiplied by the number of Units 
awarded. Participants who receive Restricted Stock Units shall have no rights as stockholders with respect to such Restricted Stock Units 
until such time as share certificates for Common Stock are issued to the Participants (if applicable); provided, however, that as of the first 
day of each quarter, during the applicable restricted period for all Restricted Stock Units awarded hereunder, the Company may credit to 
each such Participant an amount equal to the sum of all dividends and other distributions paid by the Company during the prior quarter on 
that equivalent number of shares of Common Stock. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Section or the Plan to the contrary, any 
dividends or other distributions paid on Restricted Stock, or any dividend equivalents or other distributions credited in respect to 
Restricted Stock Units, shall be distributed (in either cash or shares of Common Stock, with or without interest or other earnings, as 
provided in the Award Agreement at the discretion of the Committee) to the Participant only if, when, and to the extent the restrictions 
imposed on the attendant Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units lapse, and in an amount equal to the sum of all quarterly dividends 
and other distributions paid by the Company during the applicable restricted period on the equivalent number of shares of Common Stock 
which become unrestricted. Such dividends, dividend equivalents, or other distributions shall be payable at the same time as the attendant 
Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units to which they relate, as provided under the applicable terms of the Plan and relevant Award 
Agreements. Dividends, dividend equivalents, and other distributions that are not so vested shall be forfeited.  
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section 8, the Committee may in its discretion award up to five percent of the shares 
authorized under this Plan on an unrestricted basis, subject to the limits of Section 5.  
The Committee may in its discretion permit a Participant to defer receipt of any Common Stock or cash issuable upon the lapse of any 
restriction of Restricted Stock Units, subject to such rules and procedures as it may establish. In particular, the Committee shall establish 
rules relating to such deferrals intended to comply with the requirements of Code section 409A, including without limitation, the time 
when a deferral election can be made, the period of the deferral, and the events that would result in payment of the deferred amount.  
   
   
   
   
   
9. 
PERFORMANCE AWARDS 
  
(a) 
Grant.  The Committee may grant Performance Awards which may be denominated in shares of Common Stock (“Performance 
Share Units”) or notionally represented by a monetary value, and which may be settled in shares of Common Stock, paid in cash, or 
a combination thereof (“Performance Units”). 
  
(b) 
Performance Goal.  In order for any Participant to be granted a Performance Award for a Performance Period (defined below), the 
net earnings from continuing operations excluding items identified and disclosed by the Company as non-recurring or special costs 
and after taxes (“Net Earnings”) of the Company for such Performance Period must be greater than zero. 
  
(c) 
Grant Size.  At the end of the Performance Period, if the Committee determines that the requirement of Section 9(b) has been met, 
each Participant eligible for a Performance Award shall be deemed to be granted an Award equal in value to the Maximum Amount, 
or such lesser amount as the Committee determines in its discretion to be appropriate. The Committee may base this determination 
on additional performance-based criteria and in no case shall this have the effect of increasing an Award payable to any other 
Participant. For purposes of computing the grant value of Awards, each Performance Award denominated in shares of Common 
Stock (whether or not share settled) shall be deemed to have a value equivalent to the Fair Market Value of one share of Common 
Stock on the date the Award is granted. 
  
(d) 
Additional Performance Conditions and Vesting.  Awards granted under this Section 9 shall be subject to such other terms and 
conditions as the Committee, in its discretion, imposes in the relevant Award Agreement. These conditions may include service 
and/or performance requirements and goals over 

   
   
   
The Committee may in its discretion permit a Participant to defer receipt of any Common Stock or cash issuable under a Performance 
Award subject to such rules and procedures as it may establish. In particular, the Committee shall establish rules relating to such deferrals 
intended to comply with the requirements of Code section 409A, including without limitation, the time when a deferral election can be 
made, the period of the deferral, and the events that would result in payment of the deferred amount.  
   
The Company has the right to withhold amounts from Awards to satisfy required tax obligations as it deems appropriate. Whenever the 
Company issues Common Stock under the Plan, unless it decides to satisfy the withholding obligations through additional withholding on 
salary or other wages, it may require the recipient to remit to the Company an amount sufficient to satisfy any Federal, state, local or 
foreign tax withholding requirements prior to the delivery of such Common Stock, or the Company may in its discretion withhold from 
the shares to be delivered shares sufficient to satisfy all or a portion of such tax withholding requirements.  
   
   
   
  
periods of one or more years that could result in the future forfeiture of all or part of the Performance Award granted hereunder in 
the event of the Participant’s termination of employment with the Company prior to the expiration of any service conditions, and/or 
said performance criteria or other conditions are not met in whole or in part within the designated period of time. This designated 
period of time shall be referred to as the “Additional Performance Period”. Except as provided in Sections 11(b), (c) and 12(c), 
Performance Awards shall not be paid other than on the date specified in the relevant Award Agreement after the end of the 
Additional Performance Period. 
  
(e) 
Maximum Amount.  The total value of a Performance Award granted to any Participant for any one Performance Period shall not 
exceed the lesser of 0.5 percent of the Company’s Net Earnings for that Performance Period (such amount is the “Maximum 
Amount”), or the dollar value limit on Performance Awards under Section 5(b). 
  
(f) 
Performance Period.  “Performance Period” means the period as the Committee may from time to time establish, which is no case 
shall be less than one year. 
  
(g) 
Dividend Equivalents and Voting.  At the discretion of the Committee, Performance Share Units may be credited with amounts 
equal to the sum of all dividends and other distributions paid by the Company during the prior quarter on that equivalent number of 
shares of Common Stock. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, any dividend equivalents or other distributions so credited shall 
be distributed (in either cash or shares of Common Stock, with or without interest or other earnings, as provided in the Award 
Agreement at the discretion of the Committee) to the Participant only if, when, and to the extent the conditions imposed on the 
attendant Performance Share Units are satisfied, and in an amount equal to the sum of all quarterly dividends and other distributions 
paid by the Company during the relevant Performance Period and/or Additional Performance Period on the equivalent number of 
shares of Common Stock which become payable. Such dividend equivalents or other distributions shall be payable at the same time 
as the attendant Performance Share Units to which they relate, as provided under the applicable terms of the Plan and Award 
Agreement. Dividend equivalents and other distributions that are not so vested shall be forfeited. Dividend equivalents shall not be 
credited in respect to Performance Units. Participants who receive either Performance Share Units or Performance Units shall have 
no rights as stockholders and in particular shall have no voting rights. 
10. 
TAXES 
11. 
CHANGE OF CONTROL 
 
(a) 
Each of the following (i) through (iv) constitutes a “Change of Control”: 
  
(i) 
The acquisition by any individual, entity or group (within the meaning of Section 13(d)(3) or 14(d)(2) of the 1934 Act), (a 
“Person”) of beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 promulgated under the 1934 Act) of voting securities 
of the Company where such acquisition causes such Person to own 20% or more of the combined voting power of the then 
outstanding voting 

   
   
   
   
   
  
securities of the Company entitled to vote generally in the election of directors (the “Outstanding Voting Securities”); 
provided, however, that for purposes of this subsection (i), the following acquisitions shall not be deemed to result in a 
Change of Control: (A) any acquisition directly from the Company, (B) any acquisition by the Company, (C) any acquisition 
by any employee benefit plan (or related trust) sponsored or maintained by the Company or any corporation controlled by 
the Company or (D) any acquisition by any corporation pursuant to a transaction that complies with clauses (A), (B) and 
(C) of subsection (iii) below; and provided, further, that if any Person’s beneficial ownership of the Outstanding Voting 
Securities reaches or exceeds 20% as a result of a transaction described in clause (A) or (B) above, and such Person 
subsequently acquires beneficial ownership of additional voting securities of the Company, such subsequent acquisition shall 
be treated as an acquisition that causes such Person to own 20% or more of the Outstanding Voting Securities; or 
  
(ii) 
Individuals who, as of the date hereof, constitute the Board of Directors (the “Incumbent Board”) cease for any reason to 
constitute at least a majority of the Board; provided, however, that any individual becoming a director subsequent to the date 
hereof whose election, or nomination for election by the Company’s shareholders, was approved by a vote of at least a 
majority of the directors then comprising the Incumbent Board shall be considered as though such individual were a member 
of the Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this purpose, any such individual whose initial assumption of office occurs as a 
result of an actual or threatened election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other actual or 
threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of a Person other than the Board; or 
  
(iii) 
Consummation of a reorganization, merger, statutory share exchange or consolidation or similar transaction involving the 
Company or any of its subsidiaries, a sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of the Company, or the 
acquisition of assets or stock of another entity by the Company or any of its subsidiaries (each, a “Business Combination”); 
excluding however, such a Business Combination pursuant to which (A) all or substantially all of the individuals and entities 
who were the beneficial owners of the Outstanding Voting Securities immediately prior to such Business Combination 
beneficially own, directly or indirectly, more than 60% of, respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock and 
the combined voting power of the then outstanding voting securities entitled to vote generally in the election of directors, as 
the case may be, of the corporation resulting from such Business Combination (including, without limitation, a corporation 
which as a result of such transaction owns the Company or all or substantially all of the Company’s assets either directly or 
through one or more subsidiaries) in substantially the same proportions as their ownership, immediately prior to such 
Business Combination of the Outstanding Company Securities, (B) no Person (excluding any corporation resulting from 
such Business Combination or any employee benefit plan (or related trust) of the Company or such corporation resulting 
from such Business Combination) beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, 20% or more of, respectively, the then 
outstanding shares of common stock of the corporation resulting from such Business Combination or the combined voting 
power of the then outstanding voting securities of such corporation except to the extent that such ownership existed prior to 
the Business Combination and (C) at least a majority of the members of the board of directors of the corporation resulting 
from such Business Combination were members of the Incumbent Board at the time of the execution of the initial 
agreement, or of the action of the Board, providing for such Business Combination; or 
 
(iv) 
Approval by the stockholders of the Company of a complete liquidation or dissolution of the Company. 
  
(b) 
If, within two years after a Change of Control a Participant experiences an involuntary separation from service initiated by the 
Company for reasons other than “cause” (for this purpose cause shall have the same meaning as that term has in Section 4.2(b)(ii) 
of Plan B of the General Mills Separation Pay and Benefits Program for Officers), or a separation from service for “good reason” 
actually entitling the employee to certain separation benefits under Section 4.2(a)(ii) of Plan B of the General Mills Separation Pay 
and Benefits Program for Officers, the following applies: 
  
(i) 
All of his or her then outstanding and unvested Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights shall fully vest immediately 
and remain exercisable for the one-year period beginning on the date of his or her separation from service or, if earlier, the 
end of the term of the Stock Option and Stock Appreciation Right. 

   
   
Notwithstanding the above, any Restricted Stock Units or Performance Awards subject to Section 409A (not subject to a proper 
deferral election) shall be settled on the Participant’s separation from service (within the meaning of Section 409A) or in the case of 
a Participant who is a “specified employee” (within the meaning of Section 409A) on the first day of the seventh month following 
the month of the Participant’s separation from service.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
(ii) 
All shares of Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units shall fully vest and be settled immediately (subject to a proper 
deferral election made with respect to the Award). 
  
(iii) 
All Performance Awards shall fully vest immediately and shall be considered to be earned in full “at target” as if the 
applicable performance goals established for the Additional Performance Period have been achieved, and paid immediately 
(subject to a proper deferral election made with respect to the Award). 
  
(iv) 
If Awards are replaced pursuant to subsection (d) below, the protections and rights granted under this subsection (b) shall 
transfer and apply to such replacement awards. 
  
(c) 
If, in the event of a Change of Control, and to the extent outstanding Awards are not assumed by a successor corporation (or 
affiliate thereto) or other successor entity or person, or replaced with an award or grant that solely in the discretionary judgment of 
the Committee, which shall be reasonable, preserves the existing value of outstanding Awards at the time of the Change of Control, 
then the following shall occur: 
  
(i) 
Subject to the other provisions of this subsection (c), All Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights shall vest and 
become exercisable immediately upon the Change of Control event. 
 
(ii) 
The restrictions on all shares of Restricted Stock shall lapse and Restricted Stock Units shall vest immediately. 
  
(iii) 
All Performance Awards shall fully vest immediately and shall be considered to be earned in full “at target” as if the 
applicable performance goals established for the Additional Performance Period have been achieved. 
  
(iv) 
To the extent Code Section 409A applies, if the Change of Control constitutes a “change in control” event as described in 
IRS regulations or other guidance under Code section 409A(a)(2)(A)(v), Participants’ Restricted Stock Units and 
Performance Awards shall be settled and paid upon the Change of Control in accordance with the requirements of Code 
Section 409A. 
  
(v) 
If the Change of Control does not constitute a “change in control” event as described in IRS regulations or other guidance 
under Code section 409A(a)(2)(A)(v), Restricted Stock Units and Performance Awards that are not Section 409A Restricted 
Stock Units and/or not otherwise subject to Section 409A, and on which a deferral election was not made, shall be settled 
and paid upon the Change of Control. However, the Section 409A Restricted Stock Units, Performance Awards otherwise 
subject to Section 409A, or such Awards for which a proper deferral election was made, shall be settled in cash equal to 
either the Award’s Fair Market Value at the time of the Change of Control, or its monetary value provided for above in (iii), 
as applicable, plus interest at a rate of Prime plus 1% from the Change of Control to the date of payment, which shall be the 
time the original restriction period would have closed, the Performance Award would have been originally payable, or the 
date elected pursuant to the proper deferral election, as applicable. 

In the discretion of the Committee and notwithstanding subsection (c)(i) above or any other Plan provision, outstanding Stock 
Options and Stock Appreciation Rights (both exercisable and unexercisable) may be cancelled at the time of the Change of Control 
in exchange for cash, property, or a combination thereof that is determined by the Committee to be at least equal to the excess (if 
any) of the value of the consideration that would be received in such Change of Control by the holders of Common Stock, over the 
exercise price for such Awards. For purposes of clarification, by operation of this provision Stock Options and Stock Appreciation 
Rights that would not yield a gain at the time of the Change of Control under the aforementioned equation are subject to 
cancellation without consideration. Furthermore, the Committee is under no obligation to treat Awards and/or Participants 
uniformly and has the discretionary authority to treat Awards and Participants disparately.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
then the Participant’s Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights shall terminate three months after such termination (but in no 
event beyond the original full term of the Stock Options or Stock Appreciation Rights) and no Stock Options or Stock Appreciation 
Rights shall become exercisable after such termination, and all shares of Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units which are subject 
to restriction on the date of termination, and all outstanding Performance Awards, shall be cancelled and forfeited.  
   
   
  
(d) 
If in the event of a Change of Control and to the extent outstanding Awards are assumed by any successor corporation, affiliate 
thereof, person or other entity, or are replaced with awards that, solely in the discretionary judgment of the Committee preserve the 
existing value of outstanding Awards at the time of the Change of Control and provide for vesting payout terms, and performance 
goals, as applicable, that are at least as favorable to Participants as vesting, payout terms and Performance Goals applicable to 
Awards, then all such Awards or such substitutes thereof shall remain outstanding and be governed by their respective terms, 
subject to Subsection 11(b) hereof. 
  
(e) 
With respect to any outstanding Awards as of the date of any Change of Control which require the deposit of owned Common Stock 
as a condition to obtaining rights, the deposit requirement shall be terminated as of the date of the Change of Control. 
12. 
TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
 
(a) 
Resignation or Termination for Cause. If the Participant’s employment by the Company is terminated by either 
 
(i) 
the voluntary resignation of the Participant, or 
  
(ii) 
a Company discharge due to Participant’s illegal activities, poor work performance, misconduct or violation of the 
Company’s Code of Conduct, policies or practices, 
  
(b) 
Other Termination.  If the Participant’s employment by the Company terminates involuntarily at the initiation of the Company for 
any reason other than specified in Sections 11, 12 (a), (d) or (e), and upon the execution (without revoking) of an effective general 
legal release and such other documents as are satisfactory to the Company, the following rules shall apply: 
  
(i) 
In the event that, at the time of such involuntary termination, the sum of the Participant’s age and years of service with the 
Company equals or exceeds 70, (A) the Participant’s outstanding Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights shall 
continue to become exercisable according to the schedule established at the time of grant unless otherwise provided in the 
applicable Award Agreement; (B) the restriction on all shares of Restricted Stock shall lapse and Restricted Stock Units shall 
vest and be paid (or deferred, as appropriate) immediately; and (C) any Performance Awards remaining outstanding during 
the Additional Performance Period shall fully vest and be payable according to the original terms of the Award with a value, 
if any, that otherwise would be earned under the applicable performance goals originally established under the Award 
Agreement based on actual performance (subject to a proper deferral election). Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights 
shall remain exercisable for the remaining full term of such Awards. 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, any Section 409A Restricted Stock Units that vest under this Section 12(b) shall be paid on the 
Participant’s separation from service (within the meaning of Code section 409A), or in the case of a Participant who is a specified 
employee (within the meaning of Code section 409A) shall be paid on the first day of the seventh month following the month of 
separation from service.  
An Award that otherwise would be settled under the terms of this section shall be forfeited if the general release of claims provided 
by the Company as a condition of payment is not executed (and not revoked) within the deadlines established by the Company. 
Upon execution of (and failure to revoked) the release (i.e., upon its irrevocability), the Award shall be settled within 90 days 
following the Participant’s separation from service; provided, however, that if two calendar years could be spanned from the start to 
the end of said 90-day period, settlement shall always be in the second calendar year regardless of when the release actually became 
irrevocable.  
   
  
(ii) 
In the event that, at the time of such involuntary termination, the sum of the Participant’s age and years of service with the 
Company is less than 70, (A) the Participant’s outstanding unexercisable Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights, and 
unvested Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units, shall become exercisable or vest and paid or deferred immediately, as 
the case may be, as of the date of termination, in a pro-rata amount based on the full months of employment completed 
during the full vesting period from the date of grant to the date of termination with such newly-vested Stock Options and 
Stock Appreciation Rights, and Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights exercisable on the date of termination, 
remaining exercisable for the lesser of one year from the date of termination and the original full term of the Stock Option 
and/or Stock Appreciation Right; and (B) the Participant’s Performance Awards remaining outstanding during the 
Additional Performance Period shall be payable according to the original terms of the Award with a value, if any, that 
otherwise would be earned under the applicable performance goals originally established under the Award Agreement based 
on actual performance, and shall vest at the end of the relevant Additional Performance Period in a pro-rata amount based on 
the full months of employment completed during the relevant Additional Performance Period originally established in the 
Award Agreement through the date of termination. All other Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights, shares of Restricted 
Stock, Restricted Stock Units and Performance Awards shall be forfeited as of the date of termination. Provided, however, 
that if the Participant is a Company Senior Vice President or above, the Participant’s outstanding Stock Options and Stock 
Appreciation Rights which, as of the date of termination are not yet exercisable, shall become exercisable effective as of the 
date of such termination and, with all outstanding Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights already exercisable on the 
date of termination, shall remain exercisable for the lesser of one year following the date of termination and the original full 
term of the Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right; all shares of Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units shall fully 
vest as of the date of termination and be paid or deferred immediately; and any outstanding Performance Awards shall fully 
vest and be payable according to the original terms of the Award with a value, if any, that otherwise would be earned under 
the applicable performance goals originally established in the Award Agreement (subject to a proper deferral election). 
  
(c) 
Death.  If a Participant dies while employed by the Company, any Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right previously granted 
under this Plan shall fully vest and become exercisable upon death and may be exercised by the person designated as such 
Participant’s beneficiary or beneficiaries or, in the absence of such designation, by the Participant’s estate. Stock Options and Stock 
Appreciation Rights shall remain exercisable for the remaining full term of such Awards. A Participant who dies while employed by 
the Company during any applicable restricted period shall fully vest in such shares of Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units, 
effective as of the date of death, and such shares or cash shall be paid as of the first day of the month following death to the 
designated beneficiary or beneficiaries. If a Participant dies while employed by the Company during an Additional Performance 
Period, all Performance Awards shall fully vest and shall be considered to be earned in full “at target” as if the applicable 
performance goals have been achieved, and paid on the first day of the month following death to the designated beneficiary or 
beneficiaries. 

A Restricted Stock Unit that could vest upon retirement under this Section 12(d) at any time within the Award’s restricted period 
shall be referred to as a “Section 409A Restricted Stock Unit”.  
Notwithstanding the above, the terms of this Section 12(d) shall not apply to a Participant who, prior to a Change of Control, is 
terminated for cause as described in Section 12(a)(ii); said Participant shall be treated as provided in Section 12(a).  
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
(d) 
Retirement.  The Committee shall determine, at the time of grant, the treatment of Awards upon the retirement of the Participant. 
Unless other terms are specified in the original Award Agreement, if the termination of employment is due to a Participant’s 
retirement on or after age 55 and completion of five years of eligibility service under the General Mills Pension Plan, the Participant 
may, effective as of the date of employment termination as a retiree, exercise a Stock Option or Stock Appreciation Right pursuant 
to the original terms and conditions of such Awards; shall fully vest in, and be paid or have deferred, all shares of Restricted Stock 
or shares or cash attributable to Restricted Stock Units; and all Performance Awards shall fully vest and be payable according to the 
original terms of the Award with a value, if any, that otherwise would be earned under the applicable performance goals originally 
established in the Award Agreement based on actual performance (subject to a proper deferral election made with respect to the 
Award). However, the Restricted Stock Units without a proper deferral election that vest under this Section 12(d) shall be payable 
on the Participant’s separation from service (within the meaning of Section 409A) or in the case of a Participant who is a specified 
employee (within the meaning of Section 409A) shall be paid on the first day of the seventh month following the month of 
separation from service. 
  
(e) 
Spin-offs and Other Divestitures.  If the termination of employment is due to the divestiture, cessation, transfer, or spin-off of a 
line of business or other activity of the Company, the Committee, in its sole discretion, shall determine the conversion, vesting, or 
other treatment of all outstanding Awards under the Plan. Such treatment shall be consistent with Section 409A, and in particular 
will take into account whether a separation from service has occurred within the meaning of Section 409A. 
13. 
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLAN 
  
(a) 
Administration.  The authority to control and manage the operations and administration of the Plan shall be vested in the 
Committee in accordance with this Section. 
  
(b) 
Selection of Committee. The Committee shall be selected by the Board, and shall consist of two or more outside, disinterested 
members of the Board who, in the judgment of the Board, are qualified to administer the Plan as contemplated by Rule 16b-3 of the 
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (or any successor rule), Code section 162(m) and the regulations thereunder (or any 
successors thereto), and any rules and regulations of a stock exchange on which Common Stock is traded. 
  
(c) 
Powers of Committee.  The authority to manage and control the operations and administration of the Plan shall be vested in the 
Committee, subject to the following: 
  
(i) 
Subject to the provisions of the Plan, the Committee will have the authority and discretion to select from among the eligible 
Company employees those persons who shall receive Awards, to determine the time or times of receipt, to determine the 
types of Awards and the number of shares or amounts covered by the Awards, to establish the terms, conditions, 
performance criteria, performance period, restrictions, and other provisions of such Awards, to specify that the Participant’s 
rights, payments, and benefits with respect to Awards shall be subject to adjustment, reduction, cancellation, forfeiture, or 
recoupment under certain circumstances, and (subject to the restrictions imposed by Section 14) to cancel or suspend 
Awards. In making such determinations, the Committee may take into account the nature of services rendered by the 
individual, the individual’s present and potential contribution to the Company’s success and such other factors as the 
Committee deems relevant. Such terms and conditions may be evidenced by an agreement (“Award Agreement”), which 
need not require execution by the Participant, in which case acceptance of the Award shall constitute agreement by the 
Participant with all its terms, conditions, limitations and forfeiture provisions. 

   
   
   
   
   
   
The Committee may from time to time prescribe, amend and rescind rules relating to the Plan. Subject to the approval of the Board of 
Directors, where required, the Committee may at any time terminate, amend, or suspend the operation of the Plan, provided that no action 
shall be taken by the Board of Directors or the Committee without the approval of the stockholders which would:  
   
   
  
(ii) 
The Committee will have the authority and discretion to establish terms and conditions of Awards as the Committee 
determines to be necessary or appropriate to conform to applicable requirements or practices of jurisdictions outside of the 
United States. 
  
(iii) 
The Committee will have the authority and discretion to interpret the Plan, Award Agreements, and any other documents 
ancillary thereto, to establish, modify, and rescind any rules relating to the Plan, to determine the terms and provisions of any 
Award Agreements made pursuant to the Plan, to correct any technical defect(s) or omission(s) in connection with the Plan, 
Award Agreement, and any other documents ancillary thereto, reconcile any technical inconsistencies in connection with the 
Plan, Award Agreement, and any other documents ancillary thereto, and to make all other determinations that may be 
necessary or advisable for the administration of the Plan. 
  
(iv) 
Any interpretation of the Plan, Award Agreements, and any other documents ancillary thereto, by the Committee and any 
decision made by it under the Plan, Award Agreements, and any other documents ancillary thereto, is final and binding. 
There is no obligation for uniformity or consistency of treatment of Participants or Awards under the Plan. 
  
(v) 
The Committee will have exclusive authority and discretion to decide how outstanding Awards will be treated, and is 
empowered to make all elections among possible options, consistent with Sections 11(c) and (d). 
  
(d) 
Delegation by Committee.  Except to the extent prohibited by applicable law or the applicable rules of a stock exchange, the 
Committee may allocate all or any portion of its responsibilities and powers to any one or more of its members and may delegate all 
or any part of its responsibilities and powers to any person or persons selected by it. Any such allocation or delegation may be 
revoked by the Committee at any time. 
  
(e) 
Designation of Beneficiary.  Each Participant to whom an Award has been made under the Plan may designate a beneficiary or 
beneficiaries to exercise any Award or to receive any payment which under the terms of the Plan and the relevant Award 
Agreement may become exercisable or payable on or after the Participant’s death. At any time, and from time to time, any such 
designation may be changed or cancelled by the Participant without the consent of any such beneficiary. Any such designation, 
change or cancellation must be on a form provided for that purpose by the Committee and shall not be effective until received by 
the Committee. Such form may establish other rules as the Committee deems appropriate. If no beneficiary has been designated by 
a deceased Participant, or if all the designated beneficiaries have predeceased the Participant, the beneficiary shall be the 
Participant’s estate. If the Participant designates more than one beneficiary, any payments under the Plan to such beneficiaries shall 
be made in equal shares unless the Participant has expressly designated otherwise, in which case the payments shall be made in the 
shares designated by the Participant. 
14. 
AMENDMENTS OF THE PLAN 
 
(a) 
except as provided in Section 5(c), materially increase the number of shares which may be issued under the Plan; 
 
(b) 
permit granting of Stock Options or Stock Appreciation Rights at less than Fair Market Value; 

   
No termination, modification, suspension, or amendment of the Plan shall alter or impair the rights of any Participant pursuant to an 
outstanding Award, in any material respect, without the consent of the Participant. There is no obligation for uniformity of treatment of 
Participants or Awards under the Plan.  
   
Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary, in order to foster and promote achievement of the purposes of the Plan and/or 
to comply with provisions of the laws in countries outside the United Sates in which the Company operates or has employees, the 
Committee, in its sole discretion, shall have the power and authority to (i) determine which Eligible Persons (if any) employed by the 
Company outside the United States should participate in the Plan, (ii) modify the terms and conditions of any Awards made to such 
Eligible Persons, and (iii) establish sub-plans, modified Option exercise procedures and other Award terms, conditions and procedures to 
the extent such actions may be necessary or advisable to comply with provisions of the laws in such countries outside the United States in 
order to assure the lawfulness, validity and effectiveness of Awards granted under the Plan.  
   
Except as otherwise provided by rules of the Committee, no Stock Options or Stock Appreciation Right shall be transferable by a 
Participant otherwise than (i) by the Participant’s last will and testament or (ii) by the applicable laws of descent and distribution, and 
such Stock Options or Stock Appreciation Right shall be exercised during the Participant’s lifetime only by the Participant or his or her 
guardian or legal representative. Except as otherwise provided in Sections 8 or 9, no shares of Restricted Stock, no Restricted Stock Units 
and no Performance Awards shall be sold, exchanged, transferred, pledged or otherwise disposed of during the restricted period.  
   
Subject to Sections 16 and 20, and the rights of the Company and the Committee established under the Plan’s terms, no right or benefit 
under the Plan shall be subject to alienation, sale, assignment, pledge, or encumbrance and any attempt to do so shall be void. No right or 
benefit under the Plan be subject to the debts, contracts, liabilities or torts of the person entitled to such rights or benefits.  
   
Nothing in the Plan shall be construed  
   
   
   
   
  
(c) 
except as provided in Section 5(c), permit the repricing (as provided in Section 6(c)) of outstanding Stock Options or Stock 
Appreciation Rights; or 
 
(d) 
amend the individual limits on awards set forth in Section 5(b) which may be granted to any single Participant. 
15. 
FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS 
16. 
TRANSFERABILITY OF AWARDS 
17. 
NON-ALIENATION OF RIGHTS AND BENEFITS 
18. 
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY OR OBLIGATION OF THE COMPANY 
  
(a) 
to give any employee of the Company any right to be granted any Award other than at the sole discretion of the Committee, or to 
give any such employee the ability to designate, directly or indirectly, the calendar year or timing of payments under the Plan 
(absent a proper deferral election); 
 
(b) 
to give any Participant any rights whatsoever with respect to shares of Common Stock except as specifically provided in the Plan; 
  
(c) 
to limit in any way the right of the Company or any Subsidiary to terminate, change or modify, with or without cause, the 
employment of any Participant at any time; or 
  
(d) 
to be evidence of any agreement or understanding, express or implied, that the Company or any Subsidiary will employ any 
Participant in any particular position at any particular rate of compensation or for any particular period of time. 

Payments and other benefits received by a Participant under an Award shall not be deemed part of a Participant’s regular, recurring 
compensation for purposes of any termination, indemnity or severance pay laws and shall not be included in, nor have any effect on, the 
determination of benefits under any other employee benefit plan, contract or similar arrangement provided by the Company or any 
Subsidiary, unless expressly so provided by such other plan, contract or arrangement.  
   
The Company shall not lend money to any Participant to finance a transaction under this Plan.  
   
Awards are specifically made subject to the Company’s Executive Compensation Clawback Policy, as it is amended from time to time, to 
the full extent said Policy is applicable.  
   
All notices to the Company regarding the Plan shall be in writing, effective as of actual receipt by the Company, and shall be sent to:  
Attention: Corporate Compensation  
General Mills, Inc.  
Number One General Mills Boulevard  
Minneapolis, MN 55426  
   
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan to the contrary, the Committee is given the discretionary authority to award up to a total 
of 20,000 unrestricted shares of Common Stock during each calendar year to selected employees as a bonus or reward (“Recognition 
Awards”). Under this paragraph no employee shall receive over 200 shares of Common Stock as Recognition Awards over the duration 
of the Plan’s term.  
19. 
NO LOANS 
20. 
CLAWBACK POLICY 
21. 
NOTICES 
22. 
RECOGNITION AWARDS 

EXHIBIT 12.1 
COMPUTATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES  
   
For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, earnings represent earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings of joint 
ventures, distributed income of equity investees, fixed charges, and amortization of capitalized interest, net of interest capitalized. Fixed 
charges represent gross interest expense (excluding interest on taxes) and subsidiary preferred distributions to noncontrolling interest holders, 
plus one-third (the proportion deemed representative of the interest factor) of rent expense.  
 
  
Fiscal Year Ended 
 
In Millions, Except Ratios 
  
May 31, 
2015 
   
May 25, 
2014 
   
May 26, 
2013 
   
May 27, 
2012 
   
May 29, 
2011 
 
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures  
  $1,761.9     $ 2,655.0    $ 2,534.9    $ 2,210.5    $2,428.2  
Distributed income of equity investees 
   
72.6     
90.5     115.7     
68.0     
72.7  
Plus: Fixed charges (1) 
   403.5     389.8     400.1     431.8     414.2  
Plus: Amortization of capitalized interest, net of interest capitalized 
   
(3.0)     
(0.8 )     
(0.4 )     
(5.5 )    
(3.7 )  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Earnings available to cover fixed charges 
$2,235.0  
$ 3,134.5  
$ 3,050.3  
$ 2,704.8  
$2,911.4  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges 
 
5.54  
 
8.04  
 
7.62  
 
6.26  
 
7.03  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
(1)   Fixed charges: 
Interest expense 
$ 335.5   
$ 323.4  
$ 333.8  
$ 370.7  
$ 360.9  
Preferred distributions to noncontrolling interests 
 
3.5  
 
3.4  
 
3.7  
 
2.6  
 
2.5  
Rentals (1/3) 
 
64.5  
 
63.0  
 
62.6  
 
58.5  
 
50.8  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total fixed charges 
$ 403.5   
$ 389.8  
$ 400.1  
$ 431.8  
$ 414.2  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  

Exhibit 21.1 
Subsidiaries of the Registrant  
   
Company Name 
  Jurisdiction 
AB F C.V. 
  Netherlands 
AESR, LLC 
  Delaware 
AGRICOLA NOVA INDEMIL LTDA 
  Brazil 
ANNIE’S BAKING, LLC 
  United States 
ANNIE’S ENTERPRISES, INC. 
  United States 
ANNIE’S HOMEGROWN, INC. 
  United States 
ANNIE’S, INC. 
  United States 
BASILDON DAIRY FOODS LTD 
  United Kingdom 
BENEFICIADORA DE CEREAIS MANI LTDA. 
  Brazil 
BOURNAZI PASTRIES S.A. 
  Greece 
CEREALES PARTNERS LATIN AMERICA LLC 
  Delaware 
COLOMBO, INC. 
  Delaware 
ELYSEES CONSULT SAS 
  France 
FOODSHOULDTASTEGOOD, INC. 
  Delaware 
GARDETTO’S BAKERY, INC. 
  Delaware 
GCOM ENTERPRISES, INC. 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS (CHINA) HOLDING CO., LTD. 
  China 
GENERAL MILLS (GIBRALTAR) LIMITED 
  Gibraltar 
GENERAL MILLS ARGENTINA L.S., LLC 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS ARGENTINA S.A. 
  Argentina 
GENERAL MILLS ASIA PTE. LTD. 
  Singapore 
GENERAL MILLS AUSTRALIA CK PTY LTD 
  Australia 
GENERAL MILLS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD 
  Australia 
GENERAL MILLS BELGIUM, VOF 
  Belgium 
GENERAL MILLS BERWICK LIMITED 
  United Kingdom 
GENERAL MILLS BRASIL ALIMENTOS LTDA 
  Brazil 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA B.V. 
  Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA CORPORATION 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING FIVE LIMITED PARTNERHSIP 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING FOUR CORPORATION 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING ONE CORPORATION 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING SIX CORPORATION 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING THREE CORPORATION 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING TWO CORPORATION 
  Canada 
GENERAL MILLS CAPITAL, INC. 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS CEREALS HOLDING (SOUTH AFRICA) (PTY) LTD 
  South Africa 
GENERAL MILLS CEREALS PROPERTIES, LLC 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS CEREALS, LLC 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS CHINA HOLDINGS LIMITED 
  Mauritius 
GENERAL MILLS CHINA LIMITED 
  Hong Kong 
GENERAL MILLS CONTINENTAL INC. S.A. 
  Chile 
GENERAL MILLS DE MEXICO, S. DE R.L. DE C.V. 
  Mexico 
GENERAL MILLS DE VENEZUELA, C.A. 
  Venezuela 
GENERAL MILLS DIRECT MARKETING, INC. 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS DL GP 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS EASTERN EUROPE s.r.o. 
  Czech Republic 
GENERAL MILLS ESPANA B.V. 
  Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS FINANCE, INC. 
  Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS FOOD PRODUCTS INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED 
  India 
GENERAL MILLS FOODS (NANJING) CO. LTD. 
  China 
GENERAL MILLS FOODS (SANHE) CO., LTD. 
  China 
GENERAL MILLS FOODS ASIA LIMITED 
  Hong Kong 
GENERAL MILLS FOUNDATION 
  Minnesota 
GENERAL MILLS FRANCE SAS 
  France 
GENERAL MILLS FROZEN FOODS (GUANGZHOU) LIMITED 
  Hong Kong 

GENERAL MILLS FROZEN FOODS (SHANGHAI) LIMITED 
Hong Kong 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL FINANCE LTD. 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS EIGHT GP 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS ELEVEN GP  
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS FIVE GP 
Bermuda  
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS NINE GP 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS SEVEN LTD. 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS SIX LTD. 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TEN GP 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TWO GP 
Bermuda 
GENERAL MILLS GMBH 
Germany 
GENERAL MILLS HELLAS S.A. 
Greece 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED 
Australia 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (FRANCE) SAS 
France 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (U.K.) LIMITED 
United Kingdom 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING A (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING C (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING D (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING E (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING F (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING G (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING H (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING I (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING J (NETHERLANDS) B.V. 
Netherlands 
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING ONE (GERMANY) GmbH 
Germany 
GENERAL MILLS HONG KONG LIMITED 
Hong Kong 
GENERAL MILLS IBERICA, S.A. UNIPERSONAL 
Spain 
GENERAL MILLS INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED 
India 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL (THAILAND) CO., LTD. 
Thailand 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES TWO, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL FINANCE, LLC 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL FRANCE SAS 
France 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS, LLC 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL LIMITED 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL S.A.R.L. 
Switzerland 
GENERAL MILLS IP HOLDINGS I, LLC 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS IP HOLDINGS II, LLC 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS ISRAEL LTD 
Israel 
GENERAL MILLS ITALIA SRL 
Italy 
GENERAL MILLS KOREA CO., LTD. 
Korea, Republic of 
GENERAL MILLS LANDES (SAS) 
France 
GENERAL MILLS LEBANON S.A.L. 
Lebanon 
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG FINANCE S.A.R.L. 
Luxembourg 
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG ONE S.A.R.L. 
Luxembourg 
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG S.A.R.L. 
Luxembourg 
GENERAL MILLS MAARSSEN HOLDING, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS MAGHREB SARL 
Morocco 
GENERAL MILLS MALAYSIA SDN. BHD. 
Malaysia 
GENERAL MILLS MANUFACTURING AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED 
Australia 
GENERAL MILLS MARKETING, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS MAURITIUS, INC. 
Mauritius 
GENERAL MILLS MENAT DMCC 
United Arab Emirates 
GENERAL MILLS MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA FZE 
United Arab Emirates 
GENERAL MILLS MIDDLE EAST SAL 
Lebanon 
GENERAL MILLS MISSOURI, INC. 
Minnesota 
GENERAL MILLS NEW ZEALAND LIMITED 
New Zealand 
GENERAL MILLS NORWAY AS 
Norway 
GENERAL MILLS OPERATIONS, LLC 
New York 

GENERAL MILLS PENSION TRUSTEE LIMITED 
United Kingdom 
GENERAL MILLS PROPERTIES, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS RH, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS RIGHTS HOLDINGS, LLC 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS SALES SINGAPORE PTE. LTD. 
Singapore 
GENERAL MILLS SALES, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS SAN ADRIAN, S.L. UNIPERSONAL 
Spain 
GENERAL MILLS SCANDINAVIA AB 
Sweden 
GENERAL MILLS SERVICES (UK) LTD. 
United Kingdom 
GENERAL MILLS SERVICES, INC. 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS SOUTH AFRICA (PROPRIETARY) LIMITED 
South Africa 
GENERAL MILLS SPECIALTY PRODUCTS, LLC 
Delaware 
GENERAL MILLS SWISS FOUR GMBH 
Switzerland 
GENERAL MILLS SWISS THREE GMBH 
Switzerland 
GENERAL MILLS SWISS TWO GMBH 
Switzerland 
GENERAL MILLS TAIWAN LIMITED 
Taiwan 
GENERAL MILLS TRADING (SHANGHAI) CO. LIMITED 
China 
GENERAL MILLS UK LIMITED 
United Kingdom 
GENERAL MILLS VENTAS DE MEXICO, S. DE R.L. DE C.V. 
Mexico 
GIGANTE VERDE S. de R.L. de C.V. 
Mexico 
GIGANTE VERDE, LLC 
Delaware 
GLOBAL HOLDINGS ONE MANAGEMENT LLC 
Delaware 
GM CEREALS HOLDINGS, INC. 
Delaware 
GM CEREALS MANAGER, INC. 
Delaware 
GREEN GIANT INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Minnesota 
GUANGZHOU PILLSBURY V. PEARL FOODS CO., LTD. 
China 
HAAGEN-DAZS ARRAS SNC 
France 
HAAGEN-DAZS BELGIUM (BV BA) 
Belgium 
HAAGEN-DAZS INTERNATIONAL SHOPPE COMPANY, INC. 
Minnesota 
HAAGEN-DAZS NEDERLAND N.V. 
Netherlands 
HD DISTRIBUTORS (THAILAND) CO., LTD. 
Thailand 
HD MARKETING & DISTRIBUTION SDN. BHD. 
Malaysia 
HDIP, INC. 
Delaware 
IMMACULATE BAKING COMPANY 
Delaware 
INO FITA GMBH 
Germany 
KAMPOS ESTIASI S.A. 
Greece 
KCLM RESEARCH IN NUTRITION INC. 
Canada 
KIFISSIA PASTRIES S.A. 
Greece 
LA SALTENA S.A. 
Argentina 
LIBERTE MARQUES SARL 
Luxembourg 
LIBERTÉ USA, LLC 
United States 
MILL CITY, LLC 
United States 
MOUNTAIN HIGH LLC 
United States 
NAPA VALLEY KITCHENS, INC. 
United States 
NOBLEVAL SARL 
France 
NORTHGATE PARTNERS LLC 
North Dakota 
PASTA MASTER DISTRIBUTION PTY. LTD. 
Australia 
PET INCORPORATED 
Delaware 
PINEDALE HOLDINGS PTE LIMITED 
Singapore 
PINEDALE TRADING PTE LIMITED 
Singapore 
POWER HOUSE FOODS PTY. LTD. 
Australia 
SERETRAM (SAS) 
France 
SHANGHAI HAAGEN-DAZS FOOD TRADING CO., LTD. 
China 
SHANGHAI PILLSBURY FROZEN FOODS, LIMITED 
China 
SMALL PLANET FOODS, INC. 
Delaware 
SOCIETE FRANCASIE D’INVESTISSEMENT POUR LE BENIN (SOFIB SAS) 
France 
SODIMA SAS 
France 
SUPER FITNESS INTERNATIONAL S.A. 
Panama 
THE PASTA MASTER PTY. LTD. 
Australia 
THE PILLSBURY COMPANY, LLC 
Delaware 

TRANSYOKI – TRANSPORTES YOKI LTDA 
Brazil 
WASHBURN INVESTMENT OFFICE LLC 
Delaware 
Y.O. C.V. 
Netherlands 
YOKI DISTRIBUIDORA DE ALIMENTOS LTDA. 
Brazil 
YOPLAIT BENELUX NV 
Belgium 
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING A (FRANCE) SAS 
France 
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING B (FRANCE) SAS 
France 
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING S.A.R.L. 
Luxembourg 
YOPLAIT CANADA HOLDING CO. 
Nova Scotia 
YOPLAIT DAIRY CO., LTD. 
China 
YOPLAIT FRANCE SAS 
France 
YOPLAIT IRELAND LIMITED 
Ireland 
YOPLAIT LIBERTE CANADA CO./YOPLAIT LIBERTE CANADA CIE 
Canada 
YOPLAIT MARQUES SNC 
France 
YOPLAIT SAS 
France 
YOPLAIT SVERIGE AB 
Sweden 
YOPLAIT UK LTD 
United Kingdom 
YOPLAIT USA, INC. 
Delaware 
JOINT VENTURES 
C.P.A. CEREAL PARTNERS HANDELSGESELLSCHAFT m.b.H. 
Austria 
C.P.A. CEREAL PARTNERS HANDELSGESELLSCHAFT m.b.H & Co. OHG 
Austria 
C.P.D. CEREAL PARTNERS DEUTSCHLAND GmbH & Co. oHG 
Germany 
C.P.D. CEREAL PARTNERS DEUTSCHLAND VERWALTUNGSGESELLSCHAFT mbH 
Germany 
C.P.W. HELLAS BREAKFAST CEREALS SOCIETE ANONYME 
Greece 
C.P.W. MEXICO S. de R.L. de C.V. 
Mexico 
CEREAL ASSOCIADOS PORTUGAL, A.E.I.E. 
Portugal 
CEREAL PARTNERS (MALAYSIA) SDN. BHD. 
Malaysia 
CEREAL PARTNERS AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED 
Australia 
CEREAL PARTNERS CZECH REPUBLIC, s.r.o. 
Czech Republic 
CEREAL PARTNERS ESPANA, A.E.I.E. 
Spain 
CEREAL PARTNERS FRANCE, SNC 
France 
CEREAL PARTNERS GIDA TICARET LIMITED SIRKETI 
Turkey 
CEREAL PARTNERS HUNGARIA KFT. 
Hungary 
CEREAL PARTNERS MEXICO, S.A. DE C.V. 
Mexico 
CEREAL PARTNERS NIGERIA LIMITED 
Nigeria 
CEREAL PARTNERS POLAND TORUN-PACIFIC Sp. z.o.o. 
Poland 
CEREAL PARTNERS RUS LLC 
Russian Federation 
CEREAL PARTNERS SLOVAK REPUBLIC, s.r.o. 
Slovakia 
CEREAL PARTNERS SOUTH AFRICA 
South Africa 
CEREAL PARTNERS U.K. 
United Kingdom 
CEREAL PARTNERS VENEZUELA 
Venezuela 
CEREALES C.P.W. BOLIVIA S.R.L. 
Bolivia 
CEREALES C.P.W. CHILE LIMITADA (SRL) 
Chile 
CEREALES CPW PERU LIMITADA 
Peru 
CEREALES PARTNERS COLOMBIA LTDA. 
Colombia 
CEREALES PARTNERS L.L.C.—UTE 
Argentina 
CP COLOMBIA ACP 
Colombia 
CP MIDDLE EAST FZCO 
United Arab Emirates 
CP SUISSE 
Switzerland 
CPW BRASIL LTDA. 
Brazil 
CPW DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
Dominican Republic 
CPW ECUADOR 
Ecuador 
CPW HONG KONG LIMITED 
Hong Kong 
CPW NEW ZEALAND 
New Zealand 
CPW OPERATIONS S.A.R.L. 
Switzerland 
CPW PARAGUAY S.R.L. 
Paraguay 
CPW PHILIPPINES, INC. 
Philippines 
CPW ROMANIA 
Romania 

CPW S.A. 
Switzerland 
CPW SINGAPORE (PTE.) LTD. 
Singapore 
CPW TIANJIN LIMITED 
China 
CPW TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, LTD. 
Trinidad and Tobago 
CPW URUGUAY S.A. 
Uruguay 
HAAGEN-DAZS JAPAN, INC. 
Japan 
HAAGEN-DAZS KOREA CO., LTD. 
Korea, Republic of 
PT CEREAL PARTNERS INDONESIA 
Indonesia 

Exhibit 23.1 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  
The Board of Directors and Stockholders  
General Mills, Inc.:  
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (Nos. 333-176243 and 333-202215) on Form S-3 and registration 
statements (Nos. 2-50327, 2-53523, 2-95574, 33-27628, 33-32059, 333-32509, 333-90012, 333-109050, 333-131195, 333-139997, 333-
148820, 333-163849, and 333-179622) on Form S-8 of General Mills, Inc. of our report dated July 6, 2015, with respect to the consolidated 
balance sheets of General Mills, Inc. as of May 31, 2015 and May 25, 2014, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, comprehensive 
income, total equity and redeemable interest, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended May 31, 2015, and the related 
financial statement schedule, and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015, which report appears in the 
May 31, 2015 annual report on the Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.  
/s/ KPMG LLP  
Minneapolis, Minnesota  
July 6, 2015  

EXHIBIT 31.1 
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
I, Kendall J. Powell, certify that:  
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.;  
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period 
covered by this report;  
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material 
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;  
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-
15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:  
(a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our 
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others 
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;  
(b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under 
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;  
(c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and  
(d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s 
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably 
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and  
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial 
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent 
functions):  
(a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are 
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and  
(b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s 
internal control over financial reporting.  
Date: July 6, 2015  
/s/ Kendall J. Powell  
Kendall J. Powell  
Chairman of the Board and  
Chief Executive Officer  

EXHIBIT 31.2 
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
I, Donal L. Mulligan, certify that:  
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.;  
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period 
covered by this report;  
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material 
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;  
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-
15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:  
(a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our 
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others 
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;  
(b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under 
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;  
(c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and  
(d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s 
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably 
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and  
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial 
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent 
functions):  
(a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are 
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and  
(b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s 
internal control over financial reporting.  
Date: July 6, 2015  
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan  
Donal L. Mulligan  
Executive Vice President and  
Chief Financial Officer  

EXHIBIT 32.1 
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
I, Kendall J. Powell, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of General Mills, Inc. (the “Company”), certify, pursuant to 
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:  
(1) the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, (the “Report”) fully complies with the 
requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m or 78o(d)); and  
(2) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the 
Company.  
Date: July 6, 2015  
/s/ Kendall J. Powell  
Kendall J. Powell  
Chairman of the Board and  
Chief Executive Officer  

EXHIBIT 32.2 
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
I, Donal L. Mulligan, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of General Mills, Inc. (the “Company”), certify, pursuant to 
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:  
(1) the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, (the “Report”) fully complies with the 
requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m or 78o(d)); and  
(2) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the 
Company.  
Date: July 6, 2015  
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan  
Donal L. Mulligan  
Executive Vice President and  
Chief Financial Officer 
