Table of Contents
  
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
 
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED
May 28, 2017
 
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD
FROM              TO             
Commission file number: 001-01185
 
 
GENERAL MILLS, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Delaware
 
41-0274440
(State or other jurisdiction of
 
(I.R.S. Employer
incorporation or organization)
 
Identification No.)
Number One General Mills Boulevard
 
Minneapolis, Minnesota
 
55426
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
(763) 764-7600
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 
Title of each class
 
Name of each exchange
on which registered
Common Stock, $.10 par value
 
New York Stock Exchange
Floating Rate Notes due 2020
 
New York Stock Exchange
2.100% Notes due 2020
 
New York Stock Exchange
1.000% Notes due 2023
 
New York Stock Exchange
1.500% Notes due 2027
 
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90 days. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
and post such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
 
Large accelerated filer
 ☒
  
Accelerated filer ☐
Non-accelerated filer
 ☐  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
  
Smaller reporting company ☐
Emerging growth company
 ☐
  
 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). Yes ☐ No ☒
Aggregate market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, based on the closing price of $62.30 per share as reported on the New York
Stock Exchange on November 28, 2016 (the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter): $36,148.9 million.
Number of shares of Common Stock outstanding as of June 9, 2017: 577,099,679 (excluding 177,513,649 shares held in the treasury).

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the registrant’s Proxy Statement for its 2017 Annual Meeting of Shareholders are incorporated by reference into Part III.

Table of Contents
Table of Contents
 
 
  
  Page 
Part I
 
  
Item 1
 Business
   
3 
Item 1A
 Risk Factors
   
7 
Item 1B
 Unresolved Staff Comments
   11 
Item 2
 Properties
   12 
Item 3
 Legal Proceedings
   12 
Item 4
 Mine Safety Disclosures
   12 
Part II
 
  
Item 5
 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
   13 
Item 6
 Selected Financial Data
   14 
Item 7
 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
   15 
Item 7A
 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
   46 
Item 8
 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
   48 
Item 9
 Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
   99 
Item 9A
 Controls and Procedures
   99 
Item 9B
 Other Information
   100 
Part III
 
  
Item 10
 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
   100 
Item 11
 Executive Compensation
   100 
Item 12
 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
   100 
Item 13
 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
   101 
Item 14
 Principal Accounting Fees and Services
   101 
Part IV
 
  
Item 15
 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
   101 
Item 16
 Form 10-K Summary
   104 
Signatures
 
   105 
 
2

Table of Contents
PART I
 
ITEM 1
Business
General Mills, Inc. was incorporated in Delaware in 1928. The terms “General Mills,” “Company,” “registrant,” “we,” “us,” and “our” mean General Mills, Inc.
and all subsidiaries included in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report unless the context indicates otherwise.
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.
COMPANY OVERVIEW
We are a leading global manufacturer and marketer of branded consumer foods sold through retail stores. We also are a leading supplier of branded and unbranded
food products to the North American foodservice and commercial baking industries. We manufacture our products in 13 countries and market them in more than
100 countries. In addition to our consolidated operations, we have 50 percent interests in two strategic joint ventures that manufacture and market food products
sold in more than 130 countries worldwide.
We manage and review the financial results of our business under four operating segments: North America Retail; Convenience Stores & Foodservice; Europe &
Australia; and Asia & Latin America. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) in Item 7 of this
report for a description of our segments and certain changes made to our segments in fiscal 2017. For financial information by segment and geographic area, see
Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
We offer a variety of food products that provide great taste, nutrition, convenience and value for consumers around the world, with a focus on five large global
categories:
 
 
•
 ready-to-eat cereal;
 
 
•
 convenient meals, including meal kits, ethnic meals, pizza, soup, side dish mixes, frozen breakfast, and frozen entrees;
 
 
•
 snacks, including grain, fruit and savory snacks, nutrition bars, and frozen hot snacks;
 
 
•
 yogurt; and
 
 
•
 super-premium ice cream.
Other significant product categories include:
 
 
•
 baking mixes and ingredients; and
 
 
•
 refrigerated and frozen dough.
Our Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW) joint venture with Nestlé S.A. (Nestlé) competes in the ready-to-eat cereal category in markets outside North America, and
our Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ) joint venture competes in the super-premium ice cream category in Japan. For net sales contributed by each class of similar
products, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Customers. Our primary customers are grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, drug, dollar and discount chains, e-commerce
grocery providers, commercial and noncommercial foodservice distributors and operators, restaurants, and convenience stores. We generally sell to these customers
through our direct sales force. We use broker and distribution arrangements for certain products and to serve certain types of customers. For further information on
our customer credit and product return practices, please refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. During fiscal 2017, Wal-
Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates (Wal-Mart) accounted for 20 percent of our consolidated net sales and 29 percent of net sales of our North America Retail
segment. No other customer accounted for 10 percent or more of our consolidated net sales. For further information on significant customers, please refer to Note 7
to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Competition. The consumer foods industry is highly competitive, with numerous manufacturers of varying sizes in the United States and throughout the world. The
food categories in which we participate also are very competitive. Our principal competitors in these categories all have substantial financial, marketing, and other
resources. Competition in our product categories is based on product
 
3

Table of Contents
innovation, product quality, price, brand recognition and loyalty, effectiveness of marketing, promotional activity, and the ability to identify and satisfy consumer
preferences. Our principal strategies for competing in each of our segments include unique consumer insights, effective customer relationships, superior product
quality, innovative advertising, product promotion, product innovation aligned with consumers’ needs, an efficient supply chain, and price. In most product
categories, we compete not only with other widely advertised, branded products, but also with regional brands and with generic and private label products that are
generally sold at lower prices. Internationally, we compete with both multi-national and local manufacturers, and each country includes a unique group of
competitors.
Raw materials, ingredients, and packaging. The principal raw materials that we use are grains (wheat, oats, and corn), sugar, dairy products, vegetables, fruits,
meats, nuts, vegetable oils, and other agricultural products. We also use substantial quantities of carton board, corrugated, plastic and metal packaging materials,
operating supplies, and energy. Most of these inputs for our domestic and Canadian operations are purchased from suppliers in the United States. In our
international operations, inputs that are not locally available in adequate supply may be imported from other countries. The cost of these inputs may fluctuate
widely due to external conditions such as weather, product scarcity, limited sources of supply, commodity market fluctuations, currency fluctuations, and changes
in governmental agricultural and energy policies and regulations. We have some long-term fixed price contracts, but the majority of our inputs are purchased on the
open market. We believe that we will be able to obtain an adequate supply of needed inputs. Occasionally and where possible, we make advance purchases of items
significant to our business in order to ensure continuity of operations. Our objective is to procure materials meeting both our quality standards and our production
needs at price levels that allow a targeted profit margin. Since these inputs generally represent the largest variable cost in manufacturing our products, to the extent
possible, we often manage the risk associated with adverse price movements for some inputs using a variety of risk management strategies. We also have a grain
merchandising operation that provides us efficient access to, and more informed knowledge of, various commodity markets, principally wheat and oats. This
operation holds physical inventories that are carried at net realizable value and uses derivatives to manage its net inventory position and minimize its market
exposures.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Our research and development resources are focused on new product development, product improvement, process design and improvement, packaging, and
exploratory research in new business and technology areas. Research and development expenditures were $218 million in fiscal 2017, $222 million in fiscal 2016,
and $229 million in fiscal 2015.
TRADEMARKS AND PATENTS
Our products are marketed under a variety of valuable trademarks. Some of the more important trademarks used in our global operations (set forth in italics in this
report) include Annie’s, Betty Crocker , Bisquick , Bugles , Cascadian Farm , Cheerios , Chex , Cinnamon Toast Crunch , Cocoa Puffs , Cookie Crisp, Fiber One ,
Food Should Taste Good , Fruit by the Foot , Fruit Gushers , Fruit Roll-Ups , Gardetto’s , Go-Gurt , Gold Medal , Golden Grahams , Häagen-Dazs , Helpers ,
Jeno’s , Jus-Rol , Kitano , Kix , La Salteña , Lärabar , Latina , Liberté , Lucky Charms , Muir Glen , Nature Valley , Oatmeal Crisp , Old El Paso , Pillsbury ,
Progresso , Raisin Nut Bran , Total , Totino’s , Trix , Wanchai Ferry , Wheaties , Yoki , and Yoplait . We protect these marks as appropriate through registrations in
the United States and other jurisdictions. Depending on the jurisdiction, trademarks are generally valid as long as they are in use or their registrations are properly
maintained and they have not been found to have become generic. Registrations of trademarks can also generally be renewed indefinitely as long as the trademarks
are in use.
Some of our products are marketed under or in combination with trademarks that have been licensed from others, including Reese’s Puffs for cereal, Hershey’s for
a variety of products, Green Giant for vegetables in certain countries, and Cinnabon for refrigerated dough, frozen pastries, and baking products. Our fruit snacks
business uses a variety of licensed trademarks, including Mott’s , Minions , Sunkist , Scooby Doo , Batman , Tom and Jerry , Hello Kitty , Thomas the Tank Engine ,
and various Warner Bros. and Nickelodeon characters. Our yogurt business uses a variety of licensed trademarks, including various Disney, Marvel, Warner Bros.,
and Nickelodeon characters.
Our cereal trademarks are licensed to CPW and may be used in association with the Nestlé trademark. Nestlé licenses certain of its trademarks to CPW, including
the Nestlé and Uncle Toby’s trademarks. The Häagen-Dazs trademark is licensed royalty-free and exclusively to Nestlé for ice cream and other frozen dessert
products in the United States and Canada. The Häagen-Dazs trademark is also licensed to HDJ. The J. M. Smucker Company holds an exclusive royalty-free
license to use the Pillsbury brand and the Pillsbury Doughboy character in the dessert mix and baking mix categories in the United States and under limited
circumstances in Canada and Mexico.
The Yoplait trademark and other related trademarks are owned by Yoplait Marques SNC, an entity in which we own a 50 percent interest. These marks are licensed
exclusively to Yoplait SAS, an entity in which we own a 51 percent interest. Yoplait SAS licenses these trademarks to its franchisees. The Liberté trademark and
other related trademarks are owned by Liberté Marques Sàrl, an entity in which we own a 50 percent interest.
 
4

Table of Contents
We continue our focus on developing and marketing innovative, proprietary products. We consider the collective rights under our various patents, which expire
from time to time, a valuable asset, but we do not believe that our businesses are materially dependent upon any single patent or group of related patents.
SEASONALITY
In general, demand for our products is evenly balanced throughout the year. However, within our North America Retail segment demand for refrigerated dough,
frozen baked goods, and baking products is stronger in the fourth calendar quarter. Demand for Progresso soup is higher during the fall and winter months.
Internationally, within our Europe & Australia and Asia & Latin America segments, demand for Häagen-Dazs ice cream is higher during the summer months and
demand for baking mix and dough products increases during winter months. Due to the offsetting impact of these demand trends, as well as the different seasons in
the northern and southern hemispheres, our international segments’ net sales are generally evenly balanced throughout the year.
BACKLOG
Orders are generally filled within a few days of receipt and are subject to cancellation at any time prior to shipment. The backlog of any unfilled orders as of
May 28, 2017, was not material.
WORKING CAPITAL
A description of our working capital is included in the Liquidity section of MD&A in Item 7 of this report. Our product return practices are described in Note 2 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
EMPLOYEES
As of May 28, 2017, we had approximately 38,000 full- and part-time employees.
FOOD QUALITY AND SAFETY REGULATION
The manufacture and sale of consumer food products is highly regulated. In the United States, our activities are subject to regulation by various federal government
agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, Department of Agriculture, Federal Trade Commission, Department of Commerce, and Environmental
Protection Agency, as well as various state and local agencies. Our business is also regulated by similar agencies outside of the United States.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
As of May 28, 2017, we were involved with two active cleanup sites associated with the alleged or threatened release of hazardous substances or wastes located in
Minneapolis, Minnesota and Moonachie, New Jersey.
Our operations are subject to the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act, and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, and all similar state, local, and foreign environmental laws and
regulations applicable to the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Based on current facts and circumstances, we believe that neither the results of our environmental proceedings nor our compliance in general with environmental
laws or regulations will have a material adverse effect upon our capital expenditures, earnings, or competitive position.
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
The section below provides information regarding our executive officers as of June 29, 2017:
Richard C. Allendorf , age 56, is Senior Vice President, General Counsel, and Secretary. Mr. Allendorf joined General Mills in 2001 from The Pillsbury
Company. He was promoted to Vice President, Deputy General Counsel in 2010, first overseeing the legal affairs of the U.S. Retail segment and Consumer Food
Sales and then, in August 2012, overseeing the legal affairs of the International segment and Global Ethics and Compliance. He was named to his present position
in February 2015. Prior to joining General Mills, he practiced law with the Shearman and Sterling and Mackall, Crounse and Moore law firms. He was in finance
with General Electric prior to his legal career.
 
5

Table of Contents
John R. Church , age 51, is Executive Vice President, Supply Chain and Global Business Solutions; Chief Supply Chain Officer. Mr. Church joined General Mills
in 1988 as a Product Developer in the Big G cereals division and held various positions before becoming Vice President, Engineering in 2003. In 2005, his role was
expanded to include development of the Company’s strategy for the global sourcing of raw materials and manufacturing capabilities. He was named Vice
President, Supply Chain Operations in 2007, Senior Vice President, Supply Chain in 2008, Executive Vice President, Supply Chain in July 2013, and to his present
position in June 2017.
Peter C. Erickson , age 56, is Executive Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality. Mr. Erickson joined General Mills in 1994 as part of the Colombo
yogurt acquisition. He has held various positions in Research & Development and became Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality in 2003 and Senior
Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality in 2006. He was named to his present position in July 2013.
Olivier Faujour , age 52, is Vice President; President, Dairy Strategic Brand Unit. Mr. Faujour joined General Mills in 2010 as a Vice President and Managing
Director of France, Benelux and Southern Europe. Prior to joining General Mills, Mr. Faujour held global and national leadership positions at Danone and held
various marketing roles in the European and Latin America regions at Procter & Gamble. He was named to his present position in January 2017.
Jeffrey L. Harmening , age 50, is Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Harmening joined General Mills in 1994 and served in various marketing roles in the Betty
Crocker, Yoplait, and Big G cereal divisions. He was named Vice President, Marketing for CPW in 2003 and a Vice President of the Big G cereal division in 2007.
In 2011, he was promoted to Senior Vice President for the Big G cereal division. Mr. Harmening was appointed Senior Vice President, Chief Executive Officer of
CPW in 2012. Mr. Harmening returned from CPW in May 2014 and was named Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, U.S. Retail. He became
President, Chief Operating Officer in July 2016, and was named to his present position in June 2017.
Christina Law , age 50, is Senior Vice President; Group President, Asia & Latin America. Ms. Law joined General Mills in November 2012 as Vice President;
President, Asia, Middle East and Africa. Prior to joining General Mills, Ms. Law held various marketing and general management roles around the globe with
Johnson & Johnson and Procter & Gamble. She was named to her current position in January 2017.
Donal L. Mulligan , age 56, is Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Mulligan joined General Mills in 2001 from The Pillsbury Company. He
served as Vice President, Financial Operations for our International division until 2004, when he was named Vice President, Financial Operations for Operations
and Technology. Mr. Mulligan was appointed Treasurer in 2006 and Senior Vice President, Financial Operations in 2007. He was elected to his present position in
2007. From 1987 to 1998, he held several international positions at PepsiCo, Inc. and YUM! Brands, Inc. Mr. Mulligan is a director of Tennant Company.
Kimberly A. Nelson , age 54, is Senior Vice President, External Relations, and President of the General Mills Foundation. Ms. Nelson joined General Mills in 1988
and has held marketing leadership roles in the Big G cereal, Snacks, and Meals divisions. She was elected Vice President; President, Snacks in 2004, Senior Vice
President; President, Snacks in 2008, and Senior Vice President, External Relations in 2010. She was named President of the General Mills Foundation in 2011.
Jon J. Nudi , age 47, is Group President, North America Retail. Mr. Nudi joined General Mills in 1993 as a Sales Representative and held a variety of roles in
Consumer Foods Sales. In 2005, he moved into marketing roles in the Meals division and was elected Vice President in 2007. Mr. Nudi was named Vice President;
President, Snacks, in 2010, Senior Vice President, President, Europe/Australasia in June 2014 and Senior Vice President; President, U.S. Retail in September 2016.
He was named to his present position in January 2017.
Shawn P. O’Grady , age 53, is Group President, Convenience Stores & Foodservice; Senior Vice President, Global Revenue Development. Mr. O’Grady joined
General Mills in 1990 and held several marketing roles in the Snacks, Meals and Big G cereal divisions. He was promoted to Vice President in 1998 and held
marketing positions in the Betty Crocker and Pillsbury USA divisions. In 2004, he moved into Consumer Foods Sales, becoming Vice President, President, U.S.
Retail Sales in 2007, Senior Vice President, President, Consumer Foods Sales Division in 2010 and Senior Vice President, President, Sales & Channel
Development in 2012. He was named to his current position in January 2017.

Kendall J. Powell , age 63, is Chairman of the Board. Mr. Powell joined General Mills in 1979 and served in a variety of positions before becoming a Vice
President in 1990. He became President of the Yoplait division in 1996, President of the Big G cereal division in 1997, and Senior Vice President of General Mills
in 1998. From 1999 to 2004, he served as Chief Executive Officer of CPW. He returned from CPW in 2004 and was elected Executive Vice President. Mr. Powell
was elected President and Chief Operating Officer in 2006, Chief Executive Officer in 2007, and Chairman of the Board in 2008. Mr. Powell retired from his
position as Chief Executive Officer in June 2017. He is a director of Medtronic plc.
 
6

Table of Contents
Bethany Quam , age 46, is Group President, Europe & Australia. Ms. Quam joined General Mills in 1993 and held a variety of positions before becoming Vice
President, Strategic Planning in 2007. She was promoted to Vice President, Field Sales, Channels in 2012, Vice President; President, Convenience Stores &
Foodservice in May 2014 and Senior Vice President; President, Europe & Australia in August 2016. She was named to her current position in January 2017.
Jacqueline Williams-Roll , age 48, is Senior Vice President, Chief Human Resources Officer. Ms. Williams-Roll joined General Mills in 1995. She held human
resources leadership roles in Supply Chain, Finance, Marketing and Organization Effectiveness, and she also worked a large part of her career on businesses
outside of the United States. She was named Vice President, Human Resources, International in 2010, and then promoted to Senior Vice President, Human
Resources Operations in September 2013. She was named to her present position in September 2014. Prior to joining General Mills, she held sales and management
roles with Jenny Craig International.
Jerald A. Young , age 60, is Vice President, Controller. Mr. Young joined General Mills in 2001 from The Pillsbury Company. He was appointed Vice President of
Finance for the Bakeries and Foodservice Division while at Pillsbury in 2000. Mr. Young was appointed Vice President Internal Audit in 2005 and Vice President,
Supply Chain in 2008. He was named to his present position in August 2011. Mr. Young is retiring in August 2017.
WEBSITE ACCESS
Our website is www.GeneralMills.com. We make available, free of charge in the “Investors” portion of this website, annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (1934 Act) as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). Reports of beneficial ownership filed pursuant to Section 16(a) of the 1934 Act are also available on our website.
 
ITEM 1A
Risk Factors
Our business is subject to various risks and uncertainties. Any of the risks described below could materially, adversely affect our business, financial condition, and
results of operations.
The food categories in which we participate are very competitive, and if we are not able to compete effectively, our results of operations could be
adversely affected.
The food categories in which we participate are very competitive. Our principal competitors in these categories all have substantial financial, marketing, and other
resources. In most product categories, we compete not only with other widely advertised branded products, but also with regional brands and with generic and
private label products that are generally sold at lower prices. Competition in our product categories is based on product innovation, product quality, price, brand
recognition and loyalty, effectiveness of marketing, promotional activity, and the ability to identify and satisfy consumer preferences. If our large competitors were
to seek an advantage through pricing or promotional changes, we could choose to do the same, which could adversely affect our margins and profitability. If we did
not do the same, our revenues and market share could be adversely affected. Our market share and revenue growth could also be adversely impacted if we are not
successful in introducing innovative products in response to changing consumer demands or by new product introductions of our competitors. If we are unable to
build and sustain brand equity by offering recognizably superior product quality, we may be unable to maintain premium pricing over generic and private label
products.
We may be unable to maintain our profit margins in the face of a consolidating retail environment.
There has been significant consolidation in the grocery industry, resulting in customers with increased purchasing power. In addition, large retail customers may
seek to use their position to improve their profitability through improved efficiency, lower pricing, increased reliance on their own brand name products, increased
emphasis on generic and other economy brands, and increased promotional programs. If we are unable to use our scale, marketing expertise, product innovation,
knowledge of consumers’ needs, and category leadership positions to respond to these demands, our profitability and volume growth could be negatively impacted.
In addition, the loss of any large customer for an extended length of time could adversely affect our sales and profits. In fiscal 2017, Wal-Mart accounted for 20
percent of our consolidated net sales and 29 percent of net sales of our North America Retail segment. For more information on significant customers, please see
Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
 
7

Table of Contents
Price changes for the commodities we depend on for raw materials, packaging, and energy may adversely affect our profitability.
The principal raw materials that we use are commodities that experience price volatility caused by external conditions such as weather, product scarcity, limited
sources of supply, commodity market fluctuations, currency fluctuations, and changes in governmental agricultural and energy policies and regulations.
Commodity price changes may result in unexpected increases in raw material, packaging, and energy costs. If we are unable to increase productivity to offset these
increased costs or increase our prices, we may experience reduced margins and profitability. We do not fully hedge against changes in commodity prices, and the
risk management procedures that we do use may not always work as we intend.
Volatility in the market value of derivatives we use to manage exposures to fluctuations in commodity prices will cause volatility in our gross margins and
net earnings.
We utilize derivatives to manage price risk for some of our principal ingredient and energy costs, including grains (oats, wheat, and corn), oils (principally
soybean), dairy products, natural gas, and diesel fuel. Changes in the values of these derivatives are recorded in earnings currently, resulting in volatility in both
gross margin and net earnings. These gains and losses are reported in cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings and in unallocated corporate items
outside our segment operating results until we utilize the underlying input in our manufacturing process, at which time the gains and losses are reclassified to
segment operating profit. We also record our grain inventories at net realizable value. We may experience volatile earnings as a result of these accounting
treatments.
If we are not efficient in our production, our profitability could suffer as a result of the highly competitive environment in which we operate.
Our future success and earnings growth depend in part on our ability to be efficient in the production and manufacture of our products in highly competitive
markets. Gaining additional efficiencies may become more difficult over time. Our failure to reduce costs through productivity gains or by eliminating redundant
costs resulting from acquisitions or divestitures could adversely affect our profitability and weaken our competitive position. Many productivity initiatives involve
complex reorganization of manufacturing facilities and production lines. Such manufacturing realignment may result in the interruption of production, which may
negatively impact product volume and margins. We are currently pursuing several multi-year restructuring and cost savings initiatives designed to increase our
efficiency and reduce expenses. If we are unable to execute those initiatives as planned, we may not realize all or any of the anticipated benefits, which could
adversely affect our business and results of operations.
Disruption of our supply chain could adversely affect our business.
Our ability to make, move, and sell products is critical to our success. Damage or disruption to raw material supplies or our manufacturing or distribution
capabilities due to weather, including any potential effects of climate change, natural disaster, fire, terrorism, cyber-attack, pandemic, strikes, import/export
restrictions, or other factors could impair our ability to manufacture or sell our products. Many of our product lines are manufactured at a single location. Our
suppliers’ policies and practices can damage our reputation and the quality and safety of our products. Failure to take adequate steps to mitigate the likelihood or
potential impact of such events, or to effectively manage such events if they occur, particularly when a product is sourced from a single supplier or location, could
adversely affect our business and results of operations, as well as require additional resources to restore our supply chain.
Concerns with the safety and quality of food products could cause consumers to avoid certain food products or ingredients.
We could be adversely affected if consumers in our principal markets lose confidence in the safety and quality of certain food products or ingredients. Adverse
publicity about these types of concerns, whether or not valid, may discourage consumers from buying our products or cause production and delivery disruptions.
If our food products become adulterated, misbranded, or mislabeled, we might need to recall those items and may experience product liability claims if
consumers are injured.
We may need to recall some of our products if they become adulterated, misbranded, or mislabeled. A widespread product recall could result in significant losses
due to the costs of a recall, the destruction of product inventory, and lost sales due to the unavailability of product for a period of time. We could also suffer losses
from a significant product liability judgment against us. A significant product recall or product liability case could also result in adverse publicity, damage to our
reputation, and a loss of consumer confidence in our food products, which could have an adverse effect on our business results and the value of our brands.
 
8

Table of Contents
We may be unable to anticipate changes in consumer preferences and trends, which may result in decreased demand for our products.
Our success depends in part on our ability to anticipate the tastes, eating habits and purchasing behaviors of consumers and to offer products that appeal to their
preferences in channels where they shop. Consumer preferences and category-level consumption may change from time to time and can be affected by a number of
different trends and other factors. If we fail to anticipate, identify or react to these changes and trends, such as adapting to emerging e-commerce channels, or to
introduce new and improved products on a timely basis, we may experience reduced demand for our products, which would in turn cause our revenues and
profitability to suffer. Similarly, demand for our products could be affected by consumer concerns regarding the health effects of ingredients such as sodium, trans
fats, genetically modified organisms, sugar, processed wheat, or other product ingredients or attributes.
We may be unable to grow our market share or add products that are in faster growing and more profitable categories.
The food industry’s growth potential is constrained by population growth. Our success depends in part on our ability to grow our business faster than populations
are growing in the markets that we serve. One way to achieve that growth is to enhance our portfolio by adding innovative new products in faster growing and more
profitable categories. Our future results will also depend on our ability to increase market share in our existing product categories. If we do not succeed in
developing innovative products for new and existing categories, our growth may slow, which could adversely affect our profitability.
Economic downturns could limit consumer demand for our products.
The willingness of consumers to purchase our products depends in part on local economic conditions. In periods of economic uncertainty, consumers may purchase
more generic, private label, and other economy brands and may forego certain purchases altogether. In those circumstances, we could experience a reduction in
sales of higher margin products or a shift in our product mix to lower margin offerings. In addition, as a result of economic conditions or competitive actions, we
may be unable to raise our prices sufficiently to protect margins. Consumers may also reduce the amount of food that they consume away from home at customers
that purchase products from our Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment. Any of these events could have an adverse effect on our results of operations.
Our results may be negatively impacted if consumers do not maintain their favorable perception of our brands.
Maintaining and continually enhancing the value of our many iconic brands is critical to the success of our business. The value of our brands is based in large part
on the degree to which consumers react and respond positively to these brands. Brand value could diminish significantly due to a number of factors, including
consumer perception that we have acted in an irresponsible manner, adverse publicity about our products, our failure to maintain the quality of our products, the
failure of our products to deliver consistently positive consumer experiences, concerns about food safety, or our products becoming unavailable to consumers.
Consumer demand for our products may also be impacted by changes in the level of advertising or promotional support. The growing use of social and digital
media by consumers, us, and third parties increases the speed and extent that information or misinformation and opinions can be shared. Negative posts or
comments about us, our brands, or our products on social or digital media could seriously damage our brands and reputation. If we do not maintain the favorable
perception of our brands, our business results could be negatively impacted.
Our international operations are subject to political and economic risks.
In fiscal 2017, 29 percent of our consolidated net sales were generated outside of the United States. We are accordingly subject to a number of risks relating to
doing business internationally, any of which could significantly harm our business. These risks include:
 
•  political and economic instability;
•  exchange controls and currency exchange rates;
•  nationalization of operations;
•  compliance with anti-corruption regulations;
•  foreign tax treaties and policies; and
•  restriction on the transfer of funds to and from foreign countries, including potentially negative tax consequences.
Our financial performance on a U.S. dollar denominated basis is subject to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. These fluctuations could cause material
variations in our results of operations. Our principal exposures are to the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Chinese
renminbi, euro, Japanese yen, Mexican peso, and Swiss franc. From time to time, we enter into agreements that are intended to reduce the effects of our exposure to
currency fluctuations, but these agreements may not be effective in significantly reducing our exposure.
 
9

Table of Contents
New regulations or regulatory-based claims could adversely affect our business.
Our facilities and products are subject to many laws and regulations administered by the United States Department of Agriculture, the Federal Food and Drug
Administration, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and other federal, state, local, and foreign governmental agencies relating to the production,
packaging, labelling, storage, distribution, quality, and safety of food products and the health and safety of our employees. Our failure to comply with such laws
and regulations could subject us to lawsuits, administrative penalties, and civil remedies, including fines, injunctions, and recalls of our products. We advertise our
products and could be the target of claims relating to alleged false or deceptive advertising under federal, state, and foreign laws and regulations. We may also be
subject to new laws or regulations restricting our right to advertise our products, including proposals to limit advertising to children. Changes in laws or regulations
that impose additional regulatory requirements on us could increase our cost of doing business or restrict our actions, causing our results of operations to be
adversely affected.
We are subject to various federal, state, local, and foreign environmental laws and regulations. Our failure to comply with environmental laws and regulations
could subject us to lawsuits, administrative penalties, and civil remedies. We are currently party to a variety of environmental remediation obligations. Due to
regulatory complexities, uncertainties inherent in litigation, and the risk of unidentified contaminants on current and former properties of ours, the potential exists
for remediation, liability, indemnification, and compliance costs to differ from our estimates. We cannot guarantee that our costs in relation to these matters, or
compliance with environmental laws in general, will not exceed our established liabilities or otherwise have an adverse effect on our business and results of
operations.
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness, which could limit financing and other options and in some cases adversely affect our ability to pay
dividends.
As of May 28, 2017, we had total debt, redeemable interests, and noncontrolling interests of $10.8 billion. The agreements under which we have issued
indebtedness do not prevent us from incurring additional unsecured indebtedness in the future. Our level of indebtedness may limit our:
 
•  ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, or general corporate purposes, particularly if the ratings assigned to our debt
securities by rating organizations were revised downward; and
•  flexibility to adjust to changing business and market conditions and may make us more vulnerable to a downturn in general economic conditions.
There are various financial covenants and other restrictions in our debt instruments and noncontrolling interests. If we fail to comply with any of these
requirements, the related indebtedness (and other unrelated indebtedness) could become due and payable prior to its stated maturity and our ability to obtain
additional or alternative financing may also be adversely affected.
Our ability to make scheduled payments on or to refinance our debt and other obligations will depend on our operating and financial performance, which in turn is
subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business, and other factors beyond our control.
Global capital and credit market issues could negatively affect our liquidity, increase our costs of borrowing, and disrupt the operations of our suppliers
and customers.
We depend on stable, liquid, and well-functioning capital and credit markets to fund our operations. Although we believe that our operating cash flows, financial
assets, access to capital and credit markets, and revolving credit agreements will permit us to meet our financing needs for the foreseeable future, there can be no
assurance that future volatility or disruption in the capital and credit markets will not impair our liquidity or increase our costs of borrowing. We also utilize interest
rate derivatives to reduce the volatility of our financing costs. If we are not effective in hedging this volatility, we may experience an increase in our costs of
borrowing. Our business could also be negatively impacted if our suppliers or customers experience disruptions resulting from tighter capital and credit markets or
a slowdown in the general economy.
Volatility in the securities markets, interest rates, and other factors could substantially increase our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit,
and postemployment benefit costs.

We sponsor a number of defined benefit plans for employees in the United States, Canada, and various foreign locations, including defined benefit pension, retiree
health and welfare, severance, and other postemployment plans. Our major defined benefit pension plans are funded with trust assets invested in a globally
diversified portfolio of securities and other investments. Changes in interest rates, mortality rates, health care costs, early retirement rates, investment returns, and
the market value of plan assets can affect the funded status of our defined benefit plans and cause volatility in the net periodic benefit cost and future funding
requirements of the plans. A significant increase in our obligations or future funding requirements could have a negative impact on our results of operations and
cash flows from operations.
 
10

Table of Contents
Our business operations could be disrupted if our information technology systems fail to perform adequately or are breached.
Information technology serves an important role in the efficient and effective operation of our business. We rely on information technology networks and systems,
including the internet, to process, transmit, and store electronic information to manage a variety of business processes and to comply with regulatory, legal, and tax
requirements. Our information technology systems and infrastructure are critical to effectively manage our key business processes including digital marketing,
order entry and fulfillment, supply chain management, finance, administration, and other business processes. These technologies enable internal and external
communication among our locations, employees, suppliers, customers, and others and include the receipt and storage of personal information about our employees,
consumers, and proprietary business information. Our information technology systems, some of which are dependent on services provided by third parties, may be
vulnerable to damage, interruption, or shutdown due to any number of causes such as catastrophic events, natural disasters, fires, power outages, systems failures,
telecommunications failures, security breaches, computer viruses, hackers, employee error or malfeasance, and other causes. Increased cyber-security threats pose a
potential risk to the security and viability of our information technology systems, as well as the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data stored on those
systems. The failure of our information technology systems to perform as we anticipate could disrupt our business and result in transaction errors, processing
inefficiencies, data loss, legal claims or proceedings, regulatory penalties, and the loss of sales and customers. Any interruption of our information technology
systems could have operational, reputational, legal, and financial impacts that may have a material adverse effect on our business.
A change in the assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses or a different weighted-average cost of capital used to value our
reporting units or our indefinite-lived intangible assets could negatively affect our consolidated results of operations and net worth.
As of May 28, 2017, we had $12.9 billion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Goodwill for each of our reporting units is tested for impairment
annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. We compare the carrying value of the net assets of a
reporting unit, including goodwill, to the fair value of the unit. If the fair value of the net assets of the reporting unit is less than the net assets including goodwill,
impairment has occurred. Our estimates of fair value are determined based on a discounted cash flow model. Growth rates for sales and profits are determined
using inputs from our long-range planning process. We also make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other
factors. Our Latin America and U.S. Yogurt reporting units have experienced declining business performance and we continue to monitor these businesses. While
we currently believe that our goodwill is not impaired, different assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses could result in significant
impairment losses.
We evaluate the useful lives of our intangible assets, primarily intangible assets associated with the Pillsbury , Totino’s , Progresso , Yoplait , Old El Paso , Yoki ,
Häagen-Dazs , and Annie’s brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life requires significant judgments and
assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological
advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required
maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are also tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value
may not be recoverable. Our estimate of the fair value of the brands is based on a discounted cash flow model using inputs including projected revenues from our
long-range plan, assumed royalty rates which could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a discount rate. While not impaired as of May 28, 2017, the
Immaculate Baking, Progresso, Green Giant, and Food Should Taste Good brands had risk of decreasing coverage. We will continue to monitor these businesses.
For further information on goodwill and intangible assets, please refer to Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Our failure to successfully integrate acquisitions into our existing operations could adversely affect our financial results.
From time to time, we evaluate potential acquisitions or joint ventures that would further our strategic objectives. Our success depends, in part, upon our ability to
integrate acquired and existing operations. If we are unable to successfully integrate acquisitions, our financial results could suffer. Additional potential risks
associated with acquisitions include additional debt leverage, the loss of key employees and customers of the acquired business, the assumption of unknown
liabilities, the inherent risk associated with entering a geographic area or line of business in which we have no or limited prior experience, failure to achieve
anticipated synergies, and the impairment of goodwill or other acquisition-related intangible assets.

 
ITEM 1B
Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
 
11

Table of Contents
ITEM 2
Properties
We own our principal executive offices and main research facilities, which are located in the Minneapolis, Minnesota metropolitan area. We operate numerous
manufacturing facilities and maintain many sales and administrative offices, warehouses, and distribution centers around the world.
As of May 28, 2017, we operated 52 facilities for the production of a wide variety of food products. Of these facilities, 27 are located in the United States (1 of
which is leased), 4 in the Greater China region, 2 in the Asia/Middle East/Africa Region (1 of which is leased), 3 in Canada (2 of which are leased), 9 in
Europe/Australia, and 7 in Latin America and Mexico. The following is a list of the locations of our principal production facilities, which primarily support the
segment noted:
 
North America Retail
  
  
• Carson, California
  
• Irapuato, Mexico
  • Buffalo, New York
• St. Hyacinthe, Canada
  
• Reed City, Michigan
  • Cincinnati, Ohio
• Covington, Georgia
  
• Fridley, Minnesota
  • Wellston, Ohio
• Belvidere, Illinois
  
• Hannibal, Missouri
  • Murfreesboro, Tennessee
• Geneva, Illinois
  
• Vineland, New Jersey
  • Milwaukee, Wisconsin
• Cedar Rapids, Iowa
  
• Albuquerque, New Mexico
  
Convenience Stores & Foodservice
  
  
• Chanhassen, Minnesota
  
• Joplin, Missouri
  
Europe & Australia
  
  
• Mt. Waverly, Australia
  
• Labatut, France
  • Vienne, France
• Rooty Hill, Australia
  
• Le Mans, France
  • Inofita, Greece
• Arras, France
  
• Moneteau, France
  • San Adrian, Spain
Asia & Latin America
  
  
• Cambara, Brazil
  
• Paranavai, Brazil
  • Kunshan, China
• Campo Nova do Pareceis, Brazil
  
• Pouso Alegre, Brazil
  • Nashik, India
• Nova Prata, Brazil
  
• Sanhe, China
  • Anseong-si, Korea
• Recife, Brazil
  
• Shanghai, China
  
• Ribeirao Claro, Brazil
  
• Guangzhou, China
  
We operate numerous grain elevators and mills in the United States in support of our domestic manufacturing activities. We also utilize approximately 12 million
square feet of warehouse and distribution space, nearly all of which is leased, that primarily supports our North America Retail segment. We own and lease a
number of dedicated sales and administrative offices around the world, totaling approximately 3 million square feet. We have additional warehouse, distribution,
and office space in our plant locations.
As part of our Häagen-Dazs business in our Europe & Australia and Asia & Latin America segments, we operate 433 (all leased) and franchise 356 branded ice
cream parlors in various countries around the world, all outside of the United States and Canada.
 
ITEM 3
Legal Proceedings
We are the subject of various pending or threatened legal actions in the ordinary course of our business. All such matters are subject to many uncertainties and
outcomes that are not predictable with assurance. In our opinion, there were no claims or litigation pending as of May 28, 2017, that were reasonably likely to have
a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. See the information contained under the section entitled “Environmental
Matters” in Item 1 of this report for a discussion of environmental matters in which we are involved.
 
ITEM 4
Mine Safety Disclosures
None.
 
12

Table of Contents
PART II
 
ITEM 5
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “GIS.” On June 9, 2017, there were approximately 31,000 record holders of our
common stock. Information regarding the market prices for our common stock and dividend payments for the two most recent fiscal years is set forth in Note 18 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The following table sets forth information with respect to shares of our common stock that we purchased during the fiscal quarter ended May 28, 2017:
 
Period
  
Total Number
of Shares
Purchased (a)   
Average
Price Paid
Per Share   
Total Number of
Shares Purchased as
Part of a Publicly
Announced Program (b)   
Maximum Number of
Shares that may yet be
Purchased Under the
Program (b) 
 
February 27, 2017-
April 2, 2017
  
 
1,930   
$
60.55   
 
1,930   
 
50,425,561 
 
April 3, 2017-
April 30, 2017
  
 
8,885   
 
59.01   
 
8,885   
 
50,416,676 
 
May 1, 2017-
May 28, 2017
  
 
144   
 
56.60   
 
144   
 
50,416,532 
 
Total
  
 
10,959   
$
59.25   
 
10,959   
 
50,416,532 
 
(a)
The total number of shares purchased includes shares of common stock withheld for the payment of withholding taxes upon the distribution of deferred
option units.
(b)
On May 6, 2014, our Board of Directors approved an authorization for the repurchase of up to 100,000,000 shares of our common stock. Purchases can be
made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans,
and accelerated repurchase programs. The Board did not specify an expiration date for the authorization.
 
13

Table of Contents
ITEM 6
Selected Financial Data
The following table sets forth selected financial data for each of the fiscal years in the five-year period ended May 28, 2017:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions, Except Per Share Data, Percentages and Ratios
  
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015 (a)  
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
Operating data:
  
 
 
 
 
Net sales
  $15,619.8 
 $16,563.1 
 $17,630.3 
 $17,909.6 
 $17,774.1 
Gross margin (b)
   
5,563.8 
  
5,829.5 
  
5,949.2 
  
6,369.8 
  
6,423.9 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
   
2,801.3 
  
3,118.9 
  
3,328.0 
  
3,474.3 
  
3,552.3 
Operating profit
   
2,566.4 
  
2,707.4 
  
2,077.3 
  
2,957.4 
  
2,851.8 
Total segment operating profit (c)
   
2,952.6 
  
2,999.5 
  
3,035.0 
  
3,153.9 
  
3,222.9 
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
   
1,657.5 
  
1,697.4 
  
1,221.3 
  
1,824.4 
  
1,855.2 
Advertising and media expense
   
623.8 
  
754.4 
  
823.1 
  
869.5 
  
895.0 
Research and development expense
   
218.2 
  
222.1 
  
229.4 
  
243.6 
  
237.9 
Average shares outstanding:
  
 
 
 
 
Diluted
   
598.0 
  
611.9 
  
618.8 
  
645.7 
  
665.6 
Earnings per share:
  
 
 
 
 
Diluted
  $
2.77 
 $
2.77 
 $
1.97 
 $
2.83 
 $
2.79 
Diluted, excluding certain items affecting comparability (c)
  $
3.08 
 $
2.92 
 $
2.86 
 $
2.82 
 $
2.72 
Operating ratios:
  
 
 
 
 
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales
   
35.6%   
35.2%   
33.7%   
35.6%   
36.1% 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses as a
percentage of net sales
   
17.9%   
18.8%   
18.9%   
19.4%   
20.0% 
Operating profit as a percentage of net sales
   
16.4%   
16.3%   
11.8%   
16.5%   
16.0% 
Adjusted operating profit as a percentage of net sales (b) (c)
   
18.1%   
16.8%   
15.9%   
16.2%   
16.3% 
Total segment operating profit as a percentage of net sales (c)
   
18.9%   
18.1%   
17.2%   
17.6%   
18.1% 
Effective income tax rate
   
28.8%   
31.4%   
33.3%   
33.3%   
29.2% 
Return on average total capital (b)
   
12.7%   
12.9%   
9.1%   
12.5%   
13.4% 
Adjusted return on average total capital (b) (c)
   
11.6%   
11.3%   
11.2%   
11.6%   
12.0% 
Balance sheet data:
  
 
 
 
 
Land, buildings, and equipment
  $ 3,687.7 
 $ 3,743.6 
 $ 3,783.3 
 $ 3,941.9 
 $ 3,878.1 
Total assets
   21,812.6 
  21,712.3 
  21,832.0 
  23,044.7 
  22,505.7 
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
   
7,642.9 
  
7,057.7 
  
7,575.3 
  
6,396.6 
  
5,901.8 
Total debt (b)
   
9,481.7 
  
8,430.9 
  
9,191.5 
  
8,758.9 
  
7,944.8 
Cash flow data:
  
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  $ 2,313.3 
 $ 2,629.8 
 $ 2,542.8 
 $ 2,541.0 
 $ 2,926.0 
Capital expenditures
   
684.4 
  
729.3 
  
712.4 
  
663.5 
  
613.9 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Free cash flow (b) (c)
   
1,628.9 
  
1,900.5 
  
1,830.4 
  
1,877.5 
  
2,312.1 
Fixed charge coverage ratio (b)
   
7.26 
  
7.40 
  
5.54 
  
8.04 
  
7.62 
Operating cash flow to debt ratio (b)
   
24.4%   
31.2%   
27.7%   
29.0%   
36.8% 
Share data:
  
 
 
 
 
Low stock price
  $
55.91 
 $
54.12 
 $
48.86 
 $
46.86 
 $
37.55 
High stock price
   
72.64 
  
65.36 
  
57.14 
  
54.40 
  
50.93 
Closing stock price
   
57.32 
  
62.87 
  
56.15 
  
53.81 
  
48.98 
Cash dividends per common share
   
1.92 
  
1.78 
  
1.67 
  
1.55 
  
1.32 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Fiscal 2015 was a 53-week year; all other fiscal years were 52 weeks.
(b)
See “Glossary” in Item 8 of this report for definition.
(c)
See “Non-GAAP Measures” in Item 7 of this report for our discussion of this measure not defined by generally accepted accounting principles.
 
14

Table of Contents
ITEM 7
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a global consumer foods company. We develop distinctive value-added food products and market them under unique brand names. We work continuously
to improve our core products and to create new products that meet consumers’ evolving needs and preferences. In addition, we build the equity of our brands over
time with strong consumer-directed marketing, innovative new products, and effective merchandising. We believe our brand-building strategy is the key to winning
and sustaining leading share positions in markets around the globe.
Our fundamental financial goal is to generate superior returns for our shareholders over the long term. We believe that increases in net sales, segment operating
profit, earnings per share (EPS), free cash flow, cash return to shareholders, and return on average total capital are key drivers of financial performance for our
business.
Our long-term growth objectives are to consistently deliver:
 
•
 low single-digit annual growth in organic net sales;
 
•
 mid single-digit annual growth in total segment operating profit on a constant-currency basis;
 
•
 high single-digit annual growth in diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability on a constant-currency basis;
 
•
 improvement in adjusted return on average total capital;
 
•
 free cash flow conversion averaging above 95 percent of adjusted net earnings after tax; and
 
•
 cash return to shareholders averaging above 90 percent of free cash flow, including an attractive dividend yield.
We believe that this financial performance should result in long-term value creation for shareholders.
Fiscal 2017 was a year of significant change for General Mills. We implemented a new global organizational structure to enhance our agility in a rapidly changing
consumer environment. We expanded our global supply chain restructuring initiative to further increase our efficiency. We also implemented a business plan that
aggressively shifted resources to our best growth opportunities and eliminated low-return investments and volume. While these actions were the right thing to do
for our company, we did not execute up to our standards in certain areas and our results did not meet our expectations. Consolidated net sales and total segment
operating profit growth fell short of our plans, largely because of competitive price gaps in our North American Retail segment. We underestimated the impact that
our aggressive reductions in promotional spending, implemented early in the fiscal year, would have on our net pricing relative to competitors. The gaps were most
pronounced in the U.S. Meals & Baking operating unit, and competitive activity also significantly impacted U.S. Yogurt. We took corrective actions to improve our
performance in the second half of fiscal 2017, but it was not sufficient to stem the early declines. Yogurt in the Europe & Australia segment also did not meet
expectations as competitive pressure from smaller branded players increased significantly. Excluding yogurt, the segment’s net sales and share increased driven by
ice cream and snack bars innovation and improved merchandising performance. In the Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment, segment operating profit grew
driven by lower input costs and benefits from cost savings initiatives. Net sales for the Focus 6 platforms grew modestly, but were more than offset by market index
pricing on flour. In the Asia & Latin America segment, macroeconomic weakness in Latin America and the Middle East created a challenging environment while
greater China returned to net sales growth, including contributions from the new Yoplait business. We continued to realize planned benefits from our numerous
restructuring initiatives and cost reduction efforts in our supply chain and administrative areas which helped us to increase our adjusted operating profit margin and
adjusted diluted earnings per share (EPS) in fiscal 2017.
Our consolidated net sales for fiscal 2017 declined 6 percent to $15.6 billion, primarily driven by declining contributions from volume, including the impact of the
divestiture of the North American Green Giant product lines (Green Giant). On an organic basis, net sales decreased 4 percent. Operating profit of $2.6 billion
decreased 5 percent. Total segment operating profit of $3.0 billion declined 2 percent and declined 1 percent on a constant-currency basis. Diluted EPS of $2.77
was flat compared to fiscal 2016. Adjusted diluted EPS, which excludes certain items affecting comparability of results, rose 5 percent to $3.08 per share and
increased 6 percent on a constant-currency basis. Our return on average total capital was 12.7 percent, and adjusted return on average total capital increased 30
basis points to 11.6 percent and increased 40 basis points on a constant-currency basis (See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for discussion of total
segment operating profit, adjusted diluted EPS, organic net sales growth rate, constant-currency total segment operating profit growth rate, constant-currency
adjusted diluted EPS growth rate, and adjusted return on average total capital, which are not defined by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)).
Net cash provided by operations totaled $2.3 billion in fiscal 2017 at a conversion rate of 136 percent of net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable
and noncontrolling interests. This cash generation supported capital investments totaling $684 million, and our resulting free cash flow was $1.6 billion at a
conversion rate of 86 percent of adjusted net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests. We also returned significant cash
to shareholders through a 6 percent dividend increase and share repurchases totaling $1,652 million. Total cash returned to shareholders represented 164 percent of
our free cash flow (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
 
15

Table of Contents
A detailed review of our fiscal 2017 performance appears below in the section titled “Fiscal 2017 Consolidated Results of Operations.”
We remain committed to our Consumer First strategy and our focus on driving growth and returns for our shareholders. Our top priority in fiscal 2018 is to make
significant strides toward returning our business to sustainable topline growth. Our fiscal 2018 plans call for investment in product news and innovation to
accelerate growth for businesses where we have positive momentum, and to improve those that are underperforming. We will also increase investment in
capabilities like e-commerce and Strategic Revenue Management, which are critical to future growth. We will continue to prioritize resources against our Growth
platforms, where we see the strongest profitable growth potential. And we will make selective investments in our Foundation brands while focusing on profitability
and cash generation.
We plan to continue to drive efficiency in fiscal 2018, including delivering approximately $390 million in supply chain productivity savings through our ongoing
Holistic Margin Management (HMM) efforts. We also expect to deliver approximately $160 million in incremental savings from our other restructuring and cost-
reduction initiatives, which equates to approximately $700 million in savings versus fiscal 2015 levels. These savings should more than offset our estimate of
3 percent input cost inflation.
This cost management discipline has helped us significantly expand our adjusted operating profit margin over the past two years. We continue to see opportunities
for further margin expansion, including an increase in adjusted operating profit margin in fiscal 2018, but we will moderate the pace of expansion as we invest to
restore topline growth. Looking forward, we are focused on delivering a balance of sales growth and margin expansion, along with strong cash conversion and cash
returns, to create top-tier returns for our shareholders.
With these assumptions in mind:
 
 
•
 We expect fiscal 2018 organic net sales to decline between 1 and 2 percent from fiscal 2017 levels.
 
 
•
 We expect fiscal 2018 total segment operating profit will be in a range between flat and up 1 percent on a constant-currency basis.
 
 
•
 We expect fiscal 2018 adjusted diluted EPS to increase 1 to 2 percent in constant currency from the base of $3.08 earned in fiscal 2017.
 
 
•
 Our plans call for continued strong cash returns to shareholders. The current annualized dividend rate of $1.96 per share is up 2 percent from the
annual dividend paid in fiscal 2017. Share repurchases in fiscal 2018 are expected to result in a net reduction in average diluted shares outstanding of
approximately 1 to 2 percent.
See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP.
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.
FISCAL 2017 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal 2017 includes an additional month of results from General Mills Brasil Alimentos Ltda (Yoki) (please refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 of this report).
In fiscal 2017, operating results reflected challenging net sales performance. However, we continued to make progress against our cost savings and margin
expansion initiatives. The net sales decline of 6 percent was driven by declining contributions from volume in the North America Retail and Europe & Australia
segments including the impact of the divestiture of Green Giant in fiscal 2016, which were partially offset by favorable net price realization and mix. Operating
profit margin of 16.4 percent was up 10 basis points from year-ago levels primarily driven by benefits from cost savings and spending optimization initiatives, and
favorable net price realization, partially offset by the gain from the Green Giant divestiture. Adjusted operating profit margin increased 130 basis points to
18.1 percent, driven by benefits from cost savings and spending optimization initiatives and favorable net price realization. Diluted earnings per share of $2.77 was
flat to fiscal 2016 and adjusted diluted EPS, which excludes certain items affecting comparability, on a constant-currency basis increased 6 percent compared to
fiscal 2016 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
 
16

Table of Contents
A summary of our consolidated financial results for fiscal 2017 follows:
 
Fiscal 2017
 
In millions, except
per share
  
Fiscal 2017 vs.
Fiscal 2016  
 
Percent of Net
Sales
 
 
Constant- 
Currency 
Growth (a) 
Net sales
 
$
15,619.8  
 
(6)%  
 
Operating profit
 
 
2,566.4  
 
(5)%  
 
16.4%  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
 
 
1,657.5  
 
(2)%  
 
Diluted EPS
 
$
2.77  
 
Flat 
 
 
Organic net sales growth rate (a)
 
 
 
(4)%  
 
Total segment operating profit (a)
 
 
2,952.6  
 
(2)%  
 
 
(1)% 
Adjusted operating profit margin (a)
 
 
 
 
18.1%  
Diluted EPS, excluding certain items affecting
comparability (a)
 
$
3.08  
 
5%  
 
 
6% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of measures not defined by GAAP.
Consolidated net sales were as follows:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2017   
Fiscal 2017 vs.
Fiscal 2016    
Fiscal 2016 
Net sales (in millions)
  
$ 15,619.8   
 
(6)  %    
$ 16,563.1 
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
  
 
(8) pts   
Net price realization and mix
  
  
 
3  pts   
Foreign currency exchange
  
  
 
(1) pt     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 6 percent decline in net sales primarily reflected lower organic net sales, unfavorable foreign currency exchange, and the Green Giant divestiture in fiscal 2016
(please refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Organic net sales declined 4 percent driven by volume declines in the North America Retail and Europe & Australia segments which were partially offset by
positive net price realization and mix. To improve comparability of results from period to period, organic net sales exclude the impacts of foreign currency
exchange rate fluctuations, as well as acquisitions, divestitures, and a 53rd week of results, when applicable.
Components of organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
Fiscal 2017 vs. Fiscal 2016
  
 
 
Contributions from organic volume growth (a)
  
 (7) pts 
Organic net price realization and mix
  
 3  pts 
Organic net sales growth
  
 (4) pts 
Foreign currency exchange
  
 (1) pt  
Acquisitions and divestitures (b)
  
 (1) pt  
Net sales growth
  
 (6) pts 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
(b)
Primarily the Green Giant divestiture in fiscal 2016 (please refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Cost of sales decreased $678 million in fiscal 2017 to $10,056 million. The decrease included an $814 million decrease attributable to lower volume and a $137
million increase attributable to product rate and mix. We recorded a $14 million net decrease in cost of sales related to mark-to-market valuation of certain
commodity positions and grain inventories as described in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report, compared to a net decrease of
$63 million in fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2017, we recorded $42 million of restructuring charges in cost of sales compared to $78 million in fiscal 2016. We also
recorded $44 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2017 compared to $58 million in fiscal 2016 (please refer to Note 4 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Gross margin declined 5 percent in fiscal 2017 versus fiscal 2016. Gross margin as a percent of net sales of 36 percent increased 40 basis points compared to fiscal
2016.
 
17

Table of Contents
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses decreased $318 million to $2,801 million in fiscal 2017 versus fiscal 2016 primarily due to a 17 percentage
point decrease in media and advertising expense and cost savings initiatives. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales decreased 90 basis points compared to fiscal
2016.
During fiscal 2017, we recorded a $14 million divestiture loss from the sale of our Martel, Ohio manufacturing facility. Divestiture net gain totaled $148 million in
fiscal 2016 primarily from the sale of Green Giant (please refer to Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs totaled $183 million in fiscal 2017, compared to $151 million in fiscal 2016, and $284 million in fiscal 2015.
Total charges associated with our restructuring initiatives recognized in fiscal 2017, 2016 and 2015 consisted of the following:
 
 
 
As Reported
  
Estimated
 
In Millions
 
Fiscal 2017
  
Fiscal 2016
  
Fiscal 2015
  
Future
  
Total
  
Savings (b) 
  
 Charge  Cash   Charge  Cash   Charge  Cash  Charge  Cash  Charge  Cash   
Global reorganization
 $
72.1  $ 20.0  $
—  $
—  $
—  $
—  $
3  $ 55  $
75  $
75     
Closure of Melbourne, Australia plant
  
21.9   
1.6   
—   
—   
—   
—   
12   
1   
34   
3     
Restructuring of certain international product lines   
45.1   
10.3   
—   
—   
—   
—   
(3)   (10)   
42   
—     
Closure of Vineland, New Jersey plant
  
41.4   
7.3   
—   
—   
—   
—   
17   
12   
58   
19     
Project Compass
  
(0.4)   
12.8   
54.7   
36.1   
—   
—   
—   
5   
54   
54     
Project Century
  
44.0   
49.4   182.6   
34.1   181.8   12.0   
6   
48   
414   143     
Project Catalyst
  
—   
1.3   
(7.5)   
47.8   148.4   45.0   
—   
—   
141   
94     
Combination of certain operational facilities
  
—   
5.1   
—   
4.5   
13.9   
6.5   
1   
(2)   
15   
14     
Other
  
—   
—   
—   
0.1   
(0.6)   
0.1   
—   
—   
—   
—     
Total restructuring charges (a)
  224.1   107.8   229.8   122.6   343.5   63.6   
36   109   
833   402     
Project-related costs classified in cost of sales
  
43.9   
46.9   
57.5   
54.5   
13.2   
9.7   
15   
19   
130   130      
Restructuring charges and project-related costs
 $ 268.0  $154.7  $ 287.3  $177.1  $ 356.7  $73.3  $
51  $ 128  $
963  $532      
 
 
Future cumulative annual savings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 $
700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes restructuring charges recorded in cost of sales of $41.5 million in fiscal 2017, $78.4 million in fiscal 2016 and $59.6 million in fiscal 2015.
(b)
Cumulative annual savings estimated by fiscal 2018. Includes savings from SG&A cost reduction projects.
Please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for more information regarding our restructuring activities.
Interest, net for fiscal 2017 totaled $295 million, $9 million lower than fiscal 2016, primarily driven by lower rates and changes in the mix of debt, partially offset
by higher average debt balances.
Our consolidated effective tax rate for fiscal 2017 was 28.8 percent compared to 31.4 percent in fiscal 2016. The 2.6 percentage point decrease was primarily due
to non-deductible expenses related to the Green Giant divestiture in fiscal 2016. Our effective tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability was 29.2
percent in fiscal 2017 compared to 29.8 percent in fiscal 2016 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined
by GAAP).
 
18

Table of Contents
After-tax earnings from joint ventures for fiscal 2017 decreased to $85 million compared to $88 million in fiscal 2016 primarily driven by unfavorable foreign
currency exchange and an asset write-off for Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW), partially offset by contributions from volume growth and favorable foreign
currency exchange for Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ). On a constant-currency basis, after-tax earnings from joint ventures decreased 6 percent (see the “Non-
GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of this measure not defined by GAAP). The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are
shown in the following table:
 
Fiscal 2017 vs. Fiscal 2016
  
CPW      
HDJ  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
 
3  pts     
 6 pts 
Net price realization and mix
  
 Flat            
 2 pts 
Foreign currency exchange
  
 (5) pts     
 10 pts 
Net sales growth
  
 (2) pts     
 18 pts 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The change in net sales for each joint venture on a constant-currency basis is set forth in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2017 vs. Fiscal 2016
 
  
  
Percentage Change in Joint
Venture Net Sales as
Reported
   
Impact of Foreign
Currency Exchange   
Percentage Change in Joint
Venture Net Sales on
Constant-Currency Basis  
CPW
  
 
(2)%   
 
(5) pts   
 
3% 
HDJ
  
 
18%   
 
10  pts   
 
8% 
Joint Ventures
  
 
2%   
 
(2) pt    
 
4% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Average diluted shares outstanding decreased by 14 million in fiscal 2017 from fiscal 2016 due to share repurchases, partially offset by option exercises.
FISCAL 2016 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015. Fiscal 2016 includes an additional month of results from Annie’s and Yoplait SAS (please refer to
Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Fiscal 2016 net sales declined 6 percent to $16,563 million and were flat to fiscal 2015 on an organic basis. Operating profit of $2,707 million was 30 percent
higher than fiscal 2015. Total segment operating profit was $3,000 million, 1 percent lower than fiscal 2015 and 1 percent higher on a constant-currency basis. In
fiscal 2016, net earnings attributable to General Mills were $1,697 million, up 39 percent from $1,221 million in fiscal 2015, and we reported diluted EPS of $2.77
in fiscal 2016, up 41 percent from $1.97 in fiscal 2015. Adjusted diluted EPS which excludes certain items affecting comparability totaled $2.92 in fiscal 2016, up
2 percent from $2.86 in fiscal 2015. Diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability on a constant-currency basis increased 5 percent compared to
fiscal 2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
 
19

Table of Contents
 
A summary of our consolidated financial results for fiscal 2016 follows:
 
Fiscal 2016
 
In millions, except
per share
  
Fiscal 2016 vs.
Fiscal 2015  
 
Percent of Net
Sales
 
 
Constant- 
Currency 
Growth (a) 
Net sales
 
$
16,563.1  
 
(6)%  
 
Operating profit
 
 
2,707.4  
 
30%  
 
16.3%  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
 
 
1,697.4  
 
39%  
 
Diluted earnings per share
 
$
2.77  
 
41%  
 
Organic net sales growth rate (a)
 
 
 
Flat 
 
 
Total segment operating profit (a)
 
 
2,999.5  
 
(1)%  
 
 
1% 
Adjusted operating profit margin (a)
 
 
 
 
16.8%  
Diluted earnings per share,
excluding certain items affecting comparability (a)
 
$
2.92  
 
2%  
 
 
5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of measures not defined by GAAP.
Consolidated net sales were as follows:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2016   
Fiscal 2016 vs.
Fiscal 2015    
Fiscal 2015 
Net sales (in millions)
  
$ 16,563.1   
 
(6)  %    
$ 17,630.3 
  
  
 
 
 
  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
  
 
(3) pts   
Net price realization and mix
  
  
 
1  pt     
Foreign currency exchange
  
  
 
(4)  pt     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 6 percent decline in fiscal 2016 net sales included a 1 percent decrease from acquisitions and divestitures, primarily the Green Giant divestiture in fiscal 2016
and Annie’s acquisition in fiscal 2015, reflecting 2 percentage points of decline from volume (please refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8 of this report). The 53rd week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting approximately 1
percentage point of decline from volume.
Organic net sales were flat to fiscal 2015. To improve comparability of results from period to period, organic net sales exclude the impacts of foreign currency
exchange rate fluctuations, as well as acquisitions, divestitures, and a 53rd week of results, when applicable.
Components of organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
Fiscal 2016 vs. Fiscal 2015
  
 
Contributions from organic volume growth (a)
  
Flat       
Organic net price realization and mix
  
Flat       
  
 
Organic net sales growth
  
Flat       
Foreign currency exchange
  
(4) pts
Acquisitions and divestitures (b)
  
(1) pt  
53rd week impact (c)
  
(1) pt  
Net sales growth
  
(6) pts
  
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
(b)
Primarily the Green Giant divestiture in fiscal 2016 and Annie’s acquisition in fiscal 2015.
(c)
Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015.
Cost of sales decreased $948 million in fiscal 2016 to $10,734 million. In fiscal 2016, product mix drove a $486 million decrease in cost of sales and lower volume
drove a $369 million decrease. We recorded a $63 million net decrease in cost of sales related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and
grain inventories as described in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial
 
20

Table of Contents
Statements in Item 8 of this report, compared to a net increase of $90 million in fiscal 2015. In fiscal 2016, we recorded $78 million of restructuring charges in cost
of sales compared to $60 million in fiscal 2015. We recorded $58 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2016 compared to
$13 million in fiscal 2015 (please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report). We also recorded a $3 million foreign exchange
loss in cost of sales in fiscal 2015 related to Venezuela currency devaluation.
Gross margin declined 2 percent in fiscal 2016 versus fiscal 2015. Gross margin as a percent of net sales of 35 percent increased 150 basis points compared to
fiscal 2015.
SG&A expenses decreased $209 million in fiscal 2016 versus fiscal 2015 primarily due to an 8 percent decrease in advertising and media expense, and savings
from Project Catalyst, Project Compass, and our other cost-management initiatives. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $5 million charge in SG&A expenses related to
Venezuela currency devaluation and $16 million of integration costs related to our acquisition of Annie’s. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales decreased 10
basis points compared to fiscal 2015.
During fiscal 2016, we recorded a $148 million divestitures gain (net) from the sale of Green Giant, our subsidiary in Venezuela, and our foodservice business in
Argentina (please refer to Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs totaled $151 million in fiscal 2016 compared to $544 million in fiscal 2015.
In fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our North America Retail segment to other
businesses within the segment. As a result, we recorded a $260 million impairment charge in fiscal 2015 related to the Green Giant brand intangible asset.
Restructuring charges recorded in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs were $151 million in fiscal 2016 compared to $284 million in fiscal 2015. Total
charges associated with our restructuring initiatives recognized in fiscal 2016 and 2015 consisted of the following:
 
 
  
As Reported
 
In Millions
  
Fiscal 2016
   
Fiscal 2015
 
  
  
Charge  
Cash    
Charge  
Cash 
Project Compass
  
$
54.7  
$ 36.1   
$
—  
$
— 
Total Century (a)
  
 182.6  
 
34.1   
 181.8  
 12.0 
Project Catalyst
  
 
(7.5)  
 
47.8   
 148.4  
 45.0 
Combination of certain operational facilities
  
 
—  
 
4.5   
 
13.9  
 
6.5 
Other
  
 
—  
 
0.1   
 
(0.6)  
 
0.1 
Total restructuring charges (a)
  
 229.8  
 122.6   
 343.5  
 63.6 
Project-related costs recorded in costs of sales
  
 
57.5  
 
54.5   
 
13.2  
 
9.7 
Restructuring charges and project-related costs
  
$ 287.3  
$177.1   
$ 356.7  
$73.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes $78.4 million of restructuring charges recorded in cost of sales in fiscal 2016 and $59.6 million in fiscal 2015.
Please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for more information regarding our restructuring activities.
Interest, net for fiscal 2016 totaled $304 million, $12 million lower than fiscal 2015, primarily driven by lower average debt balances, partially offset by changes
in the mix of debt.
Our consolidated effective tax rate for fiscal 2016 was 31.4 percent compared to 33.3 percent in fiscal 2015. The 1.9 percentage point decrease was primarily due
to the unfavorable impact of our repatriation of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015, partially offset by non-deductible expenses related to the Green Giant
divestiture in fiscal 2016. Our effective tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability was 29.8 percent in fiscal 2016 compared to 30.5 percent in fiscal
2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
 
21

Table of Contents
After-tax earnings from joint ventures for fiscal 2016 increased to $88 million compared to $84 million in fiscal 2015 primarily driven by favorable input costs
in fiscal 2016, favorable product mix for HDJ, and lapping an impairment charge of $3 million at CPW in South Africa in fiscal 2015, partially offset by
unfavorable foreign currency exchange. On a constant-currency basis, after-tax earnings from joint ventures increased 12 percent (see the “Non-GAAP Measures”
section below for a description of our use of these measures not defined by GAAP). The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are shown in the
following table:
 
Fiscal 2016 vs. Fiscal 2015
  
CPW    
HDJ
 
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
 Flat           
 11  pts  
Net price realization and mix
  
 Flat           
 
(6) pts  
Foreign currency exchange
  
 (12) pts    
 
(5) pts  
Net sales growth
  
 (12) pts    
 Flat         
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) Measuredin tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The change in net sales for each joint venture on a constant-currency basis is set forth in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2016 vs. Fiscal 2015
 
  
  
Percentage Change in Joint
Venture Net Sales as
Reported
 
 
Impact of Foreign
Currency Exchange
  
Percentage Change in Joint
Venture Net Sales on
Constant-Currency Basis  
CPW
  
 
(12)%  
(12) pts  
 
Flat 
HDJ
  
 
Flat 
 
(5) pts  
 
5% 
Joint Ventures
  
 
(10)%  
(11) pts  
 
1% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Average diluted shares outstanding decreased by 7 million in fiscal 2016 from fiscal 2015 due to share repurchases, partially offset by option exercises.
RESULTS OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS
In the third quarter of fiscal 2017, we announced a new global organization structure to streamline our leadership, enhance global scale, and drive improved
operational agility to maximize our growth capabilities. As a result of this global reorganization, beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2017, we reported results
for our four operating segments as follows: North America Retail; Convenience Stores & Foodservice; Europe & Australia; and Asia & Latin America. We have
restated our net sales by segment and segment operating profit amounts to reflect our new operating segments. These segment changes had no effect on previously
reported consolidated net sales, operating profit, net earnings attributable to General Mills, or earnings per share.
Our North America Retail operating segment consists of our former U.S. Retail operating units and our Canada region. Within our North America Retail operating
segment, our former U.S. Meals operating unit and U.S. Baking operating unit have been combined into one operating unit: U.S. Meals & Baking. Our
Convenience Stores & Foodservice operating segment was unchanged. Our Europe & Australia operating segment consists of our former Europe region. Our
Asia & Latin America operating segment consists of our former Asia/Pacific and Latin America regions.
 
22

Table of Contents
The following tables provide the dollar amount and percentage of net sales and operating profit from each segment for fiscal 2017, 2016, and 2015:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
In Millions
  
Dollars   
Percent of
Total 
 
Dollars   
Percent of
Total 
 
Dollars   
Percent of
Total 
Net Sales
  
  
 
  
 
  
North America Retail
  
$10,196.9   
 
65%  
$10,936.6   
 
66%  
$11,612.1   
 
66% 
Convenience Stores & Foodservice
  
 
1,870.0   
 
12 
 
 
1,923.8   
 
12 
 
 
1,995.1   
 
11 
Europe & Australia
  
 
1,824.5   
 
12 
 
 
1,998.0   
 
12 
 
 
2,126.5   
 
12 
Asia & Latin America
  
 
1,728.4   
 
11 
 
 
1,704.7   
 
10 
 
 
1,896.6   
 
11 
Total
  
$15,619.8   
 
100%  
$16,563.1   
 
100%  
$17,630.3   
 
100% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Segment Operating Profit
  
  
 
  
 
  
North America Retail
  
$ 2,303.6   
 
78%  
$ 2,351.2   
 
78%  
$ 2,382.7   
 
78% 
Convenience Stores & Foodservice
  
 
401.2   
 
14 
 
 
378.9   
 
13 
 
 
353.1   
 
12 
Europe & Australia
  
 
164.2   
 
5 
 
 
200.3   
 
7 
 
 
179.4   
 
6 
Asia & Latin America
  
 
83.6   
 
3 
 
 
69.1   
 
2 
 
 
119.8   
 
4 
Total
  
$ 2,952.6   
 
100%  
$ 2,999.5   
 
100%  
$ 3,035.0   
 
100% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Segment operating profit excludes unallocated corporate items, net gain/loss on divestitures, and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs because these items
affecting operating profit are centrally managed at the corporate level and are excluded from the measure of segment profitability reviewed by our executive
management.
NORTH AMERICA RETAIL SEGMENT
Our North America Retail operating segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains,
drug, dollar and discount chains, and e-commerce grocery providers. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat cereals, refrigerated yogurt,
soup, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, grain, fruit and savory snacks, and a wide variety
of organic products including refrigerated yogurt, nutrition bars, meal kits, salty snacks, ready-to-eat cereal, and grain snacks.
North America Retail net sales were as follows:
 
  
 
Fiscal 
2017
  
Fiscal
2017 vs. 2016 
Percentage Change  
Fiscal 
2016
  
Fiscal 
2016 vs. 2015 
Percentage Change  
Fiscal 
2015
 
Net sales (in millions)
 
$10,196.9  
 
(7) %    
$10,936.6  
 
(6) %   
$11,612.1 
Contributions from volume growth (a)
 
 
 
(11) pts  
 
 
(7) pts  
Net price realization and mix
 
 
 
4  pts  
 
 
2  pts  
Foreign currency exchange
 
 
 
Flat         
 
 
(1) pt   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 7 percent decrease in North America Retail net sales for fiscal 2017 was driven by declines in the U.S. Meals & Baking, U.S. Yogurt, U.S. Cereal, and Canada
operating units. The decline in net sales also includes the impact of the Green Giant divestiture from the U.S. Meals & Baking and Canada operating units in fiscal
2016.
The 6 percent decrease in North America Retail net sales for fiscal 2016 was driven by declines in all operating units. These results include 3 percentage points of
net sales decline from the net impact of acquisitions and divestitures, primarily Green Giant and Annie’s, reflecting approximately 3 percentage points of decline
from volume. The 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 contributed 1 percentage point of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting approximately 2 percentage points of
decline from volume.
 
23

Table of Contents
The components of North America Retail organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 
2017 vs. 2016 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2016 vs. 2015 
Percentage Change 
Contributions from organic volume growth (a)
  
 
(9) pts   
 
(2) pts 
Organic net price realization and mix
  
 
4 pts   
 
1 pt 
  
 
 
 
Organic net sales growth
  
 
(5) pts   
 
(1) pt 
Foreign currency exchange
  
 
Flat   
 
(1) pt 
Acquisitions and divestitures (b)
  
 
(2) pts   
 
(3) pts 
53rd week impact (c)
  
 
—   
 
(1) pt 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Net sales growth
  
 
(7) pts   
 
(6) pts 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
(b)Primarily the Green Giant divestiture in fiscal 2016 and Annie’s acquisition in fiscal 2015.
(c) Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015.
North America Retail organic net sales decreased 5 percentage points in fiscal 2017 which reflects the impact of reduced marketing and higher pricing as a result of
lower promotional spending. North America Retail organic net sales decreased 1 percent in fiscal 2016 which reflects the impact of reduced marketing support.
Net sales for our North America Retail operating units are shown in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
   
2016
   
2015
 
U.S. Meals & Baking (a)
  
$ 3,876.6   
$ 4,297.3   
$ 4,644.1 
U.S. Cereal
  
 
2,251.8   
 
2,312.8   
 
2,330.1 
U.S. Snacks (a)
  
 
2,098.2   
 
2,094.3   
 
2,134.4 
U.S. Yogurt and Other
  
 
1,064.3   
 
1,302.7   
 
1,398.4 
Canada
  
 
906.0   
 
929.5   
 
1,105.1 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Total (a)
  
$10,196.9   
$10,936.6   
$11,612.1 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) The impact of an additional month of results from Annie’s in fiscal 2016 was not material to U.S. Meals & Baking, U.S. Snacks, or the North America Retail
segment.
North America Retail net sales percentage change by operating unit are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2017
vs. 2016  
 
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015  
U.S. Meals & Baking (a)
  
 
(10)%  
 
(7)% 
U.S. Yogurt
  
 
(18) 
 
 
(7) 
U.S. Cereal
  
 
(3) 
 
 
(1) 
Canada (b)
  
 
(2) 
 
 
(16) 
U.S. Snacks (a)
  
 
Flat 
 
 
(2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total (a)
  
 
(7)%  
 
(6)% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Fiscal 2016 net sales for the U.S. Meals & Baking and U.S. Snacks operating units include an additional month of results from Annie’s.
(b)On a constant currency basis, Canada net sales decreased 2 percent in fiscal 2017 and decreased 4 percent in fiscal 2016. See the “Non-GAAP Measures”
section below for our use of this measure not defined by GAAP.
Segment operating profit of $2,304 million in fiscal 2017 decreased $48 million, or 2 percent, from fiscal 2016. The decrease was primarily driven by declining
contributions from volume growth, currency-driven inflation on products imported into Canada, and the impact of the Green Giant divestiture, partially offset by
benefits from cost savings initiatives, favorable net price realization, and a decrease in SG&A expenses, including a 16 percentage point decline in media and
advertising expense. Segment operating profit decreased 2 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2017 compared to fiscal 2016 (see the “Non-GAAP
Measures” section below for our use of this measure).
Segment operating profit of $2,351 million in fiscal 2016 decreased $32 million, or 1 percent, from fiscal 2015. The decrease was primarily driven by currency-
driven inflation on products imported into Canada and the impact of the Green Giant divestiture,
 
24

Table of Contents
partially offset by a decrease in SG&A expenses, including a decline in media and advertising expense and benefits from cost savings initiatives. Segment
operating profit was flat on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2016 compared to fiscal 2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this
measure).
CONVENIENCE STORES & FOODSERVICE SEGMENT
In our Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment our major product categories are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen meals, unbaked and
fully baked frozen dough products, and baking mixes. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to
distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries in the United States.
Convenience Stores & Foodservice net sales were as follows:
 
  
  
Fiscal
2017    
Fiscal 2017
vs. 2016
Percentage Change   
Fiscal
2016    
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015
Percentage Change   
Fiscal
2015  
Net sales (in millions)
  
$1,870.0   
 
(3) %    
$1,923.8   
 
(4) %    
$1,995.1 
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
  
 
Flat           
  
 
(3) pts   
Net price realization and mix
  
  
 
(3) pts   
  
 
(1) pt    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 3 percent decline in fiscal 2017 Convenience Stores & Foodservice net sales was driven primarily by market index pricing on bakery flour and volume declines
in non-Focus 6 platforms, partially offset by an increase in the Focus 6 platforms.
The 4 percentage point decline in fiscal 2016 net sales was primarily driven by the impact of the 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 which contributed approximately 2
percentage points of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting approximately 2 percentage points of decline from volume.
The components of Convenience Stores & Foodservice organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2017
vs. 2016
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015
Percentage Change 
Contributions from organic volume growth (a)
  
 
Flat          
 
(1) pt   
Organic net price realization and mix
  
 
(3) pts   
 
(1) pt   
Organic net sales growth
  
 
(3) pts   
 
(2) pts 
53rd week impact (b)
  
 
—   
 
(2) pts 
Net sales growth
  
 
(3) pts   
 
(4) pts 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
(b)
Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015.
In fiscal 2017, segment operating profit was $401 million, an increase of 6 percent from $379 million in fiscal 2016 primarily driven by lower input costs and
benefits from cost savings initiatives. In fiscal 2016, segment operating profit was up 7 percent from $353 million in fiscal 2015 primarily driven by favorable
product mix and cost savings from Project Catalyst and other cost management initiatives.
EUROPE & AUSTRALIA SEGMENT
Our Europe & Australia operating segment consists of our former Europe region. The segment includes retail and foodservice businesses in the greater Europe and
Australia regions. Our product categories include refrigerated yogurt, meal kits, super-premium ice cream, refrigerated and frozen dough products, shelf stable
vegetables, grain snacks, and dessert and baking mixes. We also sell super-premium ice cream directly to consumers through company-owned retail shops.
Revenues from franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the franchisee is located.
 
25

Table of Contents
Europe & Australia net sales were as follows:
 
  
  
Fiscal 
2017    
Fiscal 2017
vs. 2016 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2016    
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2015  
Net sales (in millions) (a)
  
$1,824.5   
 
(9) %     
$1,998.0   
 
(6) %     
$2,126.5 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
Contributions from volume growth (b)
  
  
 
(7) pts   
  
 
5  pts   
Net price realization and mix
  
  
 
3  pts   
  
 
(2) pts   
Foreign currency exchange
  
  
 
(5) pts   
  
 
(9) pts   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
The 9 percent decline in fiscal 2017 net sales for the Europe & Australia segment includes approximately 3 percentage points of decline due to an additional
month of results from Yoplait SAS in fiscal 2016. The 6 percent decline in fiscal 2016 net sales for the Europe & Australia segment includes 3 percentage
points of growth due to an additional month of results from Yoplait SAS in fiscal 2016.
(b)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 9 percent decline in Europe & Australia fiscal 2017 net sales was driven by lower contributions from volume growth, including the impact of an additional
month of results from Yoplait SAS in fiscal 2016, and unfavorable foreign currency exchange, partially offset by favorable net price realization and mix.
The 6 percent decline in Europe & Australia fiscal 2016 net sales was driven by unfavorable foreign currency exchange, unfavorable net price realization and mix,
and the impact of the 53 rd week in fiscal 2015, partially offset by higher contributions from volume growth, including the impact of an additional month of results
from Yoplait SAS in fiscal 2016.
The components of Europe & Australia organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2017
vs. 2016 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
Percentage Change 
Contributions from organic volume growth (a)
  
 
(7) pts   
 
 6  pts 
Organic net price realization and mix
  
 
 3  pts   
 
(2) pts 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Organic net sales growth
  
 
(4) pts   
 
 4  pts 
Foreign currency exchange
  
 
(5) pts   
 
(9) pts 
53rd week impact (b)
  
 
—   
 
(1) pt  
Net sales growth
  
 
(9) pts   
 
(6) pts 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
(b)
Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015.
The 4 percent decrease in Europe & Australia organic net sales growth in fiscal 2017 was primarily driven by a 7 percentage point decline from contributions from
organic volume growth, which primarily reflects increased competition in key categories and the impact of an additional month of results from Yoplait SAS in
fiscal 2016.
The 4 percent increase in Europe & Australia organic net sales growth in fiscal 2016 was primarily driven by a 6 percentage point increase from contributions from
organic volume growth, which primarily reflects the impact of an additional month of results from Yoplait SAS, and contributions from volume growth in our
Häagen-Dazs and Old El Paso businesses.
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2017 decreased 18 percent to $164 million from $200 million in fiscal 2016, primarily driven by unfavorable foreign currency
exchange, including currency-driven inflation on imported products in certain markets, and the impact of the additional month of results from Yoplait SAS in fiscal
2016, partially offset by a decrease in SG&A expenses, including a 24 percentage point decline in media and advertising expense. Europe & Australia segment
operating profit decreased 9 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2017 compared to fiscal 2016 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use
of this measure).
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2016 increased 12 percent to $200 million from $179 million in fiscal 2015, primarily driven by lower input costs, favorable
mix, and an additional month of results from Yoplait SAS, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange. Europe & Australia segment operating profit
increased 28 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2016 compared to fiscal 2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this
measure).
 
26

Table of Contents
ASIA & LATIN AMERICA SEGMENT
Our Asia & Latin America operating segment consists of our former Asia/Pacific and Latin America regions. The segment includes retail and foodservice
businesses in the greater Asia and South America regions. Our product categories include super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts, refrigerated and frozen
dough products, dessert and baking mixes, meal kits, salty and grain snacks, wellness beverages, and refrigerated yogurt. We also sell super-premium ice cream and
frozen desserts directly to consumers through company-owned retail shops. Our Asia & Latin America segment also includes products manufactured in the United
States for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. Revenues from
export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end customer or franchisee, is located.
Asia & Latin America net sales were as follows:
 
  
 
Fiscal 
2017    
Fiscal 
2017 vs. 2016 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2016    
Fiscal 
2016 vs. 2015 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2015  
Net sales (in millions) (a)
 
$1,728.4   
 
1 %   
$1,704.7   
 
(10) %    
$1,896.6 
Contributions from volume growth (b)
 
  
 
Flat        
  
 
5  pts   
Net price realization and mix
 
  
 
1 pt   
  
 
1  pt    
Foreign currency exchange
 
  
 
Flat        
  
 
(16) pts   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
The 1 percent increase in fiscal 2017 net sales for the Asia & Latin America segment includes approximately 3 percentage points of growth due to an
additional month of results from Yoki in fiscal 2017.
(b)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Asia & Latin America net sales increased 1 percent in fiscal 2017 primarily driven by favorable net price realization in Latin America and China. Contributions
from volume growth in fiscal 2017 were flat, including the impact of an additional month of results for Yoki in fiscal 2017.
Asia & Latin America net sales declined 10 percentage points in fiscal 2016 primarily driven by 16 percentage points of net sales decline from unfavorable foreign
currency exchange and the impact of the 53 rd week in fiscal 2015, partially offset by favorable contributions from volume growth and favorable net price
realization and mix.
The components of Asia & Latin America organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 
2017 vs. 2016 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2016 vs. 2015 
Percentage Change 
Contributions from organic volume growth (a)
  
 
(2) pts   
 
3  pts 
Organic net price realization and mix
  
 
5  pts   
 
4  pts 
Organic net sales growth
  
 
3  pts   
 
7  pts 
Foreign currency exchange
  
 
Flat          
 
(16) pts 
Acquisitions and divestitures (b)
  
 
(2) pts   
 
Flat        
53rd week impact (c)
  
 
—   
 
(1) pt  
Net sales growth
  
 
1  pt    
 
(10) pts 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
(b)
Primarily our Venezuela subsidiary divestiture, Argentina foodservice divestiture, and Laticinios Carolina Ltda acquisition in fiscal 2016.
(c)
Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015.
The 3 percent increase in Asia & Latin America organic net sales in fiscal 2017 was primarily driven by a 5 percentage point increase from organic net price
realization and mix resulting from pricing actions in the Latin America and China markets, partially offset by a 2 percentage point decline in contributions from
organic volume which reflects the impact of macroeconomic challenges in Latin America and the restructuring of our snacks business in China. The 2 percentage
point decline in contributions from organic volume included the impact of an additional month of results from Yoki in fiscal 2017.

The 7 percent increase in Asia & Latin America organic net sales growth in fiscal 2016 was primarily driven by a 4 percentage point increase from organic net
price realization and mix primarily driven by pricing actions in the Latin America region and a 3 percentage point increase in contributions from organic volume
which reflects increased contributions from the Asia region.
 
27

Table of Contents
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2017 increased 21 percent to $84 million from $69 million in fiscal 2016, primarily driven by growth in the Häagen-Dazs
business in China and the impact of an additional month of results from Yoki in fiscal 2017. Asia & Latin America segment operating profit increased 20 percent
on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2017 compared to fiscal 2016 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure).
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2016 declined 42 percent to $69 million from $120 million in fiscal 2015, primarily driven by increased SG&A expenses,
unfavorable foreign currency exchange, and input cost inflation, including currency-driven inflation on imported products in certain markets. Asia & Latin America
segment operating profit declined 33 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2016 compared to fiscal 2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for
our use of this measure).
UNALLOCATED CORPORATE ITEMS
Unallocated corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, contributions to the General
Mills Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative project-related costs, and other items that are
not part of our measurement of segment operating performance. This includes gains and losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions
until passed back to our operating segments in accordance with our policy as discussed in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
For fiscal 2017, unallocated corporate expense totaled $190 million compared to $289 million last year. In fiscal 2017, we recorded a $14 million net decrease in
expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories compared to a $63 million net decrease in expense in the prior
year. In addition, we recorded $42 million of restructuring charges, and $44 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2017,
compared to $78 million of restructuring charges and $58 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2016. The decrease in
unallocated corporate expense also reflects lower incentive expense in fiscal 2017 compared to fiscal 2016.
For fiscal 2016, unallocated corporate expense totaled $289 million compared to $414 million in fiscal 2015. In fiscal 2016, we recorded a $63 million net decrease
in expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories compared to a $90 million net increase in expense in the prior
year. In addition, we recorded $78 million of restructuring charges, and $58 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2016,
compared to $60 million of restructuring charges and $13 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2015. We recorded an $8
million foreign exchange loss related to the remeasurement of assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary in fiscal 2015. We also recorded $16 million of
integration costs resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s in fiscal 2015. The decrease in unallocated corporate expense also reflects cost savings from Project
Catalyst and other cost management initiatives.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
Our gross margin performance reflects the impact of 1 percent input cost inflation in fiscal 2017, 2 percent in fiscal 2016, and 2 percent in fiscal 2015, primarily on
commodity inputs. We expect input cost inflation of 3 percent in fiscal 2018. We attempt to minimize the effects of inflation through HMM, planning, and
operating practices. Our risk management practices are discussed in Item 7A of this report.
LIQUIDITY
The primary source of our liquidity is cash flow from operations. Over the most recent three-year period, our operations have generated $7.5 billion in cash. A
substantial portion of this operating cash flow has been returned to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends. We also use cash from operations to fund
our capital expenditures and acquisitions. We typically use a combination of cash, notes payable, and long-term debt to finance significant acquisitions and major
capital expansions.
As of May 28, 2017, we had $703 million of cash and cash equivalents held in foreign jurisdictions, which will be used to fund foreign operations and acquisitions.
There is currently no need to repatriate these funds in order to meet domestic funding obligations or scheduled cash distributions. If we choose to repatriate
historical earnings held in foreign jurisdictions, we intend to do so only in a tax-neutral manner.
 
28

Table of Contents
Cash Flows from Operations
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2015  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  $1,701.1  $1,736.8  $1,259.4 
Depreciation and amortization
   
603.6   
608.1   
588.3 
After-tax earnings from joint ventures
   
(85.0)   
(88.4)   
(84.3) 
Distributions of earnings from joint ventures
   
75.6   
75.1   
72.6 
Stock-based compensation
   
95.7   
89.8   
106.4 
Deferred income taxes
   
183.9   
120.6   
25.3 
Tax benefit on exercised options
   
(64.1)   
(94.1)   
(74.6) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions
   
(45.4)   
(47.8)   
(49.5) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan costs
   
35.7   
118.1   
91.3 
Divestitures loss (gain)
   
13.5   (148.2)   
— 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
   
117.0   
107.2   
531.1 
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures
   (232.0)   
258.2   
214.7 
Other, net
   
(86.3)   (105.6)   (137.9) 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  $2,313.3  $2,629.8  $2,542.8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In fiscal 2017, cash provided by operations was $2.3 billion compared to $2.6 billion in fiscal 2016. The $316 million decrease is primarily driven by a $490
million change in current assets and liabilities. The $490 million change in current assets and liabilities is primarily due to changes in other current liabilities driven
by changes in income taxes payable, a decrease in incentive accruals and changes in trade and advertising accruals due to reduced spending. The change in current
assets and liabilities was also impacted by the timing of accounts payable. Additionally, we recorded a $14 million loss on a divestiture during fiscal 2017,
compared to a $148 million net gain on divestitures during fiscal 2016 and classified the related cash flows as investing activities.
We strive to grow core working capital at or below the rate of growth in our net sales. For fiscal 2017, core working capital increased 9 percent, primarily due to
timing of accounts receivable and inventory build late in fiscal 2017, compared to a net sales decline of 6 percent. In fiscal 2016, core working capital decreased 41
percent, compared to a net sales decline of 6 percent, and in fiscal 2015, core working capital decreased 13 percent, compared to net sales decline of 2 percent.
In fiscal 2016, our operations generated $2.6 billion of cash, compared to $2.5 billion in fiscal 2015. The $477 million increase in net earnings included a $96
million change in deferred income taxes and a $148 million net gain on divestitures and was also offset by a $424 million decrease in non-cash restructuring
charges. The $43 million change in current assets and liabilities was primarily driven by the timing of accounts payable including the impact of longer terms offset
by the timing of inventory build.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2015
 
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment
  
$(684.4)  
$(729.3)  
$
(712.4) 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
  
 
—  
 
(84.0)  
 
(822.3) 
Investments in affiliates, net
  
 
3.3  
 
63.9  
 
(102.4) 
Proceeds from disposal of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
4.2  
 
4.4  
 
11.0 
Proceeds from divestitures
  
 
17.5  
 828.5  
 
— 
Exchangeable note
  
 
13.0  
 
21.1  
 
27.9 
Other, net
  
 
(0.5)  
 
(11.2)  
 
(4.0) 
Net cash provided (used) by investing activities
  
$(646.9)  
$
93.4  
$(1,602.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In fiscal 2017, we used $647 million of cash through investing activities compared to generating $93 million in fiscal 2016. We invested $684 million in land,
buildings, and equipment in fiscal 2017, $45 million less than last year.
In fiscal 2016, we generated $93 million of cash through investing activities compared to a use of $1.6 billion in fiscal 2015. We invested $729 million in land,
buildings, and equipment in fiscal 2016, $17 million more than fiscal 2015. In fiscal 2016, we received proceeds of $828 million from the divestitures of certain
businesses, primarily Green Giant. In fiscal 2015, we acquired Annie’s for an aggregate purchase price of $809 million, net of $12 million of cash acquired.
We expect capital expenditures to be approximately $650 million in fiscal 2018. These expenditures will fund initiatives that are expected to fuel international
growth, support innovative products, and continue HMM initiatives throughout the supply chain.
 
29

Table of Contents
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
  
2016  
2015 
Change in notes payable
  
$
962.4  
$
(323.8)  
$
(509.8) 
Issuance of long-term debt
  
 1,072.1  
 
542.5  
 2,253.2 
Payment of long-term debt
  
 (1,000.0)  
 (1,000.4)  
 (1,145.8) 
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options
  
 
112.6  
 
171.9  
 
163.7 
Tax benefit on exercised options
  
 
64.1  
 
94.1  
 
74.6 
Purchases of common stock for treasury
  
 (1,651.5)  
 
(606.7)  
 (1,161.9) 
Dividends paid
  
 (1,135.1)  
 (1,071.7)  
 (1,017.7) 
Distributions to noncontrolling and redeemable interest holders
  
 
(61.0)  
 
(84.3)  
 
(25.0) 
Other, net
  
 
(9.1)  
 
(7.2)  
 
(16.1) 
Net cash used by financing activities
  
$(1,645.5)  
$(2,285.6)  
$(1,384.8) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash used by financing activities decreased by $640 million in fiscal 2017. We had $1.8 billion more net debt issuances in fiscal 2017 than the prior year. For
more information on our debt issuances and payments, please refer to Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
During fiscal 2017, we received $113 million in proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options compared to $172 million in fiscal 2016, a decrease of
$59 million. During fiscal 2015, we received $164 million in proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options.
During fiscal 2017, we repurchased 25 million shares of our common stock for $1,652 million. During fiscal 2016, we repurchased 11 million shares of our
common stock for $607 million. During fiscal 2015, we repurchased 22 million shares of our common stock for $1,162 million.
Dividends paid in fiscal 2017 totaled $1,135 million, or $1.92 per share, an 8 percent per share increase from fiscal 2016. Dividends paid in fiscal 2016 totaled
$1,072 million, or $1.78 per share, a 7 percent per share increase from fiscal 2015 dividends of $1.67 per share.
Selected Cash Flows from Joint Ventures
Selected cash flows from our joint ventures are set forth in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Inflow (Outflow), in Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Investments in affiliates, net
  
$ 3.3   
$63.9   
$(102.4) 
Dividends received
  
 75.6   
 75.1   
 
72.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Total capital consisted of the following:
 
In Millions
  
May 28, 
2017
   
May 29, 
2016
 
Notes payable
  
$ 1,234.1   
$
269.8 
Current portion of long-term debt
  
 
604.7   
 
1,103.4 
Long-term debt
  
 
7,642.9   
 
7,057.7 
Total debt
  
 
9,481.7   
 
8,430.9 
Redeemable interest
  
 
910.9   
 
845.6 
Noncontrolling interests
  
 
357.6   
 
376.9 
Stockholders’ equity
  
 
4,327.9   
 
4,930.2 
Total capital
  
$15,078.1   
$14,583.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
30

Table of Contents
The following table details the fee-paid committed and uncommitted credit lines we had available as of May 28, 2017:
 
In Billions
  
Facility 
Amount   
Borrowed
Amount  
Credit facility expiring:
  
  
May 2022
  
$
2.7   
$
— 
June 2019
  
 
0.2   
 
0.1 
Total committed credit facilities
  
 
2.9   
 
0.1 
Uncommitted credit facilities
  
 
0.5   
 
0.1 
Total committed and uncommitted credit facilities
  
$
3.4   
$
0.2 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In fiscal 2016, we entered into a $2.7 billion fee-paid committed credit facility that was originally scheduled to expire in May 2021. During the fourth quarter of
fiscal 2017 we amended the credit facility’s expiration date by one year to May 2022.
To ensure availability of funds, we maintain bank credit lines sufficient to cover our outstanding notes payable. Commercial paper is a continuing source of short-
term financing. We have commercial paper programs available to us in the United States and Europe. We also have uncommitted and asset-backed credit lines that
support our foreign operations. The credit facilities contain several covenants, including a requirement to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5
times.
Certain of our long-term debt agreements, our credit facilities, and our noncontrolling interests contain restrictive covenants. As of May 28, 2017, we were in
compliance with all of these covenants.
We have $605 million of long-term debt maturing in the next 12 months that is classified as current, including $500 million of 1.4 percent notes due October 2017
and $100 million of 6.39 percent fixed rate medium term notes due for remarketing in February 2018. We believe that cash flows from operations, together with
available short- and long-term debt financing, will be adequate to meet our liquidity and capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
As of May 28, 2017, our total debt, including the impact of derivative instruments designated as hedges, was 67 percent in fixed-rate and 33 percent in floating-rate
instruments, compared to 78 percent in fixed-rate and 22 percent in floating-rate instruments on May 29, 2016.
Return on average total capital was 12.7 percent in fiscal 2017 compared to 12.9 percent in fiscal 2016. Improvement in adjusted return on average total capital is
one of our key performance measures (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our discussion of this measure, which is not defined by GAAP). Adjusted
return on average total capital increased 30 basis points from 11.3 percent in fiscal 2016 to 11.6 percent in fiscal 2017 as fiscal 2017 adjusted earnings increased.
On a constant-currency basis, adjusted return on average total capital increased 40 basis points.
We also believe that our fixed charge coverage ratio and the ratio of operating cash flow to debt are important measures of our financial strength. Our fixed charge
coverage ratio in fiscal 2017 was 7.26 compared to 7.40 in fiscal 2016. The measure decreased from fiscal 2016 as earnings before income taxes and after-tax
earnings from joint ventures decreased by $132 million in fiscal 2017. Our operating cash flow to debt ratio decreased 6.8 percentage points to 24.4 percent in
fiscal 2017, driven by a decrease in cash provided by operations and an increase in notes payable.
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS and a 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl. Sodiaal holds the remaining
interests in each of these entities. We consolidate these entities into our consolidated financial statements. We record Sodiaal’s 50 percent interest in Yoplait
Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl as noncontrolling interests, and its 49 percent interest in Yoplait SAS as a redeemable interest on our Consolidated
Balance Sheets. These euro- and Canadian dollar-denominated interests are reported in U.S. dollars on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Sodiaal has the ability to
put all or a portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per year, up to three times before December 2024. As of May 28, 2017, the redemption value
of the redeemable interest was $911 million which approximates its fair value.
The third-party holder of the General Mills Cereals, LLC (GMC) Class A Interests receives quarterly preferred distributions from available net income based on the
application of a floating preferred return rate to the holder’s capital account balance established in the most recent mark-to-market valuation (currently $252
million). On June 1, 2015, the floating preferred return rate on GMC’s Class A Interests was reset to the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 125 basis points. The
preferred return rate is adjusted every three years through a negotiated agreement with the Class A Interest holder or through a remarketing auction.
We have an option to purchase the Class A Interests for consideration equal to the then current capital account value, plus any unpaid preferred return and the
prescribed make-whole amount. If we purchase these interests, any change in the third-party holder’s capital account from its original value will be charged directly
to retained earnings and will increase or decrease the net earnings used to calculate EPS in that period.
 
31

Table of Contents
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
As of May 28, 2017, we have issued guarantees and comfort letters of $505 million for the debt and other obligations of consolidated subsidiaries, and guarantees
and comfort letters of $165 million for the debt and other obligations of non-consolidated affiliates, mainly CPW. In addition, off-balance sheet arrangements are
generally limited to the future payments under non-cancelable operating leases, which totaled $501 million as of May 28, 2017.
As of May 28, 2017, we had invested in five variable interest entities (VIEs). None of our VIEs are material to our results of operations, financial condition, or
liquidity as of and for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2017.
Our defined benefit plans in the United States are subject to the requirements of the Pension Protection Act (PPA). In the future, the PPA may require us to make
additional contributions to our domestic plans. We do not expect to be required to make any contributions in fiscal 2017.
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations, including payments due by period:
 
 
  
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
Total
   
2018    
2019 -20   
2021 -22   
2023 and 
Thereafter 
Long-term debt (a)
  $ 8,290.6    
604.2    2,647.7   
 1,559.3   
 
3,479.4 
Accrued interest
   
83.8    
83.8    
—   
 
—   
 
— 
Operating leases (b)
   
500.7    
118.8    
182.4   
 
110.4   
 
89.1 
Capital leases
   
1.2    
0.4    
0.6   
 
0.1   
 
0.1 
Purchase obligations (c)
   
3,191.0    2,304.8    
606.8   
 
264.3   
 
15.1 
Total contractual obligations
   12,067.3    3,112.0    3,437.5   
 1,934.1   
 
3,583.7 
Other long-term obligations (d)
   
1,372.7    
—    
—   
 
—   
 
— 
Total long-term obligations
  $13,440.0   $3,112.0   $ 3,437.5   
$ 1,934.1   
$ 3,583.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Amounts represent the expected cash payments of our long-term debt and do not include $1.2 million for capital leases or $44.4 million for net unamortized
debt issuance costs, premiums and discounts, and fair value adjustments.
(b)
Operating leases represents the minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable operating leases.
(c)
The majority of the purchase obligations represent commitments for raw material and packaging to be utilized in the normal course of business and for
consumer marketing spending commitments that support our brands. For purposes of this table, arrangements are considered purchase obligations if a
contract specifies all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased, a pricing structure, and approximate timing of the transaction.
Most arrangements are cancelable without a significant penalty and with short notice (usually 30 days). Any amounts reflected on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as accounts payable and accrued liabilities are excluded from the table above.
(d)
The fair value of our foreign exchange, equity, commodity, and grain derivative contracts with a payable position to the counterparty was $24 million as of
May 28, 2017, based on fair market values as of that date. Future changes in market values will impact the amount of cash ultimately paid or received to
settle those instruments in the future. Other long-term obligations mainly consist of liabilities for accrued compensation and benefits, including the
underfunded status of certain of our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans, and miscellaneous liabilities.
We expect to pay $21 million of benefits from our unfunded postemployment benefit plans and $14.6 million of deferred compensation in fiscal 2018. We
are unable to reliably estimate the amount of these payments beyond fiscal 2018. As of May 28, 2017, our total liability for uncertain tax positions and
accrued interest and penalties was $158.6 million.
 
32

Table of Contents
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Our significant
accounting estimates are those that have a meaningful impact on the reporting of our financial condition and results of operations. These estimates include our
accounting for promotional expenditures, valuation of long-lived assets, intangible assets, redeemable interest, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and
defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans.
Promotional Expenditures
Our promotional activities are conducted through our customers and directly or indirectly with end consumers. These activities include: payments to customers to
perform merchandising activities on our behalf, such as advertising or in-store displays; discounts to our list prices to lower retail shelf prices; payments to gain
distribution of new products; coupons, contests, and other incentives; and media and advertising expenditures. The recognition of these costs requires estimation of
customer participation and performance levels. These estimates are based on the forecasted customer sales, the timing and forecasted costs of promotional
activities, and other factors. Differences between estimated expenses and actual costs are recognized as a change in management estimate in a subsequent period.
Our accrued trade, coupon, and consumer marketing liabilities were $483 million as of May 28, 2017, and $564 million as of May 29, 2016. Because our total
promotional expenditures (including amounts classified as a reduction of revenues) are significant, if our estimates are inaccurate we would have to make
adjustments in subsequent periods that could have a significant effect on our results of operations.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We estimate the useful lives of long-lived assets and make estimates concerning undiscounted cash flows to review for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) may not be recoverable. Fair value is measured using discounted cash flows or
independent appraisals, as appropriate.
Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not subject to amortization and are tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Our estimates of fair value for goodwill impairment testing are determined based on a discounted cash
flow model. We use inputs from our long-range planning process to determine growth rates for sales and profits. We also make estimates of discount rates,
perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other factors.
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, mainly brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life
requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of
the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution
channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite
lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, over their useful lives, generally ranging from 4 to 30 years. Our estimate of the fair value of our brand assets is based
on a discounted cash flow model using inputs which include projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not
own the brands, and a discount rate.
As of May 28, 2017, we had $12.9 billion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. While we currently believe that the fair value of each intangible
exceeds its carrying value and that those intangibles so classified will contribute indefinitely to our cash flows, materially different assumptions regarding future
performance of our businesses or a different weighted-average cost of capital could result in material impairment losses and amortization expense. We performed
our fiscal 2017 assessment of our intangible assets as of August 29, 2016. As of our annual assessment date, there was no impairment of any of our intangible
assets as their related fair values were substantially in excess of the carrying values except for the Latin America reporting unit and the Immaculate Baking brand
intangible asset. The excess fair value above the carrying value of the Latin America reporting unit and the Immaculate Baking brand intangible asset is as follows:

 
In Millions
  
Carrying
Value    
Excess
Fair
Value
Above
Carrying
Value  
Latin America
  
$
523.0   
 
15% 
Immaculate Baking
  
$
12.0   
 
17% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Our Latin America reporting unit and Immaculate Baking brand have experienced declining business performance. In addition, while not impaired as of May 28,
2017, the Progresso , Green Giant , and Food Should Taste Good brand intangible assets and U.S. Yogurt reporting unit had risk of decreasing coverage. We will
continue to monitor these businesses for potential impairment.
 
33

Table of Contents
Redeemable Interest
In fiscal 2017, we adjusted the redemption value of Sodiaal’s redeemable interest in Yoplait SAS based on a discounted cash flow model. The significant
assumptions used to estimate the redemption value include projected revenue growth and profitability from our long-range plan, capital spending, depreciation and
taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate. As of May 28, 2017, the redemption value of the redeemable interest was $911 million.
Stock-based Compensation
The valuation of stock options is a significant accounting estimate that requires us to use judgments and assumptions that are likely to have a material impact on our
financial statements. Annually, we make predictive assumptions regarding future stock price volatility, employee exercise behavior, dividend yield, and the
forfeiture rate. For more information on these assumptions, please refer to Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The estimated fair values of stock options granted and the assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2017
   
2016
   
2015
 
Estimated fair values of stock options granted
   
$8.80    
$7.24    
$7.22 
Assumptions:
  
  
  
Risk-free interest rate
   
1.7%    
2.4%    
2.6% 
Expected term
   8.5 years    8.5 years    8.5 years 
Expected volatility
   
17.8%    
17.6%    
17.5% 
Dividend yield
   
2.9%    
3.2%    
3.1% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The risk-free interest rate for periods during the expected term of the options is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
An increase in the expected term by 1 year, leaving all other assumptions constant, would increase the grant date fair value by 1 percent. If all other assumptions
are held constant, a one percentage point increase in our fiscal 2017 volatility assumption would increase the grant date fair value of our fiscal 2017 option awards
by 7 percent.
To the extent that actual outcomes differ from our assumptions, we are not required to true up grant-date fair value-based expense to final intrinsic values.
However, these differences can impact the classification of cash tax benefits realized upon exercise of stock options, as explained in the following two paragraphs.
Furthermore, historical data has a significant bearing on our forward-looking assumptions. Significant variances between actual and predicted experience could
lead to prospective revisions in our assumptions, which could then significantly impact the year-over-year comparability of stock-based compensation expense.
Any corporate income tax benefit realized upon exercise or vesting of an award in excess of that previously recognized in earnings (referred to as a windfall tax
benefit) is presented in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as a financing cash flow. The actual impact on future years’ cash flows will depend, in part, on
the volume of employee stock option exercises during a particular year and the relationship between the exercise-date market value of the underlying stock and the
original grant-date fair value previously determined for financial reporting purposes.
Realized windfall tax benefits are credited to additional paid-in capital within the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Realized shortfall tax benefits (amounts which are
less than that previously recognized in earnings) are first offset against the cumulative balance of windfall tax benefits, if any, and then charged directly to income
tax expense, potentially resulting in volatility in our consolidated effective income tax rate. Because employee stock option exercise behavior is not within our
control, it is possible that significantly different reported results could occur if different assumptions or conditions were to prevail.
See the new accounting requirements for the accounting and presentation of stock-based payments in the Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements section
below for forthcoming changes to stock-based compensation.

Income Taxes
We apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. Accordingly, we recognize the amount of tax benefit that
has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. Future changes in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of
uncertain tax positions will affect earnings in the quarter of such change. For more information on income taxes, please refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
 
34

Table of Contents
Defined Benefit Pension, Other Postretirement Benefit, and Postemployment Benefit Plans
We have defined benefit pension plans covering many employees in the United States, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. We also sponsor plans that
provide health care benefits to many of our retirees in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. Under certain circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits,
primarily severance, to former and inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Please refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements
in Item 8 of this report for a description of our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans.
We recognize benefits provided during retirement or following employment over the plan participants’ active working lives. Accordingly, we make various
assumptions to predict and measure costs and obligations many years prior to the settlement of our obligations. Assumptions that require significant management
judgment and have a material impact on the measurement of our net periodic benefit expense or income and accumulated benefit obligations include the long-term
rates of return on plan assets, the interest rates used to discount the obligations for our benefit plans, and health care cost trend rates.
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets
Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by our asset allocation, our historical long-term investment performance, our estimate of future long-term
returns by asset class (using input from our actuaries, investment services, and investment managers), and long-term inflation assumptions. We review this
assumption annually for each plan; however, our annual investment performance for one particular year does not, by itself, significantly influence our evaluation.
Our historical investment returns (compound annual growth rates) for our United States defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plan assets were
11.8 percent, 10.0 percent, 6.0 percent, 8.4 percent, and 8.4 percent for the 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 year periods ended May 31, 2017.
On a weighted-average basis, the expected rate of return for all defined benefit plans was 8.17 percent for fiscal 2017, 8.53 percent for fiscal 2016, and 8.53 percent
for fiscal 2015. For fiscal 2018, we lowered our weighted-average expected rate of return on plan assets for our principal defined benefit pension and other
postretirement plans in the United States to 7.95 percent due to asset changes that decreased investment risk in the portfolio.
Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on assets by 100 basis points would increase our net pension and postretirement expense by $66 million for fiscal
2018. A market-related valuation basis is used to reduce year-to-year expense volatility. The market-related valuation recognizes certain investment gains or losses
over a five-year period from the year in which they occur. Investment gains or losses for this purpose are the difference between the expected return calculated
using the market-related value of assets and the actual return based on the market-related value of assets. Our outside actuaries perform these calculations as part of
our determination of annual expense or income.
Discount Rates
Beginning in fiscal 2017, we changed the method used to estimate the service and interest cost components of the net periodic benefit expense for our United States
and most of our international defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans. We adopted a full yield curve approach to
estimate service cost and interest cost by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used to determine the benefit obligation to the relevant projected
cash flows. This method provides a more precise measurement of service and interest costs by correlating the timing of the plans’ liability cash flows to the
corresponding rate on the yield curve. Previously, we estimated service cost and interest cost using a single weighted-average discount rate derived from the yield
curve used to measure the benefit obligation at the beginning of the period. This change does not affect the measurement of our benefit obligations related to these
plans. We have accounted for this change prospectively as a change in accounting estimate beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2017. The change in methodology
resulted in a decrease in service and interest cost of approximately $68 million in fiscal 2017 compared to what our costs would have been under the previous
method. The fiscal 2017 reduction in our net periodic benefit expense as a result of this change in methodology was partially offset by a reduction in our weighted-
average expected rate of return on plan assets for our principal defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans in the United States to 8.25 percent as a result
of changes that decreased investment risk in the portfolio.

Our discount rate assumptions are determined annually as of May 31 for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan
obligations. We work with our outside actuaries to determine the timing and amount of expected future cash outflows to plan participants and, using the Aa Above
Median corporate bond yield, to develop a forward interest rate curve, including a margin to that index based on our credit risk. This forward interest rate curve is
applied to our expected future cash outflows to determine our discount rate assumptions.
 
35

Table of Contents
Our weighted-average discount rates were as follows:
 
  
  
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans  
 
Other
Postretirement
Benefit Plans  
 
Postemployment
Benefit Plans  
Effective rate for fiscal 2018 service costs
  
 
4.37%  
 
4.27%  
 
3.54% 
Effective rate for fiscal 2018 interest costs
  
 
3.45%  
 
3.24%  
 
2.67% 
Obligations as of May 31, 2017
  
 
4.08%  
 
3.92%  
 
2.87% 
Effective rate for fiscal 2017 service costs
  
 
4.57%  
 
4.42%  
 
3.55% 
Effective rate for fiscal 2017 interest costs
  
 
3.44%  
 
3.17%  
 
2.67% 
Obligations as of May 29, 2016
  
 
4.19%  
 
3.97%  
 
2.94% 
Obligations as of May 31, 2015 and fiscal 2016 expense
  
 
4.38%  
 
4.20%  
 
3.55% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lowering the discount rates by 100 basis points would increase our net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan
expense for fiscal 2018 by approximately $85 million. All obligation-related experience gains and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over the
average remaining service period of active plan participants.
Health Care Cost Trend Rates
We review our health care cost trend rates annually. Our review is based on data we collect about our health care claims experience and information provided by
our actuaries. This information includes recent plan experience, plan design, overall industry experience and projections, and assumptions used by other similar
organizations. Our initial health care cost trend rate is adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with this review, recent experiences, and short-term expectations.
Our initial health care cost trend rate assumption is 7.3 percent for retirees age 65 and over and 7.0 percent for retirees under age 65 at the end of fiscal 2017. Rates
are graded down annually until the ultimate trend rate of 5.0 percent is reached in 2024 for all retirees. The trend rates are applicable for calculations only if the
retirees’ benefits increase as a result of health care inflation. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view
on the rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate health care cost premium. Assumed trend rates for health care costs have an important effect on the amounts
reported for the other postretirement benefit plans.
A one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:
 
In Millions
  
One
Percentage
Point
Increase    
One
Percentage
Point
Decrease  
Effect on the aggregate of the service and interest cost components in fiscal 2018
  
 
$  2.2   
 
$  (1.9) 
Effect on the other post retirement accumulated benefit obligation as of May 28, 2017
  
 
59.5   
 
(53.8) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Any arising health care claims cost-related experience gain or loss is recognized in the calculation of expected future claims. Once recognized, experience gains
and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over 10 years, resulting in at least the minimum amortization required being recorded.
Financial Statement Impact
In fiscal 2017, we recorded net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan expense of $56 million compared to $163
million of expense in fiscal 2016 and $153 million of expense in fiscal 2015. As of May 28, 2017, we had cumulative unrecognized actuarial net losses of $1.6
billion on our defined benefit pension plans and $24 million on our postretirement and postemployment benefit plans, mainly as the result of liability increases
from lower interest rates, partially offset by recent increases in the values of plan assets. These unrecognized actuarial net losses will result in increases in our
future pension and postretirement benefit expenses because they currently exceed the corridors defined by GAAP.
Actual future net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan income or expense will depend on investment
performance, changes in future discount rates, changes in health care cost trend rates, and other factors related to the populations participating in these plans.
 
36

Table of Contents
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In March 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued new accounting requirements related to the presentation of net periodic defined benefit
pension expense, net periodic postretirement benefit expense, and net periodic postemployment benefit expense. The new standard requires the service cost
component of net periodic benefit expense to be recorded in the same line items as other employee compensation costs within our Consolidated Statements of
Earnings. Other components of net periodic benefit expense must be presented separately outside of operating profit in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings. In
addition, the new standard requires that only the service cost component of net periodic benefit expense is eligible for capitalization. We recognized net periodic
benefit expense of $56 million in fiscal 2017, $163 million in fiscal 2016, and $153 million in fiscal 2015 of which $141 million, $161 million, and $167 million,
respectively, related to service cost. These amounts may not necessarily be indicative of future amounts that may be recognized subsequent to the adoption of this
new standard. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those
annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2019. Early adoption is permitted.
In January 2017, the FASB issued new accounting requirements related to goodwill impairment testing. The new standard eliminates the requirement to measure a
goodwill impairment loss by determining the implied fair value of goodwill. Instead, goodwill impairment losses will be measured by the amount by which a
reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. The requirements of the new
standard are effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, which for us is fiscal 2021. Early
adoption is permitted. We intend to adopt this standard in fiscal 2018 and do not expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or
financial position.
In October 2016, the FASB issued new accounting requirements related to the recognition of income taxes resulting from intra-entity transfers of assets other than
inventory. This will result in the recognition of the income tax consequences resulting from the intra-entity transfer of assets in our Consolidated Statements of
Earnings in the period of the transfer. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and
interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2019. Early adoption is permitted. We are in the process of analyzing the
impact of this standard on our results of operations and financial position.
In March 2016, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for the accounting and presentation of stock-based payments. This will result in realized windfall
and shortfall tax benefits upon exercise or vesting of stock-based awards being recorded in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings instead of additional paid-in
capital within our Consolidated Balance Sheets. In addition, realized windfall and shortfall tax benefits will be reclassified from financing activities to operating
activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We recognized windfall tax benefits of $64 million in fiscal 2017, $94 million in fiscal 2016, and $75
million in fiscal 2015. These amounts may not necessarily be indicative of future amounts that may be recognized subsequent to the adoption of this new standard
as windfall and shortfall tax benefits are dependent upon future stock prices, employee exercise behavior, and applicable tax rates. The requirements of the new
standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first
quarter of fiscal 2018.
In February 2016, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for accounting, presentation and classification of leases. This will result in most leases being
capitalized as a right of use asset with a related liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual
reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2020. We are in the
process of evaluating lease accounting software and analyzing the impact of this standard on our results of operations and financial position. Based on our
assessment to date, we expect this guidance will have a material impact on our Consolidated Balance Sheets due to the amount of our lease commitments but we
are unable to quantify the impact at this time.
In May 2014, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for the recognition of revenue from contracts with customers. The requirements of the new standard
and its subsequent amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those annual periods,
which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2019. We are in the process of documenting the impact of the guidance on our current accounting policies and practices in
order to identify material differences, if any, that would result from applying the new requirements to our revenue contracts. We continue to make progress on our
revenue recognition review and are also in the process of evaluating the impact, if any, on changes to our business processes, systems, and controls to support
recognition and disclosure requirements under the new guidance. In addition, we continue to assess our adoption approach. Based on our assessment to date, we do
not expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
 
37

Table of Contents
NON-GAAP MEASURES
We have included in this report measures of financial performance that are not defined by GAAP. We believe that these measures provide useful information to
investors, and include these measures in other communications to investors.
For each of these non-GAAP financial measures, we are providing below a reconciliation of the differences between the non-GAAP measure and the most directly
comparable GAAP measure, an explanation of why we believe the non-GAAP measure provides useful information to investors and any additional purposes for
which our management or Board of Directors uses the non-GAAP measure. These non-GAAP measures should be viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, the
comparable GAAP measure.
Organic Net Sales Growth Rates
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our performance for incentive
compensation purposes. We provide organic net sales growth rates for our consolidated net sales and segment net sales. We believe that organic net sales growth
rates provide useful information to investors because they provide transparency to underlying performance in our net sales by excluding the effect that foreign
currency exchange rate fluctuations, as well as acquisitions, divestitures, and a 53 rd week, when applicable, have on year-to-year comparability. A reconciliation of
these measures to reported net sales growth rates, the relevant GAAP measures, are included in our Consolidated Results of Operations and Results of Segment
Operations discussions above.
Total Segment Operating Profit and Total Segment Operating Profit as a Percent of Net Sales
Total segment operating profit is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Director’s measurement of our performance
for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the profitability measure we use to
evaluate segment performance.
 
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
Percent of Net Sales
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
Operating profit as reported
 $2,566.4   16.4%  $2,707.4   16.3%  $2,077.3   11.8%  $2,957.4   16.5%  $2,851.8   16.0% 
Unallocated Corporate Items
  
190.1   1.2%   
288.9   1.8%   
413.8   2.3%   
258.4   1.5%   
351.3   2.0% 
Divestitures loss (gain)
  
13.5   0.1%   (148.2)   (0.9)%   
—   
—%   
(65.5)   (0.4)%   
—   
—% 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
182.6   1.2%   
151.4   0.9%   
543.9   3.1%   
3.6   
—%   
19.8   0.1% 
Total Segment operating profit
 $2,952.6   18.9%  $2,999.5   18.1%  $3,035.0   17.2%   $3,153.9   17.6%  $3,222.9   18.1% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38

Table of Contents
Diluted EPS Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability and Related Constant-currency Growth Rate (Adjusted Diluted EPS)
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our performance for incentive
compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the profitability measure we use to evaluate earnings
performance on a comparable year-over-year basis. The adjustments are either items resulting from infrequently occurring events or items that, in management’s
judgment, significantly affect the year-over-year assessment of operating results.
The reconciliation of our GAAP measure, diluted EPS, to diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability and the related constant-currency growth rate
follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Per Share Data
  
2017   
2016   
2017 vs.
2016 
Change  
 
2015    
2016 vs.
2015 
Change  
 
2014   
2013  
Diluted earnings per share, as reported
  $ 2.77  
$ 2.77  
 
Flat 
 
$1.97    
41%  
$ 2.83  
$ 2.79 
Mark-to-market effects (a)
   (0.01)  
 (0.07)  
 
 0.09   
 
 (0.05)  
 
— 
Divestitures loss (gain), net (b)
   0.01  
 (0.10)  
 
 
—   
 
 (0.06)  
 
— 
Tax items (c)
   
—  
 
—  
 
 0.13   
 
 
—  
 (0.13) 
Acquisition integration costs (d)
   
—  
 
—  
 
 0.02   
 
 
—  
 0.01 
Venezuela currency devaluation (a)
   
—  
 
—  
 
 0.01   
 
 0.09  
 0.03 
Restructuring costs (e)
   0.26  
 0.26  
 
 0.35   
 
 0.01  
 0.02 
Project-related costs (e)
   0.05  
 0.06  
 
 0.01   
 
 
—  
 
— 
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (f)
   
—  
 
—  
 
 0.28   
 
 
—  
 
— 
Diluted earnings per share, excluding certain items affecting comparability
  $ 3.08  
$ 2.92  
 
5%  
$2.86    
2%  
$ 2.82  
$ 2.72 
Foreign currency exchange impact
    
  
  
  
 
(1)  
  
    
(3)  
  
  
  
 
Diluted earnings per share growth, excluding certain items affecting
comparability, on a constant-currency basis
  
 
 
 
6%  
   
5%  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
The fiscal 2015 tax item is related to the one-time repatriation of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015. The fiscal 2013 tax items consist of a reduction to
income taxes related to the restructuring of our GMC subsidiary and an increase to income taxes related to the liquidation of a corporate investment.
Additionally, fiscal 2013 includes changes in deferred taxes associated with the Medicare Part D subsidies related to the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010.
(d)
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015 and Yoki in fiscal 2013.
(e)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(f)
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
See our reconciliation below of the effective income tax rate as reported to the effective income tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability for the tax
impact of each item affecting comparability.
 
39

Table of Contents
Adjusted Return on Average Total Capital
Change in adjusted return on average total capital is a measure used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Director’s
measurement of our performance for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is
important for assessing the utilization of capital and it eliminates certain items that affect year-to-year comparability. The calculation of adjusted return on average
total capital and return on average total capital, its GAAP equivalent follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
   
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
 
 
2013
   
2012
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests
  $ 1,701.1            $ 1,736.8 
 
$ 1,259.4 
 
$ 1,861.3 
 
$ 1,892.5      
Interest, net, after-tax
   
187.9             
193.1 
 
 
199.8 
 
 
190.9 
 
 
201.2      
Earnings before interest, after-tax
   
1,889.0             
1,929.9 
 
 
1,459.2 
 
 
2,052.2 
 
 
2,093.7      
Adjustments, after-tax (a):
  
  
 
 
 
  
Mark-to-market effects
   
(8.8)             
(39.6)  
 
56.5 
 
 
(30.5)  
 
(2.8)     
Divestitures loss (gain), net
   
9.2             
(66.0)  
 
— 
 
 
(36.0)  
 
—       
Tax items
   
—             
— 
 
 
78.6 
 
 
— 
 
 
(85.4)     
Acquisition integration costs
   
—             
— 
 
 
10.4 
 
 
— 
 
 
8.8      
Venezuela currency devaluation
   
—             
— 
 
 
8.0 
 
 
57.8 
 
 
20.8      
Restructuring costs
   
153.9             
160.8 
 
 
217.7 
 
 
3.6 
 
 
15.9      
Project-related costs
   
28.2             
36.8 
 
 
8.3 
 
 
— 
 
 
—       
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment
   
—             
— 
 
 
176.9 
 
 
— 
 
 
—       
Adjusted earnings before interest, after-tax for adjusted return on
capital calculation
  $ 2,071.5            $ 2,021.9 
 
$ 2,015.6 
 
$ 2,047.1 
 
$ 2,051.0      
 
  
Current portion of long-term debt
  $
604.7            $ 1,103.4 
 
$ 1,000.4 
 
$ 1,250.6 
 
$ 1,443.3      $
741.2 
Notes payable
   
1,234.1             
269.8 
 
 
615.8 
 
 
1,111.7 
 
 
599.7       
526.5 
Long-term debt
   
7,642.9             
7,057.7 
 
 
7,575.3 
 
 
6,396.6 
 
 
5,901.8       
6,139.5 
Total debt
   
9,481.7             
8,430.9 
 
 
9,191.5 
 
 
8,758.9 
 
 
7,944.8       
7,407.2 
Redeemable interest
   
910.9             
845.6 
 
 
778.9 
 
 
984.1 
 
 
967.5       
847.8 
Noncontrolling interests
   
357.6             
376.9 
 
 
396.0 
 
 
470.6 
 
 
456.3       
461.0 
Stockholders’ equity
   
4,327.9             
4,930.2 
 
 
4,996.7 
 
 
6,534.8 
 
 
6,672.2       
6,421.7 
Total capital
   15,078.1             14,583.6 
 
 15,363.1 
 
 16,748.4 
 
 16,040.8       15,137.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
   
2,244.5             
2,612.2 
 
 
2,310.7 
 
 
1,340.3 
 
 
1,585.3       
1,743.7 
After-tax earnings adjustments (b)
   
621.6             
439.1 
 
 
347.1 
 
 
(209.3)  
 
(204.2)      
(161.5) 
Adjusted total capital
  $17,944.2            $17,634.9 
 
$18,020.9 
 
$17,879.4 
 
$17,421.9      $16,719.9 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Average total capital (c)
  $14,830.9            $14,973.4 
 
$16,055.8 
 
$16,394.6 
 
$15,589.2      
Return on average total capital (c)
   
12.7%         
12.9%  
 
9.1%  
 
12.5%  
 
13.4%   
 
  
Adjusted average total capital (c)
  $17,789.6            $17,827.9 
 
$17,950.1 
 
$17,650.6 
 
$17,070.8      
Adjusted return on average total capital (c)
   
11.6%         
11.3%  
 
11.2%  
 
11.6%  
 
12.0%   
 
  
Change in adjusted return on average total capital
   
30 bps     
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency exchange impact
   
(10)bps     
 
 
 
  
Change in adjusted return on average total capital on a constant-
currency basis
   
40 bps     
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
(a)
See our reconciliation below of the effective income tax rate as reported to the effective income tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability for
the tax impact of each item affecting comparability.
(b)
Sum of current year and previous year after-tax adjustments.
(c)
See “Glossary” in Item 8 of this report for definition.
 
40

Table of Contents
Free Cash Flow Conversion Rate and Total Cash Returned to Shareholders as a Percentage of Free Cash Flow
We believe these measures provide useful information to investors because they are important for assessing our efficiency in converting earnings to cash and
returning cash to shareholders. The calculation of free cash flow conversion rate and net cash provided by operating activities conversion rate, its equivalent GAAP
measure follows:
 
In Millions
  
Fiscal
2017  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests, as reported
  
$1,701.1 
Mark-to-market effects, net of tax (a)
  
 
(8.8) 
Divestitures loss, net of tax (b)
  
 
9.2 
Restructuring costs, net of tax (c)
  
 
153.9 
Project-related costs, net of tax (c)
  
 
28.2 
Adjusted net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
 1,883.6 
  
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  
 2,313.3 
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 (684.4) 
Free cash flow
  
$1,628.9 
  
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities conversion rate
  
 136% 
  
 
 
 
Free cash flow conversion rate
  
 
86% 
  
 
 
 
 
The calculation of total cash returned to shareholders as a percentage of free cash flow follows:
 
 
Dividends paid
  
$1,135.1 
Purchases of common stock for treasury
  
 1,651.5 
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options
  
 (112.6) 
Total cash returned to shareholders
  
$2,674.0 
  
 
 
 
Total cash returned to shareholders as a percentage of free cash flow
  
 164% 
  
 
 
 
(a)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
See our reconciliation below of the effective income tax rate as reported to the effective income tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability for the tax
impact of each item affecting comparability.
 
41

Table of Contents
Total Segment Operating Profit Constant-currency Growth Rates
We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance of our segments by excluding the
effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.
Total segment operating profit growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
 
  
2017   
2016 
Percentage change in total segment operating profit as reported
  
(2) %  
 
(1) % 
Impact of foreign currency exchange
  
(1) pt  
 
(2) pts 
Percentage change in total segment operating profit on a constant-currency basis
  
(1) %  
 
1  % 
  
 
  
 
 
 
See our reconciliation of total segment operating profit to operating profit, its GAAP-equivalent, above.
Constant-currency After-Tax Earnings from Joint Ventures Growth Rates
We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance of our joint ventures by
excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.
After-tax earnings from joint ventures growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
  
  
2017 
 
2016 
Percentage change in after-tax earnings from joint ventures as reported
  
 (4) %  
 5  % 
Impact of foreign currency exchange
  
 2  pts  
 (7) pts 
Percentage change in after-tax earnings from joint ventures on a constant-currency basis
  
 (6) %  
 12 % 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net Sales Growth Rates for Canada Operating Unit on a Constant-currency Basis
We believe this measure of our Canada operating unit net sales provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to the underlying
performance for the Canada operating unit within our North America Retail segment by excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have
on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.
Net sales growth rates for our Canada operating unit on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
  
  
2017    
2016  
Percentage change in net sales as reported
  
 (2) %   
 (16) % 
Impact of foreign currency exchange
  
 Flat   
 (12) pts 
Percentage change in net sales on a constant-currency basis
  
 (2) %   
 (4)  % 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
42

Table of Contents
Constant-currency Segment Operating Profit Growth Rates
We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance of our segments by excluding the
effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.
Our segments’ operating profit growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2017
 
  
  
Percentage Change
in Operating Profit
as Reported
 
 
Impact of Foreign 
Currency Exchange 
 
Percentage Change in 
Operating Profit on Constant-
Currency Basis
 
North America Retail
  
 
(2)%  
 
Flat 
 
 
(2)%  
Europe & Australia
  
 
(18) 
 
 
(9)pts  
 
(9) 
Asia & Latin America
  
 
21 
 
 
1pt 
 
 
20 
 
  
Fiscal 2016
 
  
  
Percentage Change
in Operating Profit
as Reported
 
 
Impact of Foreign 
Currency Exchange 
 
Percentage Change in 
Operating Profit on Constant-
Currency Basis
 
North America Retail
  
 
(1)%  
 
(1)pt  
 
Flat 
Europe & Australia
  
 
12 
 
 
(16)pts  
 
28% 
Asia & Latin America
  
 
(42) 
 
 
(9)pts  
 
(33) 
 
43

Table of Contents
Effective Income Tax Rate Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability
We believe this measure provides useful information to investors because it is important for assessing the effective tax rate excluding certain items affecting year-
to-year comparability and presents the income tax effects of certain items affecting comparability.
Effective income tax rates excluding certain items affecting comparability are calculated as follows:
 
 
 
Fiscal Year Ended
 
 
 
May 28, 2017
 
 
May 29, 2016
 
 
May 31, 2015
 
 
May 25, 2014
 
 
May 26, 2013
 
In Millions
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
As reported
 $ 2,271.3  $ 655.2 
 $ 2,403.6  $ 755.2 
 $ 1,761.9  $ 586.8 
 $ 2,655.0  $ 883.3 
 $ 2,534.9  $ 741.2 
Mark-to-market effects (b)
  
(13.9)   
(5.1)   
(62.8)   
(23.2)   
89.7   
33.2 
  
(48.5)   
(18.0)   
(4.4)   
(1.6) 
Divestitures loss (gain) (c)
  
13.5   
4.3 
  
(148.2)   
(82.2)   
—   
— 
  
(65.5)   
(29.5)   
—   
— 
Tax items (d)
  
—   
— 
  
—   
— 
  
—   
(78.6)   
—   
— 
  
—   
85.4 
Acquisition integration costs (e)   
—   
— 
  
—   
— 
  
16.0   
5.6 
  
—   
— 
  
12.3   
3.5 
Venezuela currency devaluation
(b)
  
—   
— 
  
—   
— 
  
8.0   
— 
  
62.2   
4.4 
  
25.2   
4.4 
Restructuring costs (f)
  
224.1   
70.2 
  
229.8   
69.0 
  
343.5   
125.8 
  
3.6   
— 
  
18.6   
2.7 
Project-related costs (f)
  
43.9   
15.7 
  
57.5   
20.7 
  
13.2   
4.9 
  
—   
— 
  
—   
— 
Intangible asset impairment (g)   
—   
— 
  
—   
— 
  
260.0   
83.1 
  
—   
— 
  
—   
— 
As adjusted
 $ 2,538.9  $ 740.3 
 $ 2,479.9  $ 739.5 
 $ 2,492.3  $ 760.8 
 $ 2,606.8  $ 840.2 
 $ 2,586.6  $ 835.6 
 
Effective tax rate:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As reported
 
  
28.8%  
  
31.4%  
  
33.3%  
  
33.3%  
  
29.2% 
As adjusted
   
   
29.2%    
   
29.8%    
   
30.5%    
   
32.2%    
   
32.3% 
Sum of adjustments to income taxes    
  $
85.1 
   
  $
(15.7)    
  $ 174.0 
   
  $
(43.1)    
  $
94.4 
Average number of common shares -
diluted EPS
   
   
598.0 
   
   
611.9 
   
   
618.8 
   
   
645.7 
   
   
665.6 
Impact of income tax adjustments on
diluted EPS excluding certain
items affecting comparability
 
 $
(0.14)  
 $
0.03 
 
 $
(0.28)  
 $
0.07 
 
 $
(0.14) 
 
(a)
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures.
(b)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(d)
The fiscal 2015 tax item is related to the one-time repatriation of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015. The fiscal 2013 tax items consist of a reduction to
income taxes related to the restructuring of our GMC subsidiary and an increase to income taxes related to the liquidation of a corporate investment.
Additionally, fiscal 2013 includes changes in deferred taxes associated with the Medicare Part D subsidies related to the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010.
(e)
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015 and Yoki in fiscal 2013.
(f)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.

(g)
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
 
44

Table of Contents
Adjusted Operating Profit as a Percent of Net Sales Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability
We believe this measure provides useful information to investors because it is important for assessing our operating profit margin on a comparable basis. Adjusted
operating profit excludes certain items affecting comparability.
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Percent of Net Sales
  
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
Operating profit as reported
  $2,566.4   16.4%  $2,707.4   16.3%  $2,077.3    11.8%  $2,957.4   16.5%  $2,851.8   16.0% 
Mark-to-market effects (a)
   
(13.9)   (0.1)%   
(62.8)   (0.4)%   
89.7    0.5%   
(48.5)   (0.3)%   
(4.4)   —  % 
Divestitures loss (gain), (b)
   
13.5   0.1%   (148.2)   (0.9)%   
—      —  %   
(65.5)   (0.4)%   
—     —  % 
Acquisition integration costs (c)
   
—     —  %   
—     —  %   
16.0    0.1%   
—     —  %   
12.3   0.1% 
Venezuela currency devaluation (a)
   
—     —  %   
—     —  %   
8.0    —  %   
62.2   0.4%   
25.2   0.1% 
Restructuring costs (d)
   
224.1   1.4%   
229.8   1.4%   
343.5    1.9%   
3.6   —  %   
18.6   0.1% 
Project-related costs (d)
   
43.9   0.3%   
57.5   0.4%   
13.2    0.1%   
—     —  %   
—     —  % 
Intangible asset impairment (e)
   
—     —  %   
—     —  %   
260.0    1.5%   
—     —  %   
—     —  % 
Adjusted operating profit
  $2,834.0   18.1%  $2,783.7   16.8%  $2,807.7    15.9%  $2,909.2   16.2%  $2,903.5   16.3% 
 
(a)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015 and Yoki in fiscal 2013.
(d)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(e)
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Forward-Looking Financial Measures
Our fiscal 2018 outlook for organic net sales growth, constant-currency total segment operating profit and adjusted diluted EPS, and adjusted operating profit
margin are non-GAAP financial measures that exclude, or have otherwise been adjusted for, items impacting comparability, including the effect of foreign currency
exchange rate fluctuations, restructuring charges and project-related costs, and commodity mark-to-market effects. Our fiscal 2018 outlook for organic net sales
growth also excludes the effect of acquisitions and divestitures. We are not able to reconcile these forward-looking non-GAAP financial measures to their most
directly comparable forward-looking GAAP financial measures without unreasonable efforts because we are unable to predict with a reasonable degree of certainty
the actual impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices or the timing of acquisitions, divestitures and restructuring actions
throughout fiscal 2018. The unavailable information could have a significant impact on our fiscal 2018 GAAP financial results.
For fiscal 2018, we currently expect: foreign currency exchange rates (based on blend of forward and forecasted rates and hedge positions), acquisitions, and
divestitures to have an immaterial impact on net sales growth; foreign currency exchange rates to have an immaterial impact on total segment operating profit and
adjusted diluted EPS growth; and total restructuring charges and project-related costs related to actions previously announced to total approximately $45 million.
 
45

Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT RELEVANT TO FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF “SAFE HARBOR” PROVISIONS
OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995
This report contains or incorporates by reference forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that are
based on our current expectations and assumptions. We also may make written or oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in our filings
with the SEC and in our reports to shareholders.
The words or phrases “will likely result,” “are expected to,” “will continue,” “is anticipated,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” or similar expressions identify
“forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements are subject to certain risks and
uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results and those currently anticipated or projected. We wish to caution you not to
place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements.
In connection with the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we are identifying important factors that could affect our
financial performance and could cause our actual results in future periods to differ materially from any current opinions or statements.
Our future results could be affected by a variety of factors, such as: competitive dynamics in the consumer foods industry and the markets for our products,
including new product introductions, advertising activities, pricing actions, and promotional activities of our competitors; economic conditions, including changes
in inflation rates, interest rates, tax rates, or the availability of capital; product development and innovation; consumer acceptance of new products and product
improvements; consumer reaction to pricing actions and changes in promotion levels; acquisitions or dispositions of businesses or assets; changes in capital
structure; changes in the legal and regulatory environment, including labeling and advertising regulations and litigation; impairments in the carrying value of
goodwill, other intangible assets, or other long-lived assets, or changes in the useful lives of other intangible assets; changes in accounting standards and the impact
of significant accounting estimates; product quality and safety issues, including recalls and product liability; changes in consumer demand for our products;
effectiveness of advertising, marketing, and promotional programs; changes in consumer behavior, trends, and preferences, including weight loss trends; consumer
perception of health-related issues, including obesity; consolidation in the retail environment; changes in purchasing and inventory levels of significant customers;
fluctuations in the cost and availability of supply chain resources, including raw materials, packaging, and energy; disruptions or inefficiencies in the supply chain;
effectiveness of restructuring and cost savings initiatives; volatility in the market value of derivatives used to manage price risk for certain commodities; benefit
plan expenses due to changes in plan asset values and discount rates used to determine plan liabilities; failure or breach of our information technology systems;
foreign economic conditions, including currency rate fluctuations; and political unrest in foreign markets and economic uncertainty due to terrorism or war.
You should also consider the risk factors that we identify in Item 1A of this report, which could also affect our future results.
We undertake no obligation to publicly revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of those statements or to reflect the
occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
Item 7A Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are exposed to market risk stemming from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates and commodity and equity prices. Changes in these factors could
cause fluctuations in our earnings and cash flows. In the normal course of business, we actively manage our exposure to these market risks by entering into various
hedging transactions, authorized under established policies that place clear controls on these activities. The counterparties in these transactions are generally highly
rated institutions. We establish credit limits for each counterparty. Our hedging transactions include but are not limited to a variety of derivative financial
instruments. For information on interest rate, foreign exchange, commodity price, and equity instrument risk, please see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 of this report.
VALUE AT RISK
The estimates in the table below are intended to measure the maximum potential fair value we could lose in one day from adverse changes in market interest rates,
foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, and equity prices under normal market conditions. A Monte Carlo value-at-risk (VAR) methodology was used to
quantify the market risk for our exposures. The models assumed normal market conditions and used a 95 percent confidence level.
The VAR calculation used historical interest and foreign exchange rates, and commodity and equity prices from the past year to estimate the potential volatility and
correlation of these rates in the future. The market data were drawn from the RiskMetrics™ data set. The calculations are not intended to represent actual losses in
fair value that we expect to incur. Further, since the hedging instrument (the derivative) inversely correlates with the underlying exposure, we would expect that
any loss or gain in the fair value of our derivatives would be generally offset by an increase or decrease in the fair value of the underlying exposure. The positions
included in the calculations were: debt; investments; interest rate swaps; foreign exchange forwards; commodity swaps, futures and options; and equity
instruments. The calculations do not include the underlying foreign exchange and commodities or equity-related positions that are offset by these market-risk-
sensitive instruments.
 
46

Table of Contents
The table below presents the estimated maximum potential VAR arising from a one-day loss in fair value for our interest rate, foreign currency, commodity, and
equity market-risk-sensitive instruments outstanding as of May 28, 2017, and May 29, 2016, and the average fair value impact during the year ended May 28, 2017.
 
 
  
Fair Value Impact
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
Average
during
fiscal 2017   
May 29,
2016  
Interest rate instruments
  
$
25.1   
$
26.5   
$
33.3 
Foreign currency instruments
  
 
24.6   
 
22.9   
 
27.6 
Commodity instruments
  
 
3.2   
 
2.5   
 
3.3 
Equity instruments
  
 
1.3   
 
1.4   
 
1.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
47

Table of Contents
ITEM 8
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
REPORT OF MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
The management of General Mills, Inc. is responsible for the fairness and accuracy of the consolidated financial statements. The statements have been prepared in
accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the United States, using management’s best estimates and judgments where appropriate. The
financial information throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K is consistent with our consolidated financial statements.
Management has established a system of internal controls that provides reasonable assurance that assets are adequately safeguarded and transactions are recorded
accurately in all material respects, in accordance with management’s authorization. We maintain a strong audit program that independently evaluates the adequacy
and effectiveness of internal controls. Our internal controls provide for appropriate separation of duties and responsibilities, and there are documented policies
regarding use of our assets and proper financial reporting. These formally stated and regularly communicated policies demand highly ethical conduct from all
employees.
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors meets regularly with management, internal auditors, and our independent registered public accounting firm to
review internal control, auditing, and financial reporting matters. The independent registered public accounting firm, internal auditors, and employees have full and
free access to the Audit Committee at any time.
The Audit Committee reviewed and approved the Company’s annual financial statements. The Audit Committee recommended, and the Board of Directors
approved, that the consolidated financial statements be included in the Annual Report. The Audit Committee also appointed KPMG LLP to serve as the Company’s
independent registered public accounting firm for fiscal 2018.
 
/s/ J. L. Harmening
 
 /s/ D. L. Mulligan
J. L. Harmening
 
 D. L. Mulligan
Chief Executive Officer
 
 Executive Vice President
 
 and Chief Financial Officer
June 29, 2017
 
48

Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
General Mills, Inc.:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of General Mills, Inc. and subsidiaries as of May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016, and the related
consolidated statements of earnings, comprehensive income, total equity and redeemable interest, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period
ended May 28, 2017. In connection with our audits of the consolidated financial statements, we have audited the accompanying financial statement schedule. We
also have audited General Mills, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of May 28, 2017, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated
Framework (2013)  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). General Mills, Inc.’s management is responsible
for these consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Item 9a Management’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule and an opinion on the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding
of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions
and dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of General Mills, Inc. and
subsidiaries as of May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended
May 28, 2017, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also in our opinion, the accompanying financial statement schedule, when
considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. Also
in our opinion, General Mills, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of May 28, 2017, based on criteria
established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013)  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Minneapolis, Minnesota
June 29, 2017
 
49

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Earnings
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions, Except per Share Data)
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2017
   
2016
  
2015
 
Net sales
  
$15,619.8   
$16,563.1  
$17,630.3 
Cost of sales
  
 10,056.0   
 10,733.6  
 11,681.1 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
  
 
2,801.3   
 
3,118.9  
 
3,328.0 
Divestitures loss (gain)
  
 
13.5   
 
(148.2)  
 
— 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 
182.6   
 
151.4  
 
543.9 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating profit
  
 
2,566.4   
 
2,707.4  
 
2,077.3 
Interest, net
  
 
295.1   
 
303.8  
 
315.4 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
 
2,271.3   
 
2,403.6  
 
1,761.9 
Income taxes
  
 
655.2   
 
755.2  
 
586.8 
After-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
 
85.0   
 
88.4  
 
84.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
 
1,701.1   
 
1,736.8  
 
1,259.4 
Net earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
 
43.6   
 
39.4  
 
38.1 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
  
$ 1,657.5   
$ 1,697.4  
$ 1,221.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings per share - basic
  
$
2.82   
$
2.83  
$
2.02 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings per share - diluted
  
$
2.77   
$
2.77  
$
1.97 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dividends per share
  
$
1.92   
$
1.78  
$
1.67 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
50

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions)
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2017   
2016   
2015
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  $1,701.1  $1,736.8  $ 1,259.4 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
  
 
 
Foreign currency translation
   
6.3   (108.7)   
(957.9) 
Net actuarial income (loss)
   
197.9   (325.9)   
(358.4) 
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
Securities
   
0.8   
0.1   
0.8 
Hedge derivatives
   
53.3   
16.0   
4.1 
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
Hedge derivatives
   
(25.7)   
(9.5)   
4.9 
Amortization of losses and prior service costs
   
122.5   
128.6   
105.1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
   
355.1   (299.4)   (1,201.4) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total comprehensive income
   2,056.2   1,437.4   
58.0 
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
   
31.0   
41.5   
(192.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comprehensive income attributable to General Mills
  $2,025.2  $1,395.9  $
250.9 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
51

Table of Contents
Consolidated Balance Sheets
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions, Except Par Value)
 
 
  
May 28, 
2017
  
May 29, 
2016
 
ASSETS
  
 
Current assets:
  
 
Cash and cash equivalents
  
$
766.1  
$
763.7 
Receivables
  
 
1,430.1  
 
1,360.8 
Inventories
  
 
1,483.6  
 
1,413.7 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
 
381.6  
 
399.0 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total current assets
  
 
4,061.4  
 
3,937.2 
Land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
3,687.7  
 
3,743.6 
Goodwill
  
 
8,747.2  
 
8,741.2 
Other intangible assets
  
 
4,530.4  
 
4,538.6 
Other assets
  
 
785.9  
 
751.7 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total assets
  
$21,812.6  
$21,712.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
  
 
Current liabilities:
  
 
Accounts payable
  
$ 2,119.8  
$ 2,046.5 
Current portion of long-term debt
  
 
604.7  
 
1,103.4 
Notes payable
  
 
1,234.1  
 
269.8 
Other current liabilities
  
 
1,372.2  
 
1,595.0 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total current liabilities
  
 
5,330.8  
 
5,014.7 
Long-term debt
  
 
7,642.9  
 
7,057.7 
Deferred income taxes
  
 
1,719.4  
 
1,399.6 
Other liabilities
  
 
1,523.1  
 
2,087.6 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total liabilities
  
 16,216.2  
 15,559.6 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Redeemable interest
  
 
910.9  
 
845.6 
Stockholders’ equity:
  
 
Common stock, 754.6 shares issued, $0.10 par value
  
 
75.5  
 
75.5 
Additional paid-in capital
  
 
1,120.9  
 
1,177.0 
Retained earnings
  
 13,138.9  
 12,616.5 
Common stock in treasury, at cost, shares of 177.7 and 157.8
  
 (7,762.9)  
 (6,326.6) 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
  
 (2,244.5)  
 (2,612.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total stockholders’ equity
  
 
4,327.9  
 
4,930.2 
Noncontrolling interests
  
 
357.6  
 
376.9 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total equity
  
 
4,685.5  
 
5,307.1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total liabilities and equity
  
$21,812.6  
$21,712.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
52

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Total Equity, and Redeemable Interest
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions, Except per Share Data)
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
$.10 Par Value Common Stock
(One Billion Shares Authorized)
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
Issued
  
Treasury
   
   
   
   
   
 
  
 Shares  
Par
Amount  
Additional
Paid-In
Capital   Shares  Amount   
Retained
Earnings  
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Loss
  
Non-
controlling
Interests   
Total
Equity   
Redeemable
Interest
 
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  754.6  $
75.5  $
1,231.8   (142.3)  $(5,219.4)  $11,787.2  $
(1,340.3)  $
470.6  $ 7,005.4  $
984.1 
Total comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,221.3   
(970.4)   
(70.0)   
180.9   
(122.9) 
Cash dividends declared ($1.67 per share)
 
 
 
 
 
  (1,017.7)  
 
  (1,017.7)  
Shares purchased
 
 
 
  (22.3)   (1,161.9)  
 
 
  (1,161.9)  
Stock compensation plans (includes income tax benefits
of $74.6)
 
 
  
(38.1)   
8.7   
325.7  
 
 
  
287.6  
Unearned compensation related to stock unit awards
 
 
  
(80.8)  
 
 
 
 
  
(80.8)  
Earned compensation
 
 
  
111.1  
 
 
 
 
  
111.1  
Decrease in redemption value of redeemable interest
 
 
  
83.2  
 
 
 
 
  
83.2   
(83.2) 
Addition of noncontrolling interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20.7   
20.7  
Acquisition of interest in subsidiary
 
 
  
(10.5)  
 
 
 
  
0.6   
(9.9)  
Distributions to redeemable and noncontrolling interest
holders
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
(25.9)   
(25.9)   
0.9 
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  754.6   
75.5   
1,296.7   (155.9)   (6,055.6)   11,990.8   
(2,310.7)   
396.0   5,392.7   
778.9 
Total comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,697.4   
(301.5)   
11.2   1,407.1   
30.3 
Cash dividends declared ($1.78 per share)
 
 
 
 
 
  (1,071.7)  
 
  (1,071.7)  
Shares purchased
 
 
 
  (10.7)   
(606.7)  
 
 
  
(606.7)  
Stock compensation plans (includes income tax benefits
of $94.1)
 
 
  
(46.3)   
8.8   
335.7  
 
 
  
289.4  
Unearned compensation related to stock unit awards
 
 
  
(63.3)  
 
 
 
 
  
(63.3)  
Earned compensation
 
 
  
84.8  
 
 
 
 
  
84.8  
Increase in redemption value of redeemable interest
 
 
  
(91.5)  
 
 
 
 
  
(91.5)   
91.5 
Acquisition of interest in subsidiary
 
 
  
(3.4)  
 
 
 
  
(1.1)   
(4.5)  
Distributions to redeemable and noncontrolling interest
holders
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
(29.2)   
(29.2)   
(55.1) 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  754.6   
75.5   
1,177.0   (157.8)   (6,326.6)   12,616.5   
(2,612.2)   
376.9   5,307.1   
845.6 
Total comprehensive income
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,657.5   
367.7   
13.8   2,039.0   
17.2 
Cash dividends declared (1.92 per share)
 
 
 
 
 
  (1,135.1)  
 
  (1,135.1)  
Shares purchased
 
 
 
  (25.4)   (1,651.5)  
 
 
  (1,651.5)  
Stock compensation plans (includes income tax benefits
of $64.1)
 
 
  
3.6   
5.5   
215.2  
 
 
  
218.8  
Unearned compensation related to stock unit awards
 
 
  
(78.5)  
 
 
 
 
  
(78.5)  
Earned compensation
 
 
  
94.9  
 
 
 
 
  
94.9  
Increase in redemption value of redeemable interest
 
 
  
(75.9)  
 
 
 
 
  
(75.9)   
75.9 
Acquisition of interest in subsidiary
 
 
  
(0.2)  
 
 
 
  
0.1   
(0.1)  
Distributions to redeemable and noncontrolling interest
holders
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
(33.2)   
(33.2)   
(27.8) 
Balance as of May 28, 2017
  754.6  $
75.5  $
1,120.9   (177.7)  $(7,762.9)  $13,138.9  $
(2,244.5)  $
357.6  $ 4,685.5  $
910.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
53

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions)
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
Cash Flows - Operating Activities
  
 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
$ 1,701.1  
$ 1,736.8  
$ 1,259.4 
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
  
 
 
Depreciation and amortization
  
 
603.6  
 
608.1  
 
588.3 
After-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
 
(85.0)  
 
(88.4)  
 
(84.3) 
Distributions of earnings from joint ventures
  
 
75.6  
 
75.1  
 
72.6 
Stock-based compensation
  
 
95.7  
 
89.8  
 
106.4 
Deferred income taxes
  
 
183.9  
 
120.6  
 
25.3 
Tax benefit on exercised options
  
 
(64.1)  
 
(94.1)  
 
(74.6) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions
  
 
(45.4)  
 
(47.8)  
 
(49.5) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan costs
  
 
35.7  
 
118.1  
 
91.3 
Divestitures loss (gain)
  
 
13.5  
 
(148.2)  
 
— 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 
117.0  
 
107.2  
 
531.1 
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures
  
 
(232.0)  
 
258.2  
 
214.7 
Other, net
  
 
(86.3)  
 
(105.6)  
 
(137.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  
 2,313.3  
 2,629.8  
 2,542.8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows - Investing Activities
  
 
 
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
(684.4)  
 
(729.3)  
 
(712.4) 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
  
 
—  
 
(84.0)  
 
(822.3) 
Investments in affiliates, net
  
 
3.3  
 
63.9  
 
(102.4) 
Proceeds from disposal of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
4.2  
 
4.4  
 
11.0 
Proceeds from divestitures
  
 
17.5  
 
828.5  
 
— 
Exchangeable note
  
 
13.0  
 
21.1  
 
27.9 
Other, net
  
 
(0.5)  
 
(11.2)  
 
(4.0) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided (used) by investing activities
  
 
(646.9)  
 
93.4  
 (1,602.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows - Financing Activities
  
 
 
Change in notes payable
  
 
962.4  
 
(323.8)  
 
(509.8) 
Issuance of long-term debt
  
 1,072.1  
 
542.5  
 2,253.2 
Payment of long-term debt
  
 (1,000.0)  
 (1,000.4)  
 (1,145.8) 
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options
  
 
112.6  
 
171.9  
 
163.7 
Tax benefit on exercised options
  
 
64.1  
 
94.1  
 
74.6 
Purchases of common stock for treasury
  
 (1,651.5)  
 
(606.7)  
 (1,161.9) 
Dividends paid
  
 (1,135.1)  
 (1,071.7)  
 (1,017.7) 
Distributions to noncontrolling and redeemable interest holders
  
 
(61.0)  
 
(84.3)  
 
(25.0) 
Other, net
  
 
(9.1)  
 
(7.2)  
 
(16.1) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash used by financing activities
  
 (1,645.5)  
 (2,285.6)  
 (1,384.8) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
  
 
(18.5)  
 
(8.1)  
 
(88.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
  
 
2.4  
 
429.5  
 
(533.1) 
Cash and cash equivalents - beginning of year
  
 
763.7  
 
334.2  
 
867.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents - end of year
  
$
766.1  
$
763.7  
$
334.2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flow from Changes in Current Assets and Liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures:
  
 
 
Receivables
  
$
(69.2)  
$
(6.9)  
$
6.8 
Inventories
  
 
(61.5)  
 
(146.1)  
 
(24.2) 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
 
16.6  
 
(0.1)  
 
(50.5) 
Accounts payable
  
 
99.5  
 
318.7  
 
145.8 
Other current liabilities
  
 
(217.4)  
 
92.6  
 
136.8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changes in current assets and liabilities
  
$
(232.0)  
$
258.2  
$
214.7 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 

54

Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTE 1. BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND RECLASSIFICATIONS
Basis of Presentation
Our Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of General Mills, Inc. and all subsidiaries in which we have a controlling financial interest.
Intercompany transactions and accounts, including any noncontrolling and redeemable interests’ share of those transactions, are eliminated in consolidation.
Our fiscal year ends on the last Sunday in May. Fiscal years 2017 and 2016 consisted of 52 weeks, while fiscal year 2015 consisted of 53 weeks.
Change in Reporting Period
As part of a long-term plan to conform the fiscal year ends of all our operations, in fiscal 2017 we changed the reporting period of General Mills Brasil Alimentos
Ltda (Yoki) within our Asia & Latin America segment from an April fiscal year-end to a May fiscal year-end to match our fiscal calendar. Accordingly, in fiscal
2017, our results included 13 months of results from the affected operations. The impact of these changes was not material to our consolidated results of operations.
Our General Mills India business remains on an April fiscal year end.
In fiscal 2016 we changed the reporting period of Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC within our Europe & Australia segment and Annie’s, Inc. (Annie’s)
within our North America Retail segment from an April fiscal year-end to a May fiscal year-end to match our fiscal calendar. Accordingly, in fiscal 2016, our
results included 13 months of results from the affected operations. The impact of these changes was not material to our consolidated results of operations.
Certain reclassifications to our previously reported financial information have been made to conform to the current period presentation.
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Inventories
All inventories in the United States other than grain are valued at the lower of cost, using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method, or market. Grain inventories are
valued at net realizable value, and all related cash contracts and derivatives are valued at fair value, with all net changes in value recorded in earnings currently.
Inventories outside of the United States are generally valued at the lower of cost, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, or net realizable value.
Shipping costs associated with the distribution of finished product to our customers are recorded as cost of sales, and are recognized when the related finished
product is shipped to and accepted by the customer.
Land, Buildings, Equipment, and Depreciation
Land is recorded at historical cost. Buildings and equipment, including capitalized interest and internal engineering costs, are recorded at cost and depreciated over
estimated useful lives, primarily using the straight-line method. Ordinary maintenance and repairs are charged to cost of sales. Buildings are usually depreciated
over 40 years, and equipment, furniture, and software are usually depreciated over 3 to 10 years. Fully depreciated assets are retained in buildings and equipment
until disposal. When an item is sold or retired, the accounts are relieved of its cost and related accumulated depreciation and the resulting gains and losses, if any,
are recognized in earnings. As of May 28, 2017, assets held for sale were insignificant.
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) may not
be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows from the operation and disposition of the asset group are
less than the carrying amount of the asset group. Asset groups have identifiable cash flows and are largely independent of other asset groups. Measurement of an
impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset group over its fair value. Fair value is measured using a discounted cash flow
model or independent appraisals, as appropriate.
 
55

Table of Contents
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not subject to amortization and is tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have
occurred. In fiscal 2016, we changed the date of our annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessment from the first day of the third
quarter to the first day of the second quarter to more closely align with the timing of our annual long-range planning process. Impairment testing is performed for
each of our reporting units. We compare the carrying value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, to the fair value of the unit. Carrying value is based on the assets
and liabilities associated with the operations of that reporting unit, which often requires allocation of shared or corporate items among reporting units. If the
carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we revalue all assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, excluding goodwill, to determine if the fair value
of the net assets is greater than the net assets including goodwill. If the fair value of the net assets is less than the carrying amount of net assets including goodwill,
impairment has occurred. Our estimates of fair value are determined based on a discounted cash flow model. Growth rates for sales and profits are determined
using inputs from our long-range planning process. We also make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other
factors.
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, mainly brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life
requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of
the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution
channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite
lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, over their useful lives, generally ranging from 4 to 30 years.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets, mainly intangible assets primarily associated with the Pillsbury , Totino’s , Progresso , Yoplait , Old El Paso , Yoki , Häagen-
Dazs , and Annie’s brands, are also tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be
recoverable. Our estimate of the fair value of the brands is based on a discounted cash flow model using inputs which included projected revenues from our long-
range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a discount rate.
Our finite-lived intangible assets, primarily acquired franchise agreements and customer relationships, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future
cash flows from the operation and disposition of the asset are less than the carrying amount of the asset. Assets generally have identifiable cash flows and are
largely independent of other assets. Measurement of an impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its fair value. Fair
value is measured using a discounted cash flow model or other similar valuation model, as appropriate.
Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures
Our investments in companies over which we have the ability to exercise significant influence are stated at cost plus our share of undistributed earnings or losses.
We receive royalty income from certain joint ventures, incur various expenses (primarily research and development), and record the tax impact of certain joint
venture operations that are structured as partnerships. In addition, we make advances to our joint ventures in the form of loans or capital investments. We also sell
certain raw materials, semi-finished goods, and finished goods to the joint ventures, generally at market prices.
In addition, we assess our investments in our joint ventures if we have reason to believe an impairment may have occurred including, but not limited to, as a result
of ongoing operating losses, projected decreases in earnings, increases in the weighted average cost of capital, or significant business disruptions. The significant
assumptions used to estimate fair value include revenue growth and profitability, royalty rates, capital spending, depreciation and taxes, foreign currency exchange
rates, and a discount rate. By their nature, these projections and assumptions are uncertain. If we were to determine the current fair value of our investment was less
than the carrying value of the investment, then we would assess if the shortfall was of a temporary or permanent nature and write down the investment to its fair
value if we concluded the impairment is other than temporary.

Redeemable Interest
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS, a consolidated entity. Sodiaal International (Sodiaal) holds the remaining 49 percent interest in Yoplait
SAS. Sodiaal has the ability to put all or a portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per year, up to three times before December 2024. This put
option requires us to classify Sodiaal’s interest as a redeemable interest outside of equity on our Consolidated Balance Sheets for as long as the put is exercisable by
Sodiaal. When the put is no longer exercisable, the redeemable interest will be reclassified to noncontrolling interests on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We
adjust the value of the redeemable interest through additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets quarterly to the redeemable interest’s redemption
value, which approximates its fair value. During the second and third quarters of fiscal 2017, we adjusted the redeemable interest’s redemption value based on a
discounted cash flow model. The significant assumptions used to estimate the redemption value include projected revenue growth and profitability from our long-
range plan, capital spending, depreciation, taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate.
 
56

Table of Contents
Revenue Recognition
We recognize sales revenue when the shipment is accepted by our customer. Sales include shipping and handling charges billed to the customer and are reported
net of consumer coupon redemption, trade promotion and other costs, including estimated allowances for returns, unsalable product, and prompt pay discounts.
Sales, use, value-added, and other excise taxes are not recognized in revenue. Coupons are recorded when distributed, based on estimated redemption rates. Trade
promotions are recorded based on estimated participation and performance levels for offered programs at the time of sale. We generally do not allow a right of
return. However, on a limited case-by-case basis with prior approval, we may allow customers to return product. In limited circumstances, product returned in
saleable condition is resold to other customers or outlets. Receivables from customers generally do not bear interest. Terms and collection patterns vary around the
world and by channel. The allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of probable non-payments and credit losses in our existing receivables, as
determined based on a review of past due balances and other specific account data. Account balances are written off against the allowance when we deem the
amount is uncollectible.
Environmental
Environmental costs relating to existing conditions caused by past operations that do not contribute to current or future revenues are expensed. Liabilities for
anticipated remediation costs are recorded on an undiscounted basis when they are probable and reasonably estimable, generally no later than the completion of
feasibility studies or our commitment to a plan of action.
Advertising Production Costs
We expense the production costs of advertising the first time that the advertising takes place.
Research and Development
All expenditures for research and development (R&D) are charged against earnings in the period incurred. R&D includes expenditures for new product and
manufacturing process innovation, and the annual expenditures are comprised primarily of internal salaries, wages, consulting, and supplies attributable to R&D
activities. Other costs include depreciation and maintenance of research facilities, including assets at facilities that are engaged in pilot plant activities.
Foreign Currency Translation
For all significant foreign operations, the functional currency is the local currency. Assets and liabilities of these operations are translated at the period-end
exchange rates. Income statement accounts are translated using the average exchange rates prevailing during the period. Translation adjustments are reflected
within accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCI) in stockholders’ equity. Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are included in net earnings for
the period, except for gains and losses on investments in subsidiaries for which settlement is not planned for the foreseeable future and foreign exchange gains and
losses on instruments designated as net investment hedges. These gains and losses are recorded in AOCI.
Derivative Instruments
All derivatives are recognized on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value based on quoted market prices or our estimate of their fair value, and are recorded
in either current or noncurrent assets or liabilities based on their maturity. Changes in the fair values of derivatives are recorded in net earnings or other
comprehensive income, based on whether the instrument is designated and effective as a hedge transaction and, if so, the type of hedge transaction. Gains or losses
on derivative instruments reported in AOCI are reclassified to earnings in the period the hedged item affects earnings. If the underlying hedged transaction ceases
to exist, any associated amounts reported in AOCI are reclassified to earnings at that time. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings in the current period.
Stock-based Compensation
We generally measure compensation expense for grants of restricted stock units using the value of a share of our stock on the date of grant. We estimate the value
of stock option grants using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Stock-based compensation is recognized straight line over the vesting period. Our stock-based
compensation expense is recorded in selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses and cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings and
allocated to each reportable segment in our segment results.
Certain equity-based compensation plans contain provisions that accelerate vesting of awards upon retirement, termination, or death of eligible employees and
directors. We consider a stock-based award to be vested when the employee’s retention of the award is no longer contingent on providing subsequent service.
Accordingly, the related compensation cost is generally recognized immediately for awards granted to retirement-eligible individuals or over the period from the
grant date to the date retirement eligibility is achieved, if less than the stated vesting period.
We report the benefits of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation cost as a financing cash flow, thereby reducing net operating cash flows and
increasing net financing cash flows.

Defined Benefit Pension, Other Postretirement Benefit, and Postemployment Benefit Plans
We sponsor several domestic and foreign defined benefit plans to provide pension, health care, and other welfare benefits to retired employees. Under certain
circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits, primarily severance, to former or inactive employees in
 
57

Table of Contents
the United States, Canada, and Mexico. We recognize an obligation for any of these benefits that vest or accumulate with service. Postemployment benefits that do
not vest or accumulate with service (such as severance based solely on annual pay rather than years of service) are charged to expense when incurred. Our
postemployment benefit plans are unfunded.
We recognize the underfunded or overfunded status of a defined benefit pension plan as an asset or liability and recognize changes in the funded status in the year
in which the changes occur through AOCI.
Use of Estimates
Preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates
and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the
reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates include our accounting for promotional expenditures, valuation of long-
lived assets, intangible assets, redeemable interest, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit and
postemployment benefit plans. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
Other New Accounting Standards
In the first quarter of fiscal 2017, we adopted new accounting requirements for the presentation of certain investments using the net asset value, providing a
practical expedient to exclude such investments from categorization within the fair value hierarchy and separate disclosure. We adopted the guidance
retrospectively and restated the fiscal 2016 fair value of plan asset tables in Note 13. The adoption of this guidance did not impact our results of operations or
financial position.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2017, we adopted new accounting requirements which permit reporting entities with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a
month-end to apply a practical expedient that permits the entity to measure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the
entity’s fiscal year-end and apply such practical expedient consistently to all plans. The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our results of
operations or financial position.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we adopted new accounting requirements for the presentation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, requiring noncurrent
classification for all deferred tax assets and liabilities on the statement of financial position. This presentation change has been implemented retroactively. The
adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our financial position.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we adopted new accounting requirements for the classification of debt issuance costs presented in the balance sheet as a direct
reduction from the carrying amount of the debt liability. This presentation change has been implemented retroactively. The adoption of this guidance did not have a
material impact on our financial position.
In the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we adopted new accounting requirements for share-based payment awards issued based upon specific performance targets. The
adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we adopted new accounting requirements on the financial statement presentation of unrecognized tax benefits when a net
operating loss, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists. The adoption of this guidance did not have an impact on our results of operations or financial
position.
NOTE 3. ACQUISITION AND DIVESTITURES
During the second quarter of fiscal 2017, we sold our Martel, Ohio manufacturing facility in our Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment and simultaneously
entered into a co-packing agreement with the purchaser. We received $17.5 million in cash, and recorded a pre-tax loss of $13.5 million.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in Venezuela. As a result of
this transaction, we recorded a pre-tax loss of $37.6 million. In addition, we sold our General Mills Argentina S.A. foodservice business in Argentina to a third
party and recorded a pre-tax loss of $14.8 million.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our North American Green Giant product lines for $822.7 million in cash, and we recorded a pre-tax gain of
$199.1 million. We received net cash proceeds of $788.0 million after transaction related costs. After the divestiture, we retained a brand intangible asset on our
Consolidated Balance Sheets of $30.1 million related to our continued use of the Green Giant brand in certain markets outside of North America.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we acquired Annie’s, a publicly traded food company headquartered in Berkeley, California, for an aggregate purchase
price of $821.2 million, which we funded by issuing debt. We consolidated Annie’s into our Consolidated Balance Sheets and recorded goodwill of $589.8 million,
an indefinite lived intangible asset for the Annie’s brand of $244.5 million, and a finite lived customer relationship asset of $23.9 million. The pro forma effects of
this acquisition were not material.
 
58

Table of Contents
NOTE 4. RESTRUCTURING, IMPAIRMENT, AND OTHER EXIT COSTS
We view our restructuring activities as actions that help us meet our long-term growth targets. Activities we undertake must meet internal rate of return and net
present value targets. Each restructuring action normally takes one to two years to complete. At completion (or as each major stage is completed in the case of
multi-year programs), the project begins to deliver cash savings and/or reduced depreciation. These activities result in various restructuring costs, including asset
write-offs, exit charges including severance, contract termination fees, and decommissioning and other costs. Accelerated depreciation associated with restructured
assets, as used in the context of our disclosures regarding restructuring activity, refers to the increase in depreciation expense caused by shortening the useful life or
updating the salvage value of depreciable fixed assets to coincide with the end of production under an approved restructuring plan. Any impairment of the asset is
recognized immediately in the period the plan is approved.
We are currently pursuing several multi-year restructuring initiatives designed to increase our efficiency and focus our business behind our key growth strategies.
Charges recorded in fiscal 2017 related to these initiatives were as follows:
 
 
 
Fiscal 2017
 
In Millions
 
Severance  
Asset 
Write-offs  
Pension
Related  
Accelerated 
Depreciation  
Other  
Total  
Global reorganization
 
$
66.3  
$
—  
$
—  
$
—  
$
5.8  
$
72.1 
Closure of Melbourne, Australia plant
 
 
11.4  
 
4.5  
 
—  
 
5.6  
 
0.4  
 
21.9 
Restructuring of certain international product lines
 
 
7.0  
 
37.0  
 
—  
 
(0.3)  
 
1.4  
 
45.1 
Closure of Vineland, New Jersey plant
 
 
12.3  
 
7.9  
 
1.5  
 
14.5  
 
5.2  
 
41.4 
Project Compass
 
 
(1.5)  
 
0.1  
 
—  
 
0.2  
 
0.8  
 
(0.4) 
Project Century
 
 
(1.0)  
 
13.0  
 
0.7  
 
18.5  
 12.8  
 
44.0 
Total
 
$
 94.5  
$
 62.5  
$
 2.2  
$
 38.5  
$ 26.4  
$ 224.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the third quarter of fiscal 2017, we approved restructuring actions designed to better align our organizational structure with our strategic initiatives. This action
will affect approximately 600 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $75 million of net expenses relating to these actions, all of which will be cash. We
recorded $72.1 million of restructuring charges relating to these actions in fiscal 2017. We expect these actions to be completed by the end of fiscal 2018.
In the second quarter of fiscal 2017, we notified the employees and their representatives of our decision to close our pasta manufacturing facility in Melbourne,
Australia in our Europe & Australia segment to improve our margin structure. This action will affect approximately 350 positions, and we expect to incur
approximately $34 million of net expenses relating to this action, of which approximately $3 million will be cash. We recorded $21.9 million of restructuring
charges relating to this action in fiscal 2017. We expect this action to be completed by the end of fiscal 2019.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2017, we announced a plan to restructure certain product lines in our Asia & Latin America segment. To eliminate excess capacity, we
closed our snacks manufacturing facility in Marília, Brazil and ceased production operations for meals and snacks at our facility in São Bernardo do Campo, Brazil.
We also ceased production of certain underperforming snack products at our facility in Nanjing, China. These and other actions will affect approximately 420
positions in our Brazilian operations and approximately 440 positions in our Greater China operations. We expect to incur approximately $42 million of net
expenses related to these actions, most of which will be non-cash. We recorded $45.1 million of restructuring charges relating to these actions in fiscal 2017. We
expect these actions to be completed by the end of fiscal 2019.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2017, we approved a plan to close our Vineland, New Jersey facility to eliminate excess soup capacity in our North America Retail
segment. This action will affect approximately 380 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $58 million of net expenses related to this action, of which
approximately $19 million will be cash. We recorded $41.4 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2017. We expect this action to be
completed by the end of fiscal 2019.
 
59

Table of Contents
Charges recorded in fiscal 2016 were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2016
 
In Millions
  
Severance  
Asset
Write-offs    
Pension
Related   
Accelerated 
Depreciation   
Other   
Total  
Project Compass
  
$
45.4  
$
—   
$
1.4   
$
—   
$
7.9   
$ 54.7 
Project Catalyst
  
 
(8.7)  
 
1.2   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
(7.5) 
Project Century
  
 
30.9  
 
30.7   
 
19.1   
 
76.5   
 25.4   
 182.6 
Total
  
$
67.6  
$
31.9   
$
20.5   
$
76.5   
$ 33.3   
$229.8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved Project Compass, a restructuring plan designed to enable our international operations to accelerate long-term growth
through increased organizational effectiveness and reduced administrative expense. In connection with this project, we eliminated 749 positions. We incurred $54.3
million of net expenses, all of which was cash. In fiscal 2017, we reduced the estimate of charges related to this action by $0.4 million. We recorded $54.7 million
of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016. This action was completed in fiscal 2017.
In fiscal 2015, we announced Project Century (Century) which initially involved a review of our North American manufacturing and distribution network to
streamline operations and identify potential capacity reductions. In fiscal 2016, we broadened the scope of Century to identify opportunities to streamline our
supply chain outside of North America.
As part of Century, in the second quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved a restructuring plan to close manufacturing facilities in our Europe & Australia segment
supply chain located in Berwick, United Kingdom and East Tamaki, New Zealand. These actions affected 287 positions and we incurred $31.8 million of net
expenses related to these actions, of which $12 million was cash. We recorded $1.8 million of restructuring charges relating to these actions in fiscal 2017 and
$30.0 million in fiscal 2016. These actions were completed in fiscal 2017.
As part of Century, in the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved a restructuring plan to close our West Chicago, Illinois cereal and dry dinner manufacturing
plant in our North America Retail segment supply chain. This action affected 484 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $104 million of net expenses
relating to this action, of which approximately $41 million will be cash. We recorded $23.2 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2017 and
$79.2 million in fiscal 2016. We expect this action to be completed by the end of fiscal 2018.
As part of Century, in the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved a restructuring plan to close our Joplin, Missouri snacks plant in our North America Retail
segment’s supply chain. This action affected 125 positions, and we incurred $6.6 million of net expenses relating to this action, of which less than $1 million was
cash. We recorded $6.3 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016. This action was completed in fiscal 2016.
Charges recorded in fiscal 2015 were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2015
 
In Millions
  
Severance  
Asset
Write-offs    
Pension
Related   
Accelerated 
Depreciation   
Other   
Total  
Project Catalyst
  
$
121.5  
$
12.3   
$
6.6   
$
—   
$
8.0   
$148.4 
Project Century
  
 
44.3  
 
42.3   
 
31.2   
 
53.1   
 10.9   
 181.8 
Combination of certain operational facilities
  
 
13.0  
 
0.7   
 
—   
 
—   
 
0.2   
 
13.9 
Charges associated with restructuring actions previously announced
  
 
(0.6)  
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
(0.6) 
Total
  
$
178.2  
$
55.3   
$
37.8   
$
53.1   
$ 19.1   
$343.5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved Project Catalyst, a restructuring plan to increase organizational effectiveness and reduce overhead expense. In
connection with this project, 759 positions were impacted, primarily in the United States. We incurred $140.9 million of net expenses relating to this action of
which approximately $94 million was cash. We recorded $148.4 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2015. This action was substantially
completed in fiscal 2015.
As part of Century, in the third quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to reduce our refrigerated dough capacity and exit our Midland, Ontario,
Canada and New Albany, Indiana facilities, which support our North America Retail and Convenience Stores & Foodservice segments’ supply chains. The Midland
action affected 94 positions and we expect to incur approximately $13 million of net expenses relating to this action, of which approximately $7 million will be
cash. We recorded $1.8 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2017, $2.7 million in fiscal 2016 and $6.5 million in fiscal 2015. The New
Albany action will affect 412 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $83 million of net expenses relating to this action of which approximately $40
million will be cash. We recorded $14.6 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2017, $17.1 million in fiscal 2016 and $51.3 million in
fiscal 2015. We anticipate these actions will be completed by the end of fiscal 2018.
 
60

Table of Contents
As part of Century, in the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to consolidate yogurt manufacturing capacity and exit our Methuen,
Massachusetts facility in our North America Retail and Convenience Stores & Foodservice segments’ supply chains. This action affected 170 positions. We
incurred $59.7 million of net expenses relating to this action of which $13 million was cash. We recorded $15.6 million of restructuring charges relating to this
action in fiscal 2016 and $43.6 million in fiscal 2015. This action was substantially completed in fiscal 2017.
As part of Century, in the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to eliminate excess cereal and dry mix capacity and exit our Lodi,
California facility in our North America Retail segment supply chain. This action affected 409 positions. We incurred $95.3 million of net expenses related to this
action of which $22 million was cash. We recorded $1.5 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2017, $30.6 million in fiscal 2016 and $63.2
million in fiscal 2015. This action was substantially completed in fiscal 2016.
In addition to the actions taken at certain facilities described above, we incurred restructuring charges related to Century of $1.1 million in fiscal 2017, none of
which was cash, $1.1 million in fiscal 2016 and $17.2 million in fiscal 2015.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a plan to combine certain Yoplait and General Mills operational facilities within our North America Retail and
Europe & Australia segments to increase efficiencies and reduce costs. This action affected approximately 240 positions. We expect to incur $15 million of net
expenses relating to this action of which $14 million will be cash. We recorded $13.9 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2015. We anticipate these actions
will be completed by the end of fiscal 2018.
We paid cash related to restructuring initiatives of $107.8 million in fiscal 2017, $122.6 million in fiscal 2016 and $63.6 million in fiscal 2015.
In addition to restructuring charges, we expect to incur approximately $130 million of additional project-related costs, which will be recorded in cost of sales, all of
which will be cash. We recorded project-related costs in cost of sales of $43.9 million in fiscal 2017, $57.5 million in fiscal 2016 and $13.2 million in fiscal 2015.
We paid cash for project-related costs of $46.9 million in fiscal 2017, $54.5 million in fiscal 2016 and $9.7 million in fiscal 2015.
Restructuring charges and project-related costs are classified in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Cost of sales
  
$ 41.5   
$ 78.4   
$ 59.6 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 182.6   
 151.4   
 283.9 
Total restructuring charges
  
 224.1   
 229.8   
 343.5 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Project-related costs classified in cost of sales
  
$ 43.9   
$ 57.5   
$ 13.2 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
61

Table of Contents
The roll forward of our restructuring and other exit cost reserves, included in other current liabilities, is as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Severance  
Contract
Termination  
Other
Exit Costs  
Total  
Reserve balance as of May 25, 2014
  
$
3.5  
$
—  
$
—  
$
3.5 
Fiscal 2015 charges, including foreign 
currency translation
  
 
176.4  
 
0.6  
 
8.1  
 185.1 
Utilized in fiscal 2015
  
 
(61.3)  
 
—  
 
(6.5)  
 
(67.8) 
Reserve balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 
118.6  
 
0.6  
 
1.6  
 120.8 
Fiscal 2016 charges, including foreign 
currency translation
  
 
64.3  
 
1.6  
 
4.3  
 
70.2 
Utilized in fiscal 2016
  
 
(109.3)  
 
(0.7)  
 
(4.4)  
 (114.4) 
Reserve balance as of May 29, 2016
  
 
73.6  
 
1.5  
 
1.5  
 
76.6 
Fiscal 2017 charges, including foreign 
currency translation
  
 
95.0  
 
0.9  
 
8.1  
 104.0 
Utilized in fiscal 2017
  
 
(86.8)  
 
(1.7)  
 
(7.1)  
 
(95.6) 
Reserve balance as of May 28, 2017
  
$
81.8  
$
0.7  
$
2.5  
$
85.0 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The charges recognized in the roll forward of our reserves for restructuring and other exit costs do not include items charged directly to expense (e.g., asset
impairment charges, the gain or loss on the sale of restructured assets, and the write-off of spare parts) and other periodic exit costs recognized as incurred, as those
items are not reflected in our restructuring and other exit cost reserves on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
NOTE 5. INVESTMENTS IN UNCONSOLIDATED JOINT VENTURES
We have a 50 percent equity interest in Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW), which manufactures and markets ready-to-eat cereal products in more than 130
countries outside the United States and Canada. CPW also markets cereal bars in several European countries and manufactures private label cereals for customers
in the United Kingdom. We have guaranteed a portion of CPW’s debt and its pension obligation in the United Kingdom.
We also have a 50 percent equity interest in Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ). This joint venture manufactures and markets Häagen-Dazs ice cream products and
frozen novelties.
Results from our CPW and HDJ joint ventures are reported for the 12 months ended March 31.
Joint venture related balance sheet activity follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Cumulative investments
  
$ 505.3   
$ 518.9 
Goodwill and other intangibles
  
 
472.0   
 
469.2 
Aggregate advances included in cumulative investments
  
 
284.7   
 
300.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Joint venture earnings and cash flow activity follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Sales to joint ventures
  
$ 7.0   
$ 10.5   
$ 11.6 
Net advances (repayments)
  
 (3.3)   
 (63.9)   
 102.4 
Dividends received
  
 75.6   
 75.1   
 
72.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
62

Table of Contents
Summary combined financial information for the joint ventures on a 100 percent basis follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Net sales:
  
  
  
CPW
  
$1,648.4   
$1,674.8   
$1,894.5 
HDJ
  
 
435.1   
 
369.4   
 
370.2 
Total net sales
  
 2,083.5   
 2,044.2   
 2,264.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Gross margin
  
 
865.9   
 
867.6   
 
925.4 
Earnings before income taxes
  
 
243.3   
 
234.8   
 
220.9 
Earnings after income taxes
  
 
190.3   
 
186.7   
 
170.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Current assets
  
$ 849.7   
$ 814.1 
Noncurrent assets
  
 
858.9   
 
959.9 
Current liabilities
  
 1,469.6   
 1,457.3 
Noncurrent liabilities
  
 
55.2   
 
81.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOTE 6. GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
The components of goodwill and other intangible assets are as follows:
In Millions
  
May 28, 
2017
   
May 29, 
2016
 
Goodwill
  
$ 8,747.2   
$ 8,741.2 
Other intangible assets:
  
  
Intangible assets not subject to amortization:
  
  
Brands and other indefinite-lived intangibles
  
 
4,161.1   
 
4,147.5 
Intangible assets subject to amortization:
  
  
Franchise agreements, customer relationships, and other finite-lived intangibles
  
 
524.8   
 
536.9 
Less accumulated amortization
  
 
(155.5)   
 
(145.8) 
Intangible assets subject to amortization
  
 
369.3   
 
391.1 
Other intangible assets
  
 
4,530.4   
 
4,538.6 
Total
  
$13,277.6   
$13,279.8 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Based on the carrying value of finite-lived intangible assets as of May 28, 2017, amortization expense for each of the next five fiscal years is estimated to be
approximately $28 million.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2017, we announced a new global organization structure to streamline our leadership, enhance global scale, and drive improved
operational agility to maximize our growth capabilities. As a result of this global reorganization, we reassessed our operating segments and our reporting units.
Under our new organization structure, our chief operating decision maker assesses performance and makes decisions about resources to be allocated to our
segments at the North America Retail, Convenience Stores & Foodservice, Europe & Australia, and Asia & Latin America operating segment level. See Note 16
for additional information on our operating segments. Our reporting units were unchanged with the exception of combining our former U.S. Meals and U.S. Baking
reporting units into a single reporting unit.
 
63

Table of Contents
The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for fiscal 2015, 2016, and 2017 are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
North 
America
Retail    
Convenience
Stores & 
Foodservice    
Europe &
Australia    
Asia & Latin
America
   
Joint 
Ventures   
Total  
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  
$ 5,975.1   
$
921.1   
$
866.1   
$
390.0   
$
498.2   
$8,650.5 
Acquisition
  
 
589.8   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
589.8 
Other activity, primarily foreign currency
translation
  
 
(18.7)   
 
—   
 
(147.0)   
 
(103.0)   
 
(96.7)   
 (365.4) 
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 6,546.2   
 
921.1   
 
719.1   
 
287.0   
 
401.5   
 8,874.9 
Acquisitions
  
 
54.1   
 
—   
 
—   
 
29.4   
 
—   
 
83.5 
Divestitures
  
 
(184.5)   
 
—   
 
—   
 
(1.9)   
 
—   
 (186.4) 
Other activity, primarily foreign currency
translation
  
 
(5.5)   
 
—   
 
(2.6)   
 
(27.4)   
 
4.7   
 
(30.8) 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  
 6,410.3   
 
921.1   
 
716.5   
 
287.1   
 
406.2   
 8,741.2 
Divestiture
  
 
—   
 
(2.3)   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
(2.3) 
Other activity, primarily foreign currency
translation
  
 
(3.8)   
 
—   
 
(15.7)   
 
25.3   
 
2.5   
 
8.3 
Balance as of May 28, 2017
  
$ 6,406.5   
$
918.8   
$
700.8   
$
312.4   
$
408.7   
$8,747.2 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The changes in the carrying amount of other intangible assets for fiscal 2015, 2016, and 2017 are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Total  
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  
$5,014.3 
Acquisition
  
 
268.4 
Impairment charge
  
 (260.0) 
Other activity, primarily amortization and foreign currency translation
  
 (345.7) 
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 4,677.0 
Acquisitions
  
 
30.1 
Divestiture
  
 (119.6) 
Other activity, primarily amortization and foreign currency translation
  
 
(48.9) 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  
 4,538.6 
Other activity, primarily amortization and foreign currency translation
  
 
(8.2) 
Balance as of May 28, 2017
  
$4,530.4 
  
 
 
 
Our annual goodwill intangible asset test was performed on the first day of the second quarter of fiscal 2017. As of the assessment date, we determined there was
no impairment of our goodwill intangible assets as their related fair values were substantially in excess of the carrying values, except for the Latin America
reporting unit. We did not consider the new organization structure to be a triggering event requiring a subsequent goodwill impairment test as our reporting units
remain unchanged, with the exception of combining the former U.S. Meals and U.S. Baking reporting units.
Our indefinite-lived intangible asset test was performed on the first day of the second quarter of fiscal 2017. As of the assessment date, there was no impairment of
any of our indefinite-lived intangible assets as their related fair values were substantially in excess of the carrying values, except for the Immaculate Baking brand
intangible asset.
 
64

Table of Contents
The excess fair value above the carrying value of the Latin America reporting unit and the Immaculate Baking brand intangible asset is as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Carrying
Value    
Excess Fair
Value 
Above 
Carrying 
Value
 
Latin America
  
$
523.0   
 
15% 
Immaculate Baking
  
$
12.0   
 
17% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
While having significant coverage as of our fiscal 2017 assessment date, the  Progresso, Green Giant, and Food Should Taste Good brand intangible assets and
U.S. Yogurt reporting unit had risk of decreasing coverage. We will continue to monitor these businesses for potential impairment.
In fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our North America Retail segment to other
businesses within the segment. Therefore, future sales and profitability projections in our long-range plan for this business declined. As a result of this triggering
event, we performed an interim impairment assessment of the Green Giant brand intangible asset as of May 31, 2015, and determined that the fair value of the
brand asset no longer exceeded the carrying value of the asset. Significant assumptions used in that assessment included our updated long-range cash flow
projections for the Green Giant business, an updated royalty rate, a weighted-average cost of capital, and a tax rate. We recorded a $260.0 million impairment
charge in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs in fiscal 2015 related to this asset.
NOTE 7. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES, AND FAIR VALUES
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The carrying values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, accounts payable, other current liabilities, and notes payable approximate fair value. Marketable
securities are carried at fair value. As of May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016, a comparison of cost and market values of our marketable debt and equity securities is as
follows:
 
 
  
Cost
   
Fair Value
   
Gross 
Gains
   
Gross 
Losses
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year    
Fiscal Year  
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2017    
2016    2017   2016   2017   2016 
Available for sale:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Debt securities
  $265.4   $165.7   $265.5   $165.8   $ 0.1   $ 0.1   $ —   $ — 
Equity securities
   
1.8    
1.8    
9.9    
8.4    8.1    6.6    —    — 
Total
  $267.2   $167.5   $275.4   $174.2   $ 8.2   $ 6.7   $ —   $ — 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
There were no realized gains or losses from sales of available-for-sale marketable securities. Gains and losses are determined by specific identification.
Classification of marketable securities as current or noncurrent is dependent upon our intended holding period and the security’s maturity date. The aggregate
unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities, net of tax effects, are classified in AOCI within stockholders’ equity.
Scheduled maturities of our marketable securities are as follows:
 
 
  
Available for Sale  
In Millions
  
Cost    
Fair
Value  
Under 1 year (current)
  
$ 265.4   
$ 265.5 
Equity securities
  
 
1.8   
 
9.9 
Total
  
$ 267.2   
$ 275.4 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As of May 28, 2017, we did not any have cash and cash equivalents pledged as collateral for derivative contracts. As of May 28, 2017, $19.6 million of certain
accounts receivable were pledged as collateral against a foreign uncommitted line of credit.
The fair value and carrying amounts of long-term debt, including the current portion, were $8,547.0 million and $8,247.6 million, respectively, as of May 28, 2017.
The fair value of long-term debt was estimated using market quotations and discounted cash flows based on our current incremental borrowing rates for similar
types of instruments. Long-term debt is a Level 2 liability in the fair value hierarchy.
 
65

Table of Contents
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
As a part of our ongoing operations, we are exposed to market risks such as changes in interest and foreign currency exchange rates and commodity and equity
prices. To manage these risks, we may enter into various derivative transactions (e.g., futures, options, and swaps) pursuant to our established policies.
COMMODITY PRICE RISK
Many commodities we use in the production and distribution of our products are exposed to market price risks. We utilize derivatives to manage price risk for our
principal ingredients and energy costs, including grains (oats, wheat, and corn), oils (principally soybean), dairy products, natural gas, and diesel fuel. Our primary
objective when entering into these derivative contracts is to achieve certainty with regard to the future price of commodities purchased for use in our supply chain.
We manage our exposures through a combination of purchase orders, long-term contracts with suppliers, exchange-traded futures and options, and over-the-counter
options and swaps. We offset our exposures based on current and projected market conditions and generally seek to acquire the inputs at as close to our planned
cost as possible.
We use derivatives to manage our exposure to changes in commodity prices. We do not perform the assessments required to achieve hedge accounting for
commodity derivative positions. Accordingly, the changes in the values of these derivatives are recorded currently in cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements
of Earnings.
Although we do not meet the criteria for cash flow hedge accounting, we believe that these instruments are effective in achieving our objective of providing
certainty in the future price of commodities purchased for use in our supply chain. Accordingly, for purposes of measuring segment operating performance these
gains and losses are reported in unallocated corporate items outside of segment operating results until such time that the exposure we are managing affects earnings.
At that time we reclassify the gain or loss from unallocated corporate items to segment operating profit, allowing our operating segments to realize the economic
effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in unallocated corporate items.
Unallocated corporate items for fiscal 2017, 2016 and 2015 included:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Net loss on mark-to-market valuation of commodity positions
  
$(22.0)   
$ (69.1)   
$(163.7) 
Net loss on commodity positions reclassified from unallocated corporate items to segment operating profit
  
 32.0   
 127.9   
 
84.4 
Net mark-to-market revaluation of certain grain inventories
  
 
3.9   
 
4.0   
 
(10.4) 
Net mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions recognized in unallocated corporate items
  
$ 13.9   
$ 62.8   
$ (89.7) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As of May 28, 2017, the net notional value of commodity derivatives was $410.3 million, of which $289.6 million related to agricultural inputs and $120.7 million
related to energy inputs. These contracts relate to inputs that generally will be utilized within the next 12 months.
INTEREST RATE RISK
We are exposed to interest rate volatility with regard to future issuances of fixed-rate debt, and existing and future issuances of floating-rate debt. Primary
exposures include U.S. Treasury rates, LIBOR, Euribor, and commercial paper rates in the United States and Europe. We use interest rate swaps, forward-starting
interest rate swaps, and treasury locks to hedge our exposure to interest rate changes, to reduce the volatility of our financing costs, and to achieve a desired
proportion of fixed rate versus floating-rate debt, based on current and projected market conditions. Generally under these swaps, we agree with a counterparty to
exchange the difference between fixed-rate and floating-rate interest amounts based on an agreed upon notional principal amount.
Floating Interest Rate Exposures — Floating-to-fixed interest rate swaps are accounted for as cash flow hedges, as are all hedges of forecasted issuances of debt.
Effectiveness is assessed based on either the perfectly effective hypothetical derivative method or changes in the present value of interest payments on the
underlying debt. Effective gains and losses deferred to AOCI are reclassified into earnings over the life of the associated debt. Ineffective gains and losses are
recorded as net interest. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less than $1 million in each of fiscal 2017, 2016, and 2015.
 
66

Table of Contents
Fixed Interest Rate Exposures — Fixed-to-floating interest rate swaps are accounted for as fair value hedges with effectiveness assessed based on changes in the
fair value of the underlying debt and derivatives, using incremental borrowing rates currently available on loans with similar terms and maturities. Ineffective gains
and losses on these derivatives and the underlying hedged items are recorded as net interest. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was a $4.3 million gain in fiscal
2017, less than $1 million in fiscal 2016, and a $1.6 million gain in fiscal 2015.
In advance of planned debt financing, in the first quarter of fiscal 2017 and the third quarter of fiscal 2016, we entered into $100 million and $400 million,
respectively, of treasury locks due February 15, 2017 with an average fixed rate of 2.0 percent. All of these treasury locks were cash settled for $17.2 million
during the third quarter of fiscal 2017, concurrent with the issuance of our $750.0 million 10-year fixed-rate notes.
In fiscal 2015, we entered into swaps to convert $500.0 million of 1.4 percent fixed-rate notes due October 20, 2017, and $500.0 million of 2.2 percent fixed-rate
notes due October 21, 2019, to floating rates.
As of May 28, 2017, the pre-tax amount of cash-settled interest rate hedge gain or loss remaining in AOCI, which will be reclassified to earnings over the
remaining term of the related underlying debt, follows:
 
In Millions
  
Gain/(Loss) 
5.65% notes due February 15, 2019
  
 
0.8 
3.15% notes due December 15, 2021
  
 
(45.0) 
1.0% notes due April 27, 2023
  
 
(1.4) 
3.65% notes due February 15, 2024
  
 
12.0 
3.2% notes due February 10, 2027
  
 
16.6 
1.5% notes due April 27, 2027
  
 
(3.2) 
5.4% notes due June 15, 2040
  
 
(12.9) 
4.15% notes due February 15, 2043
  
 
10.1 
Net pre-tax hedge loss in AOCI
  
$
(23.0) 
  
 
 
 
The following table summarizes the notional amounts and weighted-average interest rates of our interest rate derivatives. Average floating rates are based on rates
as of the end of the reporting period.
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017  
 
May 29,
2016  
Pay-floating swaps - notional amount
  
$1,000.0 
 
$1,000.0 
Average receive rate
  
 
1.8%  
 
1.8% 
Average pay rate
  
 
1.6%  
 
1.1% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The swap contracts mature as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Pay Floating 
2018
  
$
500.0 
2020
  
$
500.0 
Total
  
$
1,000.0 
  
 
 
 
 
67

Table of Contents
The following tables reconcile the net fair values of assets and liabilities subject to offsetting arrangements that are recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets to
the net fair values that could be reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 
 
 
May 28, 2017
 
 
 
Assets
  
Liabilities
 
 
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
   
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
 
In Millions
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Assets
  
Gross 
Liabilities
Offset in 
the 
Balance 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts
of Assets
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Received   
Net 
Amount
(c)
  
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Liabilities   
Gross 
Assets 
Offset in 
the Balance
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts of
Liabilities 
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Pledged   
Net 
Amount
(d)
 
Commodity contracts
  
$11.5   
$  —   
$  11.5   
$  (7.2)   
$  —   
$  4.3   
$(8.2)   
$  —   
$(8.2)   
$7.2   
$  —   
$(1.0) 
Interest rate contracts
  
0.9   
—   
0.9   
(0.5)   
—   
0.4   
(0.5)   
—   
(0.5)   
0.5   
—   
— 
Foreign exchange contracts
  
16.5   
—   
16.5   
(7.2)   
—   
9.3   
(10.2)   
—   
(10.2)   
7.2   
—   
(3.0) 
Equity contracts
  
1.9   
—   
1.9   
—   
—   
1.9   
—   
—   
—   
—   
—   
— 
Total
  
$30.8   
$  —   
$30.8   
$(14.9)   
$  —   
$15.9   
$(18.9)   
$  —   
$(18.9)   
$14.9   
$—   
$(4.0) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes related collateral offset in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(b)
Net fair value as recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(c)
Fair value of assets that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(d)
Fair value of liabilities that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(e)
Fair value of assets and liabilities reported on a gross basis in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
68

Table of Contents
 
 
May 29, 2016
 
 
 
Assets
  
Liabilities
 
 
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
   
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
 
In Millions
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Assets
  
Gross 
Liabilities
Offset in 
the 
Balance 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts
of Assets
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Received   
Net 
Amount
(c)
  
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Liabilities   
Gross 
Assets 
Offset in
the 
Balance 
Sheet (a)  
Net 
Amounts 
of 
Liabilities
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Pledged   
Net 
Amount
(d)
 
Commodity contracts
 $
4.4  $
—  $
4.4  $
(3.9)  $
—  $
0.5  $
(22.2)  $
—  $
(22.2)  $
3.9  $
7.5  $
(10.8) 
Interest rate contracts
  
8.5   
—   
8.5   
—   
—   
8.5   
(3.0)   
—   
(3.0)   
—   
—   
(3.0) 
Foreign exchange contracts
  
25.4   
—   
25.4   
(8.7)   
—   
16.7   
(13.7)   
—   
(13.7)   
8.7   
—   
(5.0) 
Equity contracts
  
2.4   
—   
2.4   
—   
—   
2.4   
—   
—   
—   
—   
—   
— 
Total
 $
40.7  $
—  $
40.7  $
(12.6)  $
—  $
28.1  $
(38.9)  $
—  $
(38.9)  $
12.6  $
7.5  $
(18.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes related collateral offset in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(b)
Net fair value as recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(c)
Fair value of assets that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(d)
Fair value of liabilities that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(e)
Fair value of assets and liabilities reported on a gross basis in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE RISK
Foreign currency fluctuations affect our net investments in foreign subsidiaries and foreign currency cash flows related to third party purchases, intercompany
loans, product shipments, and foreign-denominated debt. We are also exposed to the translation of foreign currency earnings to the U.S. dollar. Our principal
exposures are to the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Chinese renminbi, euro, Japanese yen, Mexican peso, and Swiss
franc. We primarily use foreign currency forward contracts to selectively hedge our foreign currency cash flow exposures. We also generally swap our foreign-
denominated commercial paper borrowings and nonfunctional currency intercompany loans back to U.S. dollars or the functional currency of the entity with
foreign exchange exposure. The gains or losses on these derivatives offset the foreign currency revaluation gains or losses recorded in earnings on the associated
borrowings. We generally do not hedge more than 18 months in advance.
As of May 28, 2017, the net notional value of foreign exchange derivatives was $850.2 million. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less than $1 million in
each of fiscal 2017, 2016, and 2015.
We also have many net investments in foreign subsidiaries that are denominated in euros. We previously hedged a portion of these net investments by issuing euro-
denominated commercial paper and foreign exchange forward contracts. As of May 28, 2017, we hedged a portion of these net investments with €2,200 million of
euro denominated bonds. As of May 28, 2017, we had deferred net foreign currency transaction losses of $39.1 million in AOCI associated with net investment
hedging activity.
Venezuela is a highly inflationary economy and as such, we remeasured the value of the assets and liabilities of our former Venezuelan subsidiary based on the
exchange rate at which we expected to remit dividends in U.S. dollars from the SIMADI market. In fiscal 2015, we recorded an $8 million foreign exchange loss.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in Venezuela.
EQUITY INSTRUMENTS
Equity price movements affect our compensation expense as certain investments made by our employees in our deferred compensation plan are revalued. We use
equity swaps to manage this risk. As of May 28, 2017, the net notional amount of our equity swaps was $138.9 million. These swap contracts mature in fiscal 2018.
 
69

Table of Contents
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT PRESENTATION
The fair values of our assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair value and their respective levels in the fair value hierarchy as of May 28, 2017 and
May 29, 2016, were as follows:
 
 
  
May 28, 2017
   
May 28, 2017
 
 
  
Fair Values of Assets
   
Fair Values of Liabilities
 
In Millions
  Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   
Total    Level 1  
Level 2  
Level 3   
Total  
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Interest rate contracts (a) (b)
  $
—   $
0.7   $
—   $
0.7   $
—  
$
(0.4)  
$
—   $ (0.4) 
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—    
16.3    
—    
16.3    
—  
 
(3.6)  
 
—    
(3.6) 
Total
   
—    
17.0    
—    
17.0    
—  
 
(4.0)  
 
—    
(4.0) 
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—    
0.2    
—    
0.2    
—  
 
(6.6)  
 
—    
(6.6) 
Commodity contracts (c) (e)
   
4.1    
7.4    
—    
11.5    
(3.4)  
 
(4.8)  
 
—    
(8.2) 
Grain contracts (c) (e)
   
—    
2.7    
—    
2.7    
—  
 
(5.6)  
 
—    
(5.6) 
Total
   
4.1    
10.3    
—    
14.4    
(3.4)  
 
(17.0)  
 
—    (20.4) 
Other assets and liabilities reported at fair value:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Marketable investments (a) (f)
   
9.9    265.5    
—    275.4    
—  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Long-lived assets (g)
   
—    
43.7    
—    
43.7    
—  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Total
   
9.9    309.2    
—    319.1    
—  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Total assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair value
  $
14.0   $ 336.5   $
—   $350.5   $
(3.4)  
$ (21.0)  
$
—   $(24.4) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
These contracts and investments are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities or other liabilities, as
appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss position. Certain marketable investments are recorded as cash and cash equivalents.
(b)
Based on LIBOR and swap rates.
(c)
These contracts are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities, or other liabilities, as appropriate, based on
whether in a gain or loss position.
(d)
Based on observable market transactions of spot currency rates and forward currency prices.
(e)
Based on prices of futures exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace.
(f)
Based on prices of common stock and bond matrix pricing.
(g)
We recorded $47.4 million in non-cash impairment charges in fiscal 2017 to write down certain long-lived assets to their fair value. Fair value was based on
recently reported transactions for similar assets in the marketplace. These assets had a carrying value of $91.1 million and were associated with the
restructuring actions described in Note 4.
 
70

Table of Contents
 
  
May 29, 2016
   
May 29, 2016
 
 
  
Fair Values of Assets
   
Fair Values of Liabilities
 
In Millions
  Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   
Total    Level 1  
Level 2  
Level 3   
Total  
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Interest rate contracts (a) (b)
  $
—   $
7.7   $
—   $
7.7   $
—  
$
(3.0)  
$
—   $ (3.0) 
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—    
12.2    
—    
12.2    
—  
 
(12.2)  
 
—    (12.2) 
Total
   
—    
19.9    
—    
19.9    
—  
 
(15.2)  
 
—    (15.2) 
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—    
13.2    
—    
13.2    
—  
 
(1.5)  
 
—    
(1.5) 
Commodity contracts (c) (e)
   
2.6    
1.7    
—    
4.3    
(0.6)  
 
(21.6)  
 
—    (22.2) 
Grain contracts (c) (e)
   
—    
1.8    
—    
1.8    
—  
 
(5.5)  
 
—    
(5.5) 
Total
   
2.6    
16.7    
—    
19.3    
(0.6)  
 
(28.6)  
 
—    (29.2) 
Other assets and liabilities reported at fair value:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Marketable investments (a) (f)
   
8.4    165.8    
—    174.2    
—  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Long-lived assets (g)
   
—    
26.0    
—    
26.0    
—  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Total
   
8.4    191.8    
—    200.2    
—  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Total assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair value
  $
11.0   $ 228.4   $
—   $239.4   $
(0.6)  
$ (43.8)  
$
—   $(44.4) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
These contracts and investments are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities or other liabilities, as
appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss position. Certain marketable investments are recorded as cash and cash equivalents.
(b)
Based on LIBOR and swap rates.
(c)
These contracts are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets or as other current liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss
position.
(d)
Based on observable market transactions of spot currency rates and forward currency prices.
(e)
Based on prices of futures exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace.
(f)
Based on prices of common stock and bond matrix pricing.
(g)
We recorded $11.4 million in non-cash impairment charges in fiscal 2016 to write down certain long-lived assets to their fair value. Fair value was based on
recently reported transactions for similar assets in the marketplace. These assets had a carrying value of $28.2 million and were associated with the
restructuring actions described in Note 4.
We did not significantly change our valuation techniques from prior periods.
 
71

Table of Contents
Information related to our cash flow hedges, fair value hedges, and other derivatives not designated as hedging instruments for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2017
and May 29, 2016, follows:
 
 
  
Interest Rate 
Contracts
  
Foreign Exchange 
Contracts
  
Equity 
Contracts
  
Commodity 
Contracts
  
Total
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year   
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2017    
2016   
2017    
2016  
2017   
2016   
2017    
2016  
Derivatives in Cash Flow Hedging Relationships:
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Amount of gain (loss) recognized in other comprehensive income (OCI) (a)
  $24.0  
$ (2.6)  
$
46.3   
$
21.2  
$
—   $ —  
$
—  
$
—  
$70.3   $ 18.6 
Amount of net gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI into earnings (a) (b)
   (5.0)  
 (10.6)  
 
33.8   
 
22.1  
 
—    
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 28.8    11.5 
Amount of net gain (loss) recognized in earnings (c)
   
0.1  
 
(0.1)  
 
0.6   
 
(0.7)  
 
—    
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
0.7    
(0.8) 
Derivatives in Fair Value Hedging Relationships:
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Amount of net gain recognized in earnings (d)
   
4.3  
 
0.1  
 
—   
 
—  
 
—    
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
4.3    
0.1 
Derivatives in Net Investment Hedging Relationships:
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Amount of loss recognized in OCI (a)
   
—  
 
—  
 
—   
 
(0.2)  
 
—    
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—    
(0.2) 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments:
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Amount of net gain (loss) recognized in earnings (d)
   
—  
 
—  
 
7.6   
 
1.1  
 17.8    (4.5)  
 (16.2)  
 (56.1)  
 
9.2    (59.5) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Effective portion.
(b)
Gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign
exchange contracts.
(c)
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings is related to the ineffective portion of the hedging relationship, including SG&A expenses for foreign exchange contracts
and interest, net for interest rate contracts. No amounts were reported as a result of being excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness.
(d)
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate contracts, in cost of sales for commodity contracts, and in SG&A expenses for
equity contracts and foreign exchange contracts.
AMOUNTS RECORDED IN ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
As of May 28, 2017, the after-tax amounts of unrealized gains and losses in AOCI related to hedge derivatives follows:
 
In Millions
  
After-Tax Gain/(Loss)  
Unrealized losses from interest rate cash flow hedges
  
 
$(12.9) 
Unrealized gains from foreign currency cash flow hedges
  
 
14.4 
After-tax gain in AOCI related to hedge derivatives
  
 
$1.5 
  
 
 
 
The net amount of pre-tax gains and losses in AOCI as of May 28, 2017 that we expect to be reclassified into net earnings within the next 12 months is $11.7
million of gain.
CREDIT-RISK-RELATED CONTINGENT FEATURES
Certain of our derivative instruments contain provisions that require us to maintain an investment grade credit rating on our debt from each of the major credit
rating agencies. If our debt were to fall below investment grade, the counterparties to the derivative instruments could request full collateralization on derivative
instruments in net liability positions. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that were in a liability
position on May 28, 2017, was $1.0 million. We have posted no collateral under these contracts. If the credit-risk-related contingent features underlying these
agreements had been triggered on May 28, 2017, we would have been required to post $1.0 million of collateral to counterparties.
 
72

Table of Contents
CONCENTRATIONS OF CREDIT AND COUNTERPARTY CREDIT RISK
During fiscal 2017, customer concentration was as follows:
 
Percent of total
  
Consolidated 
 
North
America
Retail  
 
Convenience
Stores &
Foodservice  
 
Europe &
Australia  
 
Asia & Latin
America
 
Wal-mart (a):
  
 
 
 
 
Net sales
  
 
20%  
 
29%  
 
7%  
 
2%  
 
4% 
Accounts receivable
  
 
 
24%  
 
8%  
 
1%  
 
4% 
Five largest customers:
  
 
 
 
 
Net sales
  
 
 
52%  
 
48%  
 
31%  
 
10% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates.
No customer other than Wal-Mart accounted for 10 percent or more of our consolidated net sales.
We enter into interest rate, foreign exchange, and certain commodity and equity derivatives, primarily with a diversified group of highly rated counterparties. We
continually monitor our positions and the credit ratings of the counterparties involved and, by policy, limit the amount of credit exposure to any one party. These
transactions may expose us to potential losses due to the risk of nonperformance by these counterparties; however, we have not incurred a material loss. We also
enter into commodity futures transactions through various regulated exchanges.
The amount of loss due to the credit risk of the counterparties, should the counterparties fail to perform according to the terms of the contracts, is $5.8 million
against which we do not hold collateral. Under the terms of our swap agreements, some of our transactions require collateral or other security to support financial
instruments subject to threshold levels of exposure and counterparty credit risk. Collateral assets are either cash or U.S. Treasury instruments and are held in a trust
account that we may access if the counterparty defaults.
We offer certain suppliers access to third party services that allows them to view our scheduled payments online. The third party services also allow suppliers to
finance advances on our scheduled payments at the sole discretion of the supplier and the third party. We have no economic interest in these financing
arrangements and no direct relationship with the suppliers, the third parties, or any financial institutions concerning these services. All of our accounts payable
remain as obligations to our suppliers as stated in our supplier agreements. As of May 28, 2017, $639.0 million of our accounts payable is payable to suppliers who
utilize these third party services.
NOTE 8. DEBT
Notes Payable
The components of notes payable and their respective weighted-average interest rates at the end of the periods were as follows:
 
 
  
May 28, 2017
 
 
May 29, 2016
 
In Millions
  
Notes
Payable   
Weighted-
Average
Interest Rate 
 
Notes
Payable   
Weighted-
Average
Interest Rate 
U.S. commercial paper
  
$ 954.7   
 
1.1%  
$
—     
 
—  % 
Financial institutions
  
 
279.4   
 
7.0 
 
 269.8   
 
8.6 
Total
  
$1,234.1   
 
2.4%  
$ 269.8   
 
8.6% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
To ensure availability of funds, we maintain bank credit lines sufficient to cover our outstanding notes payable. Commercial paper is a continuing source of short-
term financing. We have commercial paper programs available to us in the United States and Europe. We also have uncommitted and asset-backed credit lines that
support our foreign operations.
 
73

Table of Contents
The following table details the fee-paid committed and uncommitted credit lines we had available as of May 28, 2017:
 
In Billions
  
Facility 
Amount   
Borrowed
Amount  
Credit facility expiring:
  
  
May 2022
  
$
2.7   
$
 — 
June 2019
  
 
0.2   
 
0.1 
Total committed credit facilities
  
 
2.9   
 
0.1 
Uncommitted credit facilities
  
 
0.5   
 
0.1 
Total committed and uncommitted credit facilities
  
$
3.4   
$
0.2 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In fiscal 2016, we entered into a $2.7 billion fee-paid committed credit facility that was originally scheduled to expire in May 2021. In fiscal 2017, we amended the
credit facility’s expiration date by one year to May 2022.
The credit facilities contain covenants, including a requirement to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5 times. We were in compliance with all
credit facility covenants as of May 28, 2017.
Long-Term Debt
In March 2017, we issued €300.0 million principal amount of floating-rate notes due March 20, 2019. Interest on the notes is payable quarterly in arrears. The notes
are not generally redeemable prior to maturity. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds
were used to repay a portion of our outstanding commercial paper.
In February 2017, we repaid $1.0 billion of 5.7 percent fixed-rate notes.
In January 2017, we issued $750.0 million principal amount of 3.2 percent fixed-rate notes due February 10, 2027. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in
arrears. We may redeem the notes in whole or in part at any time at the applicable redemption price. The notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a
change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used to repay a portion of our maturing long-term debt.
In January 2016, we issued €500.0 million principal amount of floating-rate notes due January 15, 2020. Interest on the notes are payable quarterly in arrears. The
notes are not generally redeemable prior to maturity. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net
proceeds were used to repay a portion of our maturing long-term debt.
In January 2016, we repaid $250 million of 0.875 percent fixed-rate notes and $750 million of floating-rate notes.
In April 2015, we issued €500.0 million principal amount of 1.0 percent fixed-rate notes due April 27, 2023 and €400.0 million principal amount of 1.5 percent
fixed-rate notes due April 27, 2027. Interest on the notes is payable annually in arrears. The notes may be redeemed in whole or in part at our option at any time at
the applicable redemption price. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used for
general corporate purposes and to reduce our commercial paper borrowings.
In March 2015, we repaid $750.0 million of 5.2 percent fixed-rate notes.
 
74

Table of Contents
A summary of our long-term debt is as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017   
May 29, 
2016
 
5.65% notes due February 15, 2019
  
$1,150.0  
$ 1,150.0 
5.7% notes due February 15, 2017
  
 
—  
 1,000.0 
3.15% notes due December 15, 2021
  
 1,000.0  
 1,000.0 
3.2% notes due February 10, 2027
  
 
750.0  
 
— 
Euro-denominated 2.1% notes due November 16, 2020
  
 
559.2  
 
555.8 
Euro-denominated 1.0% notes due April 27, 2023
  
 
559.2  
 
555.8 
Euro-denominated floating-rate notes due January 15, 2020
  
 
559.2  
 
555.8 
1.4% notes due October 20, 2017
  
 
500.0  
 
500.0 
5.4% notes due June 15, 2040
  
 
500.0  
 
500.0 
4.15% notes due February 15, 2043
  
 
500.0  
 
500.0 
3.65% notes due February 15, 2024
  
 
500.0  
 
500.0 
2.2% notes due October 21, 2019
  
 
500.0  
 
500.0 
Euro-denominated 1.5% notes due April 27, 2027
  
 
447.3  
 
444.6 
Euro-denominated floating-rate notes due March 20, 2019
  
 
335.5  
 
— 
Euro-denominated 2.2% notes due June 24, 2021
  
 
222.8  
 
221.0 
Medium-term notes, 0.02% to 6.59%, due fiscal 2018 or later
  
 
204.2  
 
204.2 
Other, including debt issuance costs and capital leases
  
 
(39.8)  
 
(26.1) 
  
 8,247.6  
 8,161.1 
Less amount due within one year
  
 (604.7)  
 (1,103.4) 
Total long-term debt
  
$7,642.9  
$ 7,057.7 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal payments due on long-term debt in the next five years based on stated contractual maturities, our intent to redeem, or put rights of certain note holders are
$604.7 million in fiscal 2018, $1,585.9 million in fiscal 2019, $1,062.5 million in fiscal 2020, $559.4 million in fiscal 2021, and $1,001.1 million in fiscal 2022.
Certain of our long-term debt agreements contain restrictive covenants. As of May 28, 2017, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
As of May 28, 2017, the $23.0 million pre-tax loss recorded in AOCI associated with our previously designated interest rate swaps will be reclassified to net
interest over the remaining lives of the hedged transactions. The amount expected to be reclassified from AOCI to net interest in fiscal 2018 is a $6.7 million pre-
tax loss.
NOTE 9. REDEEMABLE AND NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS
Our principal redeemable and noncontrolling interests relate to our Yoplait SAS, Yoplait Marques SNC, Liberté Marques Sàrl, and General Mills Cereals, LLC
(GMC) subsidiaries. In addition, we have four foreign subsidiaries that have noncontrolling interests totaling $8.5 million as of May 28, 2017.
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS and a 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl. Sodiaal holds the remaining
interests in each of the entities. On the acquisition date, we recorded the $904.4 million fair value of Sodiaal’s 49 percent euro-denominated interest in Yoplait SAS
as a redeemable interest on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Sodiaal has the ability to put all or a portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per
year, up to three times before December 2024. We adjust the value of the redeemable interest through additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets
quarterly to the redeemable interest’s redemption value, which approximates its fair value. Yoplait SAS pays dividends annually if it meets certain financial metrics
set forth in its shareholders agreement. As of May 28, 2017, the redemption value of the euro-denominated redeemable interest was $910.9 million.
On the acquisition dates, we recorded the $281.4 million fair value of Sodiaal’s 50 percent euro-denominated interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and 50 percent
Canadian dollar-denominated interest in Liberté Marques Sàrl as noncontrolling interests on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Yoplait Marques SNC earns a
royalty stream through a licensing agreement with Yoplait SAS for the rights to  Yoplait  and related trademarks. Liberté Marques Sàrl earns a royalty stream
through licensing agreements with certain Yoplait group companies for the rights to  Liberté  and related trademarks. These entities pay dividends annually based
on their available cash as of their fiscal year end.
 
75

Table of Contents
We paid dividends of $48.6 million in fiscal 2017, and $74.5 million in fiscal 2016, to Sodiaal under the terms of the Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC
shareholder agreements.
A subsidiary of Yoplait SAS has entered into an exclusive milk supply agreement for its European operations with Sodiaal at market-determined prices through
July 1, 2021. Net purchases totaled $186.4 million for fiscal 2017 and $321.0 million for fiscal 2016.
The holder of the GMC Class A Interests receives quarterly preferred distributions from available net income based on the application of a floating preferred return
rate to the holder’s capital account balance established in the most recent mark-to-market valuation (currently $251.5 million). On June 1, 2015, the floating
preferred return rate on GMC’s Class A interests was reset to the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 125 basis points. The preferred return rate is adjusted every three
years through a negotiated agreement with the Class A Interest holder or through a remarketing auction.
For financial reporting purposes, the assets, liabilities, results of operations, and cash flows of our non-wholly owned subsidiaries are included in our Consolidated
Financial Statements. The third-party investor’s share of the net earnings of these subsidiaries is reflected in net earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings.
Our noncontrolling interests contain restrictive covenants. As of May 28, 2017, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
NOTE 10. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Cumulative preference stock of 5.0 million shares, without par value, is authorized but unissued.
On May 6, 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 100 million shares of our common stock. Purchases under the authorization can be made
in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, and
accelerated repurchase programs. The authorization has no specified termination date.
Share repurchases were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Shares of common stock
   
25.4    
10.7    
22.3 
Aggregate purchase price
  $1,651.5   $606.7   $1,161.9 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
76

Table of Contents
The following table provides details of total comprehensive income (loss):
 
 
  
Fiscal 2017
 
 
  
General Mills
  
Noncontrolling
Interests
   
Redeemable
Interest
 
In Millions
  
Pretax   
Tax   
Net
  
Net
   
Net
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling
interests
  
  
  
  
  
$
1,657.5  
 
$   11.3   
 
$   32.3 
Other comprehensive income (loss):
  
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency translation
  
 $   19.5  
 $     —  
 
19.5  
 
2.5   
 
(15.7) 
Net actuarial income
  
 
307.3  
 (109.4)  
 
197.9  
 
—   
 
— 
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
 
  
Securities
  
 
1.3  
 
(0.5)  
 
0.8  
 
—   
 
— 
Hedge derivatives
  
 
65.9  
 (16.1)  
 
49.8  
 
—   
 
3.5 
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
 
  
Hedge derivatives (a)
  
 
(25.2)  
 
2.4  
 
(22.8)  
 
—   
 
(2.9) 
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b)
  
 
197.2  
 (74.7)  
 
122.5  
 
—   
 
— 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
  
 
566.0  
 (198.3)  
 
367.7  
 
2.5   
 
(15.1) 
Total comprehensive income
  
 
 
 $   2,025.2  
 
$13.8   
 
$17.2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Gain reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign exchange
contracts.
(b)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expenses.
 
 
  
Fiscal 2016
 
 
  
General Mills
  
Noncontrolling
Interests
   
Redeemable
Interest
 
In Millions
  
Pretax   
Tax   
Net
  
Net
   
Net
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests
  
  
  
  
  
 $1,697.4  
 
$  8.4   
 
$31.0 
Other comprehensive Income (loss):
  
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency translation
  
$(107.6)  
$      —  
 
(107.6)  
 
2.8   
 
(3.9) 
Net actuarial loss
  
 (514.2)  
 188.3  
 
(325.9)  
 
—   
 
— 
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
 
  
Securities
  
 
0.2  
 
(0.1)  
 
0.1  
 
—   
 
— 
Hedge derivatives
  
 
16.5  
 
(2.2)  
 
14.3  
 
—   
 
1.7 
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
 
  
Hedge derivatives (a)
  
 
(13.5)  
 
2.5  
 
(11.0)  
 
—   
 
1.5 
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b)
  
 206.8  
 (78.2)  
 
128.6  
 
—   
 
— 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
  
 (411.8)  
 110.3  
 
(301.5)  
 
2.8   
 
(0.7) 
Total comprehensive income
  
 
 
 $1,395.9  
 
$11.2   
 
$30.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Gain reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign exchange
contracts.
(b)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expenses.
 
77

Table of Contents
 
  
Fiscal 2015
 
 
  
General Mills
  
Noncontrolling
Interests
  
Redeemable
Interest
 
In Millions
  
Pretax   
Tax   
Net
  
Net
  
Net
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling
interests
  
  
  
  
  
 $1,221.3  
 
$  8.2  
 
$29.9 
Other comprehensive income (loss):
  
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation
  
 $(727.9)  
 $     —  
 
(727.9)  
 
(78.2)  
 
(151.8) 
Net actuarial loss
  
 
(561.1)  
 202.7  
 
(358.4)  
 
—  
 
— 
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
 
 
Securities
  
 
1.3  
 
(0.5)  
 
0.8  
 
—  
 
— 
Hedge derivatives
  
 
13.6  
 
(4.8)  
 
8.8  
 
—  
 
(4.7) 
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
 
 
Hedge derivatives (a)
  
 
0.7  
 
0.5  
 
1.2  
 
—  
 
3.7 
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b)
  
 
170.2  
 (65.1)  
 
105.1  
 
—  
 
— 
Other comprehensive loss
  
 (1,103.2)  
 132.8  
 
(970.4)  
 
(78.2)  
 
(152.8) 
Total comprehensive income (loss)
  
 
 
 
$250.9  
 
$(70.0)  
 
$(122.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign exchange
contracts.
(b)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expenses.
In fiscal 2017, 2016, and 2015, except for reclassifications to earnings, changes in other comprehensive income (loss) were primarily non-cash items.
Accumulated other comprehensive loss balances, net of tax effects, were as follows:
 
In Millions
  
2017
  
2016
 
Foreign currency translation adjustments
  $
(624.7)  
$
(644.2) 
Unrealized gain (loss) from:
  
 
Securities
   
4.6  
 
3.8 
Hedge derivatives
   
1.5  
 
(25.5) 
Pension, other postretirement, and postemployment benefits:
  
 
Net actuarial loss
   (1,645.4)  
 (1,958.2) 
Prior service credits
   
19.5  
 
11.9 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
  $(2,244.5)  
$(2,612.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE 11. STOCK PLANS
We use broad-based stock plans to help ensure that management’s interests are aligned with those of our shareholders. As of May 28, 2017, a total of 20.3 million
shares were available for grant in the form of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and shares of unrestricted stock under the 2011 Stock
Compensation Plan (2011 Plan) and the 2016 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors. The 2011 Plan also provides for the issuance of cash-settled share-
based units, stock appreciation rights, and performance-based stock awards. Stock-based awards now outstanding include some granted under the 2005, 2006, 2007
and 2009 stock plans and the 2011 compensation plan for non-employee directors, under which no further awards may be granted. The stock plans provide for
potential accelerated vesting of awards upon retirement, termination, or death of eligible employees and directors.
 
78

Table of Contents
Stock Options
The estimated fair values of stock options granted and the assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2017
   
2016
   
2015
 
Estimated fair values of stock options granted
   $  8.80            $  7.24            $  7.22         
Assumptions:
  
  
  
Risk-free interest rate
   
1.7%          
2.4%          
2.6%       
Expected term
   
8.5 years    
8.5 years    
8.5 years 
Expected volatility
   17.8%          17.6%          17.5%       
Dividend yield
   
2.9%          
3.2%          
3.1%       
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
We estimate the fair value of each option on the grant date using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires us to make predictive assumptions
regarding future stock price volatility, employee exercise behavior, dividend yield, and the forfeiture rate. We estimate our future stock price volatility using the
historical volatility over the expected term of the option, excluding time periods of volatility we believe a marketplace participant would exclude in estimating our
stock price volatility. We also have considered, but did not use, implied volatility in our estimate, because trading activity in options on our stock, especially those
with tenors of greater than 6 months, is insufficient to provide a reliable measure of expected volatility.
Our expected term represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding based on historical data to estimate option exercises and
employee terminations within the valuation model. Separate groups of employees have similar historical exercise behavior and therefore were aggregated into a
single pool for valuation purposes. The weighted-average expected term for all employee groups is presented in the table above. The risk-free interest rate for
periods during the expected term of the options is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
Any corporate income tax benefit realized upon exercise or vesting of an award in excess of that previously recognized in earnings (referred to as a windfall tax
benefit) is presented in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as a financing cash flow.
Realized windfall tax benefits are credited to additional paid-in capital within our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Realized shortfall tax benefits (amounts which are
less than that previously recognized in earnings) are first offset against the cumulative balance of windfall tax benefits, if any, and then charged directly to income
tax expense, potentially resulting in volatility in our consolidated effective income tax rate. We calculated a cumulative memo balance of windfall tax benefits for
the purpose of accounting for future shortfall tax benefits.
Options may be priced at 100 percent or more of the fair market value on the date of grant, and generally vest four years after the date of grant. Options generally
expire within 10 years and one month after the date of grant.
 
79

Table of Contents
Information on stock option activity follows:
 
  
  
Options 
Exercisable 
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average 
Exercise
Price Per 
Share
   
Options 
Outstanding
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average 
Exercise
Price Per 
Share
 
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  
 
29,452.8   
$     28.37   
 
44,169.0   
$     32.10 
Granted
  
  
  
 
2,253.1   
 
53.70 
Exercised
  
  
  
 
(7,297.2)   
 
26.68 
Forfeited or expired
  
  
   
  
   
 
(47.7)   
 
43.73 
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 
26,991.5   
$
30.44   
 
39,077.2   
$
34.35 
Granted
  
  
  
 
1,930.2   
 
55.72 
Exercised
  
  
  
 
(8,471.0)   
 
28.49 
Forfeited or expired
  
  
   
  
   
 
(134.8)   
 
48.16 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  
 
22,385.1   
$
32.38   
 
32,401.6   
$
37.09 
Granted
  
  
  
 
2,446.0   
 
66.52 
Exercised
  
  
  
 
(4,904.9)   
 
30.76 
Forfeited or expired
  
  
   
  
   
 
(108.3)   
 
57.52 
Balance as of May 28, 2017
  
 
20,899.2   
$
33.83   
 
29,834.4   
$
40.47 
Stock-based compensation expense related to stock option awards was $18.0 million in fiscal 2017, $14.8 million in fiscal 2016, and $18.1 million in fiscal 2015.
Compensation expense related to stock-based payments recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings includes amounts recognized in restructuring,
impairment, and other exit costs for fiscal 2017, 2016 and 2015.
Net cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options less shares used for minimum withholding taxes and the intrinsic value of options exercised were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Net cash proceeds
  
$112.6   
$171.9   
$163.7 
Intrinsic value of options exercised
  
$176.5   
$268.4   
$201.9 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units, and Performance Share Units
Stock and units settled in stock subject to a restricted period and a purchase price, if any (as determined by the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors), may be granted to key employees under the 2011 Plan. Restricted stock and restricted stock units generally vest and become unrestricted four years after
the date of grant. Performance share units are earned based on our future achievement of three-year goals for average organic net sales growth and cumulative free
cash flow. Performance share units are settled in common stock and are generally subject to a three year performance and vesting period. The sale or transfer of
these awards is restricted during the vesting period. Participants holding restricted stock, but not restricted stock units or performance share units, are entitled to
vote on matters submitted to holders of common stock for a vote. These awards accumulate dividends from the date of grant, but participants only receive payment
if the awards vest.
 
80

Table of Contents
Information on restricted stock unit and performance share units activity follows:
 
 
  
Equity Classified
   
Liability Classified
 
  
  
Share-Settled 
Units 
(Thousands)   
Weighted- 
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value    
Share-Settled 
Units 
(Thousands)   
Weighted- 
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value  
Non-vested as of May 29, 2016
  
 
5,100.4  
$
48.60   
 
211.4  
$
48.37 
Granted
  
 
1,418.7  
 
67.02   
 
43.6  
 
66.75 
Vested
  
 
(1,710.3)  
 
42.50   
 
(119.8)  
 
41.21 
Forfeited, expired, or reclassified
  
 
(317.6)  
 
57.96   
 
(11.9)  
 
57.76 
Non-vested as of May 28, 2017
  
 
4,491.2  
$
56.08   
 
123.3  
$
56.93 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Number of units granted (thousands)
  
 1,462.3   
 1,351.5   
 1,708.2 
Weighted average price per unit
  
$ 67.01   
$ 56.00   
$ 53.45 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The total grant-date fair value of restricted stock unit awards that vested was $78.1 million in fiscal 2017 and $101.8 million in fiscal 2016.
As of May 28, 2017, unrecognized compensation expense related to non-vested stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units was $98.1 million.
This expense will be recognized over 18 months, on average.
Stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock units and performance share units was $77.9 million for fiscal 2017, $76.8 million for fiscal 2016, and
$96.6 million for fiscal 2015. Compensation expense related to stock-based payments recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings includes amounts
recognized in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs for fiscal 2017, 2016 and 2015.
NOTE 12. EARNINGS PER SHARE
Basic and diluted EPS were calculated using the following:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions, Except per Share Data
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
  
$1,657.5   
$1,697.4   
$1,221.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Average number of common shares—basic EPS
  
 
587.1   
 
598.9   
 
603.3 
Incremental share effect from: (a)
  
  
  
Stock options
  
 
8.1   
 
9.8   
 
11.3 
Restricted stock units, performance share units, and other
  
 
2.8   
 
3.2   
 
4.2 
Average number of common shares—diluted EPS
  
 
598.0   
 
611.9   
 
618.8 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Earnings per share—basic
  
$
2.82   
$
2.83   
$
2.02 
Earnings per share—diluted
  
$
2.77   
$
2.77   
$
1.97 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Incremental shares from stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units are computed by the treasury stock method. Stock options,
restricted stock units, and performance share units excluded from our computation of diluted EPS because they were not dilutive were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2015 
Anti-dilutive stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units
  
 2.3   
 1.1   
 2.1 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
81

Table of Contents
NOTE 13. RETIREMENT BENEFITS AND POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
We have defined benefit pension plans covering many employees in the United States, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. Benefits for salaried employees
are based on length of service and final average compensation. Benefits for hourly employees include various monthly amounts for each year of credited service.
Our funding policy is consistent with the requirements of applicable laws. We made no voluntary contributions to our principal U.S. plans in fiscal 2017, 2016, and
2015. We do not expect to be required to make any contributions in fiscal 2018. Our principal domestic retirement plan covering salaried employees has a provision
that any excess pension assets would be allocated to active participants if the plan is terminated within five years of a change in control. All salaried employees
hired on or after June 1, 2013 are eligible for a retirement program that does not include a defined benefit pension plan.
In May 2017, we announced changes to the United States pension plans. The Company will freeze the pay and service amounts used to calculate pension benefits
for active employees who participate in the United States pension plans as of December 31, 2027. Beginning January 1, 2028, active employees in the United States
will not accrue additional benefits for future service and eligible compensation received under these plans. These changes resulted in a $130.9 million decline in the
projected benefit obligation as of May 28, 2017, due to the decrease in expected future pensionable compensation.
Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
We also sponsor plans that provide health care benefits to many of our retirees in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. The United States salaried health care
benefit plan is contributory, with retiree contributions based on years of service. We make decisions to fund related trusts for certain employees and retirees on an
annual basis. We made voluntary contributions to these plans of $20.0 million in in fiscal 2017 and $24.0 million in fiscal 2016.
Health Care Cost Trend Rates
Assumed health care cost trends are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2017
   
2016
 
Health care cost trend rate for next year
   7.0% and 7.3%    7.3% and 7.5% 
Rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (ultimate rate)
   
5.0%    
5.0% 
Year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
   
2024        
2024     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
We review our health care cost trend rates annually. Our review is based on data we collect about our health care claims experience and information provided by
our actuaries. This information includes recent plan experience, plan design, overall industry experience and projections, and assumptions used by other similar
organizations. Our initial health care cost trend rate is adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with this review, recent experiences, and short-term expectations.
Our initial health care cost trend rate assumption is 7.3 percent for retirees age 65 and over and 7.0 percent for retirees under age 65 at the end of fiscal 2017. Rates
are graded down annually until the ultimate trend rate of 5.0 percent is reached in 2024 for all retirees. The trend rates are applicable for calculations only if the
retirees’ benefits increase as a result of health care inflation. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view
on the rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate health care cost premium. Assumed trend rates for health care costs have an important effect on the amounts
reported for the other postretirement benefit plans.
A one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:
 
In Millions
  
One
Percentage
Point
Increase    
One
Percentage
Point
Decrease  
Effect on the aggregate of the service and interest cost components in fiscal 2018
  
 
$  2.2   
 
$  (1.9) 
Effect on the other postretirement accumulated benefit obligation as of May 28, 2017
  
 
59.5   
 
(53.8) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the Act) was signed into
law in March 2010. The Act codifies health care reforms with staggered effective dates from 2010 to 2018. Estimates of the future impacts of several of the Act’s
provisions are incorporated into our postretirement benefit liability.
 
82

Table of Contents
Postemployment Benefit Plans
Under certain circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits, primarily severance, to former or inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
We recognize an obligation for any of these benefits that vest or accumulate with service. Postemployment benefits that do not vest or accumulate with service
(such as severance based solely on annual pay rather than years of service) are charged to expense when incurred. Our postemployment benefit plans are unfunded.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2017, we adopted new accounting requirements which permit reporting entities with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a
month-end to apply a practical expedient to measure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the entity’s fiscal year-end
and apply such practical expedient consistently to all plans. We measured the plan assets and obligations for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement
benefit, and postemployment benefit plans as of May 31, 2017.
Summarized financial information about defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans is presented below:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
  
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
  
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2017   
2016   
2017   
2016  
Change in Plan Assets:
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fair value at beginning of year
  $5,539.9  $5,758.5  $ 602.4  $ 582.8   
 
Actual return on assets
   
645.6   
36.3   
75.2   
(0.1)  
 
Employer contributions
   
25.4   
23.7   
20.1   
24.1   
 
Plan participant contributions
   
8.8   
5.7   
15.2   
14.1   
 
Benefits payments
   (282.2)   (277.5)   
(18.1)   
(18.5)  
 
Foreign currency
   
(12.3)   
(6.8)   
—   
—   
 
 
 
 
Fair value at end of year
  $5,925.2  $5,539.9  $ 694.8  $ 602.4  
 
 
 
 
Change in Projected Benefit Obligation:
  
 
 
 
 
 
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
  $6,448.5  $6,252.1  $1,028.9  $1,079.6  $ 164.1  $ 146.6 
Service cost
   
119.7   
134.6   
12.5   
19.0   
8.8   
7.6 
Interest cost
   
216.5   
267.8   
32.2   
44.1   
2.6   
3.9 
Plan amendment
   (130.9)   
0.9   
—   
—   
—   
1.1 
Curtailment/other
   
1.9   
7.1   
(0.3)   
0.5   
1.3   
10.7 
Plan participant contributions
   
8.8   
5.7   
15.2   
14.1   
—   
— 
Medicare Part D reimbursements
   
—   
—   
3.4   
3.5   
—   
— 
Actuarial loss (gain)
   
88.5   
65.2   
(77.6)   
(64.5)   
(7.4)   
11.2 
Benefits payments
   (282.6)   (278.0)   
(63.3)   
(66.4)   
(34.7)   
(16.9) 
Foreign currency
   
(11.8)   
(6.9)   
0.4   
(1.0)   
(0.2)   
(0.1) 
Projected benefit obligation at end of year
  $6,458.6  $6,448.5  $ 951.4  $1,028.9  $ 134.5  $ 164.1 
Plan assets less than benefit obligation as of fiscal year end
  $ (533.4)  $ (908.6)  $ (256.6)   $ (426.5)  $(134.5)   $(164.1) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit pension plans was $6,104.5 million as of May 28, 2017, and $5,950.7 million as of May 29, 2016.
 
83

Table of Contents
Amounts recognized in AOCI as of May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016, are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
  
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans   
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
  
Total
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
  
2016
  
2017   
2016   
2017   
2016   
2017
  
2016
 
Net actuarial loss
  $(1,621.4)  
$(1,886.0)  
$(14.5)  
$ (57.6)  
$ (9.5)  
$ (14.6)  
$(1,645.4)  
$(1,958.2) 
Prior service (costs) credits
   
(3.9)  
 
(6.8)  
 22.8  
 
19.9  
 
0.6  
 
(1.2)  
 
19.5  
 
11.9 
Amounts recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss  $(1,625.3)   
$(1,892.8)  
$
8.3  
$ (37.7)  
$ (8.9)   
$ (15.8)  
$(1,625.9)   
$(1,946.3) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plans with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined 
Benefit 
Pension Plans
   
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
   
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2017    
2016    
2017    
2016  
Projected benefit obligation
  $610.1   $5,490.3   $
5.5   $
—   $
4.4   $
4.8 
Accumulated benefit obligation
   542.3    4,998.3    947.9    1,024.7    130.1    159.3 
Plan assets at fair value
   
51.9    4,498.5    694.8    
602.4    
—    
— 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Components of net periodic benefit expense are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
  
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
  
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2015   
2017   
2016   
2015   
2017   
2016    
2015  
Service cost
  $ 119.7  
$ 134.6  
$ 137.0  
$ 12.5  
$ 19.0  
$ 22.4  
$ 8.8  
$ 7.6   $ 7.5 
Interest cost
   216.5  
 267.8  
 249.2  
 32.2  
 44.1  
 46.9  
 
2.6  
 
3.9    
4.3 
Expected return on plan assets
   (486.7)  
 (496.9)  
 (476.4)  
 (48.5)  
 (46.2)  
 (40.2)  
 
—  
 
—    
— 
Amortization of losses
   190.2  
 189.8  
 141.7  
 
2.5  
 
6.6  
 
4.9  
 
1.7  
 
0.7    
0.7 
Amortization of prior service costs (credits)
   
2.5  
 
4.7  
 
7.4  
 
(5.4)  
 
(5.4)  
 
(1.6)  
 
0.6  
 
2.5    
2.4 
Other adjustments
   
3.1  
 
5.0  
 
15.1  
 
1.3  
 
2.3  
 
3.3  
 
1.3  
 10.7    
9.5 
Settlement or curtailment losses
   
3.8  
 
13.1  
 
18.0  
 
(0.9)  
 
(1.0)  
 
1.3  
 (1.4)  
 
—    
— 
Net expense
  $
49.1  
$ 118.1  
$
92.0  
$ (6.3)  
$ 19.4  
$ 37.0  
$13.6  
$25.4   $24.4 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
We expect to recognize the following amounts in net periodic benefit expense in fiscal 2018:
 
In Millions
  
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans    
Other
Postretirement
Benefit Plans   
Postemployment
Benefit Plans  
Amortization of losses
  
$
176.9   
$
 0.8  
$
0.6 
Amortization of prior service costs (credits)
  
 
1.9   
 
(5.4)  
 
0.8 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84

Table of Contents
Assumptions
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine fiscal year-end benefit obligations are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
 
 
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
 
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2017  
 
2016  
 
2017 
 
2016  
 
2017  
 
2016  
Discount rate
  
 4.08%  
 4.19%  
 3.92%  
 3.97%  
 2.87%  
 2.94% 
Rate of salary increases
  
 4.25 
 
 4.28 
 
 
— 
 
 
— 
 
 4.46 
 
 4.35 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine fiscal year net periodic benefit expense are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
 
 
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
 
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
  
  2017 (a) 
 2016 
 2015 
 2017 (a) 
 2016 
 2015 
 2017 (a) 
 2016 
 2015 
Discount rate
   
4.19%   4.38%   4.54%   
3.97%   4.20%   4.51%   
2.94%   3.55%   3.82% 
Service cost effective rate
   
4.57 
  
— 
  
— 
  
4.42 
  
— 
  
— 
  
3.55 
  
— 
  
— 
Interest cost effective rate
   
3.44 
  
— 
  
— 
  
3.17 
  
— 
  
— 
  
2.67 
  
— 
  
— 
Rate of salary increases
   
4.28 
  4.31 
  4.44 
  
— 
  
— 
  
— 
  
4.35 
  4.36 
  4.44 
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
   
8.17 
  8.53 
  8.53 
  
7.85 
  8.14 
  8.13 
  
— 
  
— 
  
— 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Beginning in fiscal 2017, we adopted the full yield curve method.
Discount Rates
Beginning in fiscal 2017, we changed the method used to estimate the service and interest cost components of the net periodic benefit expense for our United States
and most of our international defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans. We adopted a full yield curve approach to
estimate service cost and interest cost by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used to determine the benefit obligation to the relevant projected
cash flows. This method provides a more precise measurement of service and interest costs by correlating the timing of the plans’ liability cash flows to the
corresponding rate on the yield curve. Previously, we estimated service cost and interest cost using a single weighted-average discount rate derived from the yield
curve used to measure the benefit obligation at the beginning of the period. This change does not affect the measurement of our benefit obligations related to these
plans. We have accounted for this change prospectively as a change in accounting estimate beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2017. The change in methodology
resulted in a decrease in service and interest cost of approximately $68 million for fiscal 2017 compared to our previous methodology. The fiscal 2017 reduction in
our net periodic benefit expense as a result of this change in methodology was partially offset by a reduction in our weighted-average expected rate of return on
plan assets for our principal defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans in the United States to 8.25 percent as a result of changes that decreased
investment risk in the portfolio.
Beginning in fiscal 2017, our discount rate assumptions are determined annually as of May 31 for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and
postemployment benefit plan obligations. We also use discount rates as of May 31 to determine defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and
postemployment benefit plan income and expense for the following fiscal year. We work with our outside actuaries to determine the timing and amount of expected
future cash outflows to plan participants and, using the Aa Above Median corporate bond yield, to develop a forward interest rate curve, including a margin to that
index based on our credit risk. This forward interest rate curve is applied to our expected future cash outflows to determine our discount rate assumptions.
 
85

Table of Contents
Fair Value of Plan Assets
The fair values of our pension and postretirement benefit plans’ assets and their respective levels in the fair value hierarchy at May 28, 2017, and May 29, 2016, by
asset category were as follows:
 
 
  
May 28, 2017
   
May 29, 2016
 
In Millions
  
Level 1    
Level 2    Level 3   
Total
Assets    
Level 1    
Level 2    
Level 3   
Total
Assets  
Fair value measurement of pension plan assets:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Equity (a)
  $1,773.0   $ 781.2   $
—   
$2,554.2   
$1,543.7   
$ 741.9   
$
—   
$2,285.6 
Fixed income (b)
   
951.9    
742.2    
—   
 1,694.1   
 
903.8   
 
745.8   
 
—   
 1,649.6 
Real asset investments (c)
   
253.1    
95.8    
—   
 
348.9   
 
193.6   
 
95.2   
 
—   
 
288.8 
Other investments (d)
   
—    
—    
0.3   
 
0.3   
 
—   
 
—   
 
0.4   
 
0.4 
Cash and accruals
   
174.2    
—    
—   
 
174.2   
 
195.1   
 
—   
 
—   
 
195.1 
Fair value measurement of pension plan assets in the fair value
hierarchy
  $3,152.2   $1,619.2   $
0.3   
$4,771.7   
$2,836.2   
$1,582.9   
$
0.4   
$4,419.5 
Investments measured at net asset value (e)
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
   
 1,153.5   
  
   
  
   
 
 
   
 1,120.4 
Total pension plan investments
  
  
  
  
$5,925.2   
  
  
  
$5,539.9 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fair value measurement of postretirement benefit plan assets:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Equity (a)
  $ 122.3   $
67.5   $
—   
$ 189.8   
$ 128.9   
$
87.6   
$
—   
$ 216.5 
Fixed income (b)
   
34.1    
160.0    
—   
 
194.1   
 
18.0   
 
83.4   
 
—   
 
101.4 
Real asset investments (c)
   
18.0    
14.5    
—   
 
32.5   
 
—   
 
14.3   
 
—   
 
14.3 
Other investments (d)
   
—    
—    
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—   
 
— 
Cash and accruals
   
11.3    
—    
—   
 
11.3   
 
8.9   
 
—   
 
—   
 
8.9 
Fair value measurement of postretirement benefit plan assets in
the fair value hierarchy
  $ 185.7   $ 242.0   $
—   
$ 427.7   
$ 155.8   
$ 185.3   
$
—   
$ 341.1 
Investments measured at net asset value (e)
    
     
     
   
 
267.1   
  
   
  
   
  
   
 
261.3 
Total postretirement benefit plan investments
  
  
  
  
$ 694.8   
  
  
  
$ 602.4 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Primarily publicly traded common stock for purposes of total return and to maintain equity exposure consistent with policy allocations. Investments include:
United States and international equity securities, mutual funds, and equity futures valued at closing prices from national exchanges; and commingled funds
valued at unit values provided by the investment managers, which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments.
(b)
Primarily government and corporate debt securities and futures for purposes of total return, managing fixed income exposure to policy allocations, and
managing duration targets. Investments include: fixed income securities and bond futures generally valued at closing prices from national exchanges, fixed
income pricing models, and independent financial analysts; and fixed income commingled funds valued at unit values provided by the investment managers,
which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments.
(c)
Publicly traded common stock and limited partnerships in the energy and real estate sectors for purposes of total return. Investments include: energy and real
estate securities generally valued at closing prices from national exchanges; and commingled funds valued at unit values provided by the investment
managers, which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments.
(d)
Global balanced fund of equity, fixed income, and real estate securities for purposes of meeting Canadian pension plan asset allocation policies, and
insurance and annuity contracts to provide a stable stream of income for retirees and to fund postretirement medical benefits. Fair values are derived from
unit values provided by the investment managers, which are generally based on the fair value of the underlying investments and contract fair values from the
providers.
(e)
Primarily private investments and common collective trusts that are measured at fair value using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent) practical
expedient and have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy.
There were no material changes in our level 3 investments in fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2016.
 
86

Table of Contents
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets
Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by our asset allocation, our historical long-term investment performance, our estimate of future long-term
returns by asset class (using input from our actuaries, investment services, and investment managers), and long-term inflation assumptions. We review this
assumption annually for each plan; however, our annual investment performance for one particular year does not, by itself, significantly influence our evaluation.
Weighted-average asset allocations for the past two fiscal years for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
 
 
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2017  
 
2016  
 
2017  
 
2016
 
 
Asset category:
  
 
 
 
United States equities
  
 28.5%  
 30.5%  
 
31.9%  
 
37.2% 
International equities
  
 17.9 
 
 19.0 
 
 
17.8 
 
 
23.4 
Private equities
  
 
7.8 
 
 
8.3 
 
 
3.6 
 
 
3.9 
Fixed income
  
 31.7 
 
 28.6 
 
 
40.0 
 
 
29.4 
Real assets
  
 14.1 
 
 13.6 
 
 
6.7 
 
 
6.1 
 
Total
  
 100.0%  
 100.0%  
 
100.0%  
 
100.0% 
 
The investment objective for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans is to secure the benefit obligations to participants at a reasonable
cost to us. Our goal is to optimize the long-term return on plan assets at a moderate level of risk. The defined benefit pension plan and other postretirement benefit
plan portfolios are broadly diversified across asset classes. Within asset classes, the portfolios are further diversified across investment styles and investment
organizations. For the defined benefit pension plans, the long-term investment policy allocation is: 20 percent to equities in the United States; 15 percent to
international equities; 10 percent to private equities; 40 percent to fixed income; and 15 percent to real assets (real estate, energy, and timber). For other
postretirement benefit plans, the long-term investment policy allocations are: 30 percent to equities in the United States; 15 percent to international equities; 10
percent to private equities; 40 percent to fixed income; and 5 percent to real assets (real estate, energy, and timber). The actual allocations to these asset classes may
vary tactically around the long-term policy allocations based on relative market valuations.
Contributions and Future Benefit Payments
We do not expect to be required to make contributions to our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans in fiscal
2018. Actual fiscal 2018 contributions could exceed our current projections, as influenced by our decision to undertake discretionary funding of our benefit trusts
and future changes in regulatory requirements. Estimated benefit payments, which reflect expected future service, as appropriate, are expected to be paid from
fiscal 2018 to 2027 as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Defined
Benefit
Pension
Plans    
Other
Postretirement
Benefit Plans
Gross Payments   
Medicare
Subsidy
Receipts    
Postemployment
Benefit
Plans
 
 
2018
  
$ 290.2   
 
$  59.5   
 
$  4.3   
 
$21.2 
2019
  
 
298.6   
 
61.6   
 
4.6   
 
19.0 
2020
  
 
307.7   
 
63.0   
 
4.2   
 
17.4 
2021
  
 
316.4   
 
64.1   
 
3.5   
 
16.1 
2022
  
 
325.7   
 
64.8   
 
3.6   
 
15.0 
2023-2027
  
 1,767.8   
 
328.8   
 
18.8   
 
61.5 
 

Defined Contribution Plans
The General Mills Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan that covers domestic salaried, hourly, nonunion, and certain union employees. This plan is a 401(k)
savings plan that includes a number of investment funds, including a Company stock fund and an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP). We sponsor another
money purchase plan for certain domestic hourly employees with net assets of $23.0 million as of May 28, 2017, and $21.0 million as of May 29, 2016. We also
sponsor defined contribution plans in many of our foreign locations. Our total recognized expense related to defined contribution plans was $54.1 million in fiscal
2017, $61.2 million in fiscal 2016, and $44.0 million in fiscal 2015.
 
87

Table of Contents
We match a percentage of employee contributions to the General Mills Savings Plan. The Company match is directed to investment options of the participant’s
choosing. The number of shares of our common stock allocated to participants in the ESOP was 6.3 million as of May 28, 2017, and 6.9 million as of May 29,
2016. The ESOP’s only assets are our common stock and temporary cash balances.
The Company stock fund and the ESOP collectively held $598.7 million and $711.5 million of Company common stock as of May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016,
respectively.
NOTE 14. INCOME TAXES
The components of earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures and the corresponding income taxes thereon are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017   
2016   
2015 
 
Earnings before income taxes and 
after-tax earnings from joint ventures:
  
  
  
United States
  
$1,941.6   
$1,941.4   
$1,338.6 
Foreign
  
 
329.7   
 
462.2   
 
423.3 
 
Total earnings before income taxes and 
after-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
$2,271.3   
$2,403.6   
$1,761.9 
 
Income taxes:
  
  
  
Currently payable:
  
  
  
Federal
  
$ 368.5   
$ 489.8   
$ 392.7 
State and local
  
 
21.1   
 
30.8   
 
29.3 
Foreign
  
 
81.7   
 
114.0   
 
139.5 
 
Total current
  
 
471.3   
 
634.6   
 
561.5 
 
Deferred:
  
  
  
Federal
  
 
201.3   
 
123.0   
 
70.3 
State and local
  
 
10.2   
 
(6.9)   
 
(8.7) 
Foreign
  
 
(27.6)   
 
4.5   
 
(36.3) 
 
Total deferred
  
 
183.9   
 
120.6   
 
25.3 
 
Total income taxes
  
$ 655.2   
$ 755.2   
$ 586.8 
 
The following table reconciles the United States statutory income tax rate with our effective income tax rate:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2017 
 
2016 
 
2015 
 
United States statutory rate
  
 35.0%  
 35.0%  
 35.0% 
State and local income taxes, net of federal tax benefits
  
 0.8 
 
 0.7 
 
 0.7 
Foreign rate differences
  
 (3.5)  
 (2.2)  
 (3.1) 
Repatriation of foreign earnings
  
 
— 
 
 
— 
 
 4.5 
Non-deductible goodwill
  
 
— 
 
 2.6 
 
 
— 
Domestic manufacturing deduction
  
 (2.8)  
 (2.0)  
 (2.9) 
Other, net (a)
  
 (0.7)  
 (2.7)  
 (0.9) 
Effective income tax rate
  
 28.8%  
 31.4%  
 33.3% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Fiscal 2016 includes 0.6 percent tax benefit related to the divestiture of our business in Venezuela. See Note 3 for additional information.
 
88

Table of Contents
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
 
Accrued liabilities
  
$
70.0   
$
89.9 
Compensation and employee benefits
  
 
419.2   
 
491.5 
Pension
  
 
196.3   
 
322.0 
Tax credit carryforwards
  
 
18.4   
 
4.5 
Stock, partnership, and miscellaneous investments
  
 
276.4   
 
353.6 
Capital losses
  
 
29.8   
 
14.5 
Net operating losses
  
 
109.5   
 
97.9 
Other
  
 
85.6   
 
84.1 
 
Gross deferred tax assets
  
 1,205.2   
 1,458.0 
Valuation allowance
  
 
231.8   
 
227.0 
 
Net deferred tax assets
  
 
973.4   
 1,231.0 
 
Brands
  
 1,310.1   
 1,311.7 
Fixed assets
  
 
484.5   
 
476.3 
Intangible assets
  
 
238.6   
 
221.8 
Tax lease transactions
  
 
45.8   
 
48.0 
Inventories
  
 
60.0   
 
53.0 
Stock, partnership, and miscellaneous investments
  
 
479.4   
 
476.0 
Unrealized hedges
  
 
45.4   
 
22.6 
Other
  
 
29.0   
 
21.2 
 
Gross deferred tax liabilities
  
 2,692.8   
 2,630.6 
 
Net deferred tax liability
  
$1,719.4   
$1,399.6 
 
We have established a valuation allowance against certain of the categories of deferred tax assets described above as current evidence does not suggest we will
realize sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character (e.g., ordinary income versus capital gain income) within the carryforward period to allow us to
realize these deferred tax benefits.
Of the total valuation allowance of $231.8 million, the majority relates to a deferred tax asset for losses recorded as part of the Pillsbury acquisition in the amount
of $167.2 million, $53.3 million relates to various state and foreign loss carryforwards, and $11.1 million relates to various foreign capital loss carryforwards. As of
May 28, 2017, we believe it is more-likely-than-not that the remainder of our deferred tax assets are realizable.
We have $142.1 million of tax loss carryforwards. Of this amount, $125.3 million is foreign loss carryforwards. The carryforward periods are as follows: $93.2
million do not expire; $3.7 million expire in fiscal 2018 and 2019; and $28.4 million expire in fiscal 2020 and beyond. The remaining $16.8 million are state
operating loss carryforwards, the majority of which expire after fiscal 2023.
We have not recognized a deferred tax liability for unremitted earnings of approximately $2.3 billion from our foreign operations because our subsidiaries have
invested or will invest the undistributed earnings indefinitely, or the earnings will be remitted in a tax-neutral transaction. It is not practicable for us to determine
the amount of unrecognized deferred tax liabilities on these indefinitely reinvested earnings. Deferred taxes are recorded for earnings of our foreign operations
when we determine that such earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested. In fiscal 2015, we approved a one-time repatriation of $606.1 million of historical
foreign earnings to reduce the economic cost of funding restructuring initiatives and the acquisition of Annie’s. We recorded a discrete tax charge of $78.6 million
in fiscal 2015 related to this action. We have previously asserted that our historical foreign earnings are permanently reinvested and will only be repatriated in a
tax-neutral manner, and this one-time repatriation does not change this on-going assertion.
We are subject to federal income taxes in the United States as well as various state, local, and foreign jurisdictions. A number of years may elapse before an
uncertain tax position is audited and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain
tax position, we believe that our liabilities for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these liabilities, as well as the related interest, in light of
changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position would usually require the use of cash.

The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Our major taxing jurisdictions include the United States (federal and state) and
Canada. Various tax examinations by United States state taxing authorities could be conducted for any open tax year, which vary by jurisdiction, but are generally
from 3 to 5 years.
 
89

Table of Contents
Several state and foreign examinations are currently in progress. We do not expect these examinations to result in a material impact on our results of operations or
financial position.
During fiscal 2017, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) concluded its field examination of our federal tax returns for fiscal 2013 and 2014. The audit closure and
related adjustments did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position. As of May 28, 2017, we have effectively settled all issues with
the IRS for fiscal years 2014 and prior.
During fiscal 2017, the Brazilian tax authority, Secretaria da Receita Federal do Brasil (RFB), concluded audits of our 2012 and 2013 tax return years. These audits
included a review of our determinations of amortization of certain goodwill arising from the acquisition of Yoki Alimentos S.A. (Yoki). The RFB has proposed
adjustments that effectively eliminate the goodwill amortization benefits related to this transaction. We believe we have meritorious defenses and intend to contest
the disallowance.
We apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. Accordingly, we recognize the amount of tax benefit that
has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. Future changes in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of
uncertain tax positions will affect earnings in the period of such change.
The following table sets forth changes in our total gross unrecognized tax benefit liabilities, excluding accrued interest, for fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2016.
Approximately $62 million of this total in fiscal 2017 represents the amount that, if recognized, would affect our effective income tax rate in future periods. This
amount differs from the gross unrecognized tax benefits presented in the table because certain of the liabilities below would impact deferred taxes if recognized.
We also would record a decrease in U.S. federal income taxes upon recognition of the state tax benefits included therein.
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016  
 
Balance, beginning of year
  
$176.5   
$161.1 
Tax positions related to current year:
  
  
Additions
  
 
27.2   
 
31.6 
Tax positions related to prior years:
  
  
Additions
  
 
0.9   
 
23.9 
Reductions
  
 (47.9)   
 (25.7) 
Settlements
  
 
(9.6)   
 
(4.0) 
Lapses in statutes of limitations
  
 (11.6)   
 (10.4) 
Balance, end of year
  
$135.5   
$176.5 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As of May 28, 2017, we expect to pay approximately $1.8 million of unrecognized tax benefit liabilities and accrued interest within the next 12 months. We are not
able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes. The remaining amount of our
unrecognized tax liability was classified in other liabilities.
We report accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefit liabilities in income tax expense. For fiscal 2017, we recognized a net benefit of $5.6
million of tax-related net interest and penalties, and had $23.1 million of accrued interest and penalties as of May 28, 2017. For fiscal 2016, we recognized a net
benefit of $2.7 million of tax-related net interest and penalties, and had $32.1 million of accrued interest and penalties as of May 29, 2016.
NOTE 15. LEASES, OTHER COMMITMENTS, AND CONTINGENCIES
The Company’s leases are generally for warehouse space and equipment. Rent expense under all operating leases from continuing operations was $188.1 million in
fiscal 2017, $189.1 million in fiscal 2016, and $193.5 million in fiscal 2015.
Some operating leases require payment of property taxes, insurance, and maintenance costs in addition to the rent payments. Contingent and escalation rent in
excess of minimum rent payments and sublease income netted in rent expense were insignificant.
 
90

Table of Contents
Noncancelable future lease commitments are:
 
In Millions
  
 
Operating
Leases
  
   
 
Capital
Leases
  
 
Fiscal 2018
  
 
$118.8   
 
$0.4 
Fiscal 2019
  
 
101.7   
 
0.4 
Fiscal 2020
  
 
80.7   
 
0.2 
Fiscal 2021
  
 
60.7   
 
0.1 
Fiscal 2022
  
 
49.7   
 
— 
After fiscal 2022
  
 
89.1   
 
0.1 
Total noncancelable future lease commitments
  
 
$500.7   
 
$1.2 
  
 
 
 
  
Less: interest
  
  
   
 
(0.1) 
Present value of obligations under capital leases
  
  
 
$1.1 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Depreciation on capital leases is recorded as depreciation expense in our results of operations.
As of May 28, 2017, we have issued guarantees and comfort letters of $504.7 million for the debt and other obligations of consolidated subsidiaries, and guarantees
and comfort letters of $165.3 million for the debt and other obligations of non-consolidated affiliates, mainly CPW. In addition, off-balance sheet arrangements are
generally limited to the future payments under non-cancelable operating leases, which totaled $500.7 million as of May 28, 2017.
NOTE 16. BUSINESS SEGMENT AND GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
We operate in the consumer foods industry. In the third quarter of fiscal 2017, we announced a new global organization structure to streamline our leadership,
enhance global scale, and drive improved operational agility to maximize our growth capabilities. As a result of this global reorganization, beginning in the third
quarter of fiscal 2017, we reported results for our four operating segments as follows: North America Retail, 65.3 percent of our fiscal 2017 consolidated net sales;
Convenience Stores & Foodservice, 12.0 percent of our fiscal 2017 consolidated net sales; Europe & Australia, 11.7 percent of our fiscal 2017 consolidated net
sales; and Asia & Latin America, 11.0 percent of our fiscal 2017 consolidated net sales. We have restated our net sales by segment and segment operating profit
amounts to reflect our new operating segments. These segment changes had no effect on previously reported consolidated net sales, operating profit, net earnings
attributable to General Mills, or earnings per share.
Our North America Retail operating segment consists of our former U.S. Retail operating units and our Canada region. Within our North America Retail operating
segment, our former U.S. Meals operating unit and U.S. Baking operating unit have been combined into one operating unit: U.S. Meals & Baking. Our
Convenience Stores & Foodservice operating segment is unchanged. Our Europe & Australia operating segment consists of our former Europe region. Our Asia &
Latin America operating segment consists of our former Asia/Pacific and Latin America regions.
Under our new organization structure, our chief operating decision maker assesses performance and makes decisions about resources to be allocated to our
segments at the North America Retail, Convenience Stores & Foodservice, Europe & Australia, and Asia & Latin America operating segment level.
Our North America Retail operating segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains,
drug, dollar and discount chains, and e-commerce grocery providers. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat cereals, refrigerated yogurt,
soup, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, grain, fruit and savory snacks, and a wide variety
of organic products including refrigerated yogurt, nutrition bars, meal kits, salty snacks, ready-to-eat cereal, and grain snacks.
In our Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment our major product categories are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen meals, unbaked and
fully baked frozen dough products, and baking mixes. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to
distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries in the United States.

Our Europe & Australia operating segment consists of our former Europe region. The segment includes retail and foodservice businesses in the greater Europe and
Australia regions. Our product categories include refrigerated yogurt, meal kits, super-premium ice cream, refrigerated and frozen dough products, shelf stable
vegetables, grain snacks, and dessert and baking mixes. We also sell super-premium ice cream directly to consumers through company-owned retail shops.
Revenues from franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the franchisee is located.
 
91

Table of Contents
Our Asia & Latin America operating segment consists of our former Asia/Pacific and Latin America regions. The segment includes retail and foodservice
businesses in the greater Asia and South America regions. Our product categories include super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts, refrigerated and frozen
dough products, dessert and baking mixes, meal kits, salty and grain snacks, wellness beverages, and refrigerated yogurt. We also sell super-premium ice cream and
frozen desserts directly to consumers through company-owned retail shops. Our Asia & Latin America segment also includes products manufactured in the United
States for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. Revenues from
export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end customer or franchisee is located.
Operating profit for these segments excludes unallocated corporate items, gain on divestitures, and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs. Unallocated
corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, contributions to the General Mills
Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative project-related costs, and other items that are not part
of our measurement of segment operating performance. These include gains and losses arising from the revaluation of certain grain inventories and gains and losses
from mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions until passed back to our operating segments. These items affecting operating profit are centrally
managed at the corporate level and are excluded from the measure of segment profitability reviewed by executive management. Under our supply chain
organization, our manufacturing, warehouse, and distribution activities are substantially integrated across our operations in order to maximize efficiency and
productivity. As a result, fixed assets and depreciation and amortization expenses are neither maintained nor available by operating segment.
Our operating segment results were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
   
2016
   
2015
 
Net sales:
  
  
  
North America Retail
  
$10,196.9   
$10,936.6   
$11,612.1 
Convenience Stores & Foodservice
  
 
1,870.0   
 
1,923.8   
 
1,995.1 
Europe & Australia
  
 
1,824.5   
 
1,998.0   
 
2,126.5 
Asia & Latin America
  
 
1,728.4   
 
1,704.7   
 
1,896.6 
Total
  
$15,619.8   
$16,563.1   
$17,630.3 
Operating profit:
  
  
  
North America Retail
  
$ 2,303.6   
$ 2,351.2   
$ 2,382.7 
Convenience Stores & Foodservice
  
 
401.2   
 
378.9   
 
353.1 
Europe & Australia
  
 
164.2   
 
200.3   
 
179.4 
Asia & Latin America
  
 
83.6   
 
69.1   
 
119.8 
Total segment operating profit
  
 
2,952.6   
 
2,999.5   
 
3,035.0 
Unallocated corporate items
  
 
190.1   
 
288.9   
 
413.8 
Divestitures loss (gain)
  
 
13.5   
 
(148.2)   
 
— 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 
182.6   
 
151.4   
 
543.9 
Operating profit
  
$ 2,566.4   
$ 2,707.4   
$ 2,077.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
92

Table of Contents
Net sales by class of similar products were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
   
2016
   
2015
 
Snacks
  $ 3,302.2   $ 3,297.2   $ 3,392.0 
Cereal
   
2,673.2    
2,731.5    
2,771.3 
Convenient meals
   
2,653.6    
2,779.0    
2,810.3 
Yogurt
   
2,403.5    
2,760.9    
2,938.3 
Dough
   
1,690.6    
1,820.0    
1,877.0 
Baking mixes and ingredients
   
1,654.1    
1,704.3    
1,867.7 
Super-premium ice cream
   
738.4    
731.2    
769.5 
Vegetables
   
310.5    
532.3    
937.3 
Other
   
193.7    
206.7    
266.9 
Total
  $15,619.8   $16,563.1   $17,630.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The following table provides financial information by geographic area:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017
   
2016
   
2015
 
Net sales:
  
  
  
United States
  $11,160.9   $11,930.9   $12,501.8 
Non-United States
   
4,458.9    
4,632.2    
5,128.5 
Total
  $15,619.8   $16,563.1   $17,630.3 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Cash and cash equivalents:
  
  
United States
  $
62.9   $ 118.5 
Non-United States
   
703.2    
645.2 
Total
  $ 766.1   $ 763.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Land, buildings, and equipment:
  
  
United States
  $2,704.0   $2,755.1 
Non-United States
   
983.7    
988.5 
Total
  $3,687.7   $3,743.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOTE 17. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
The components of certain Consolidated Balance Sheet accounts are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017   
May 29,
2016  
Receivables:
  
 
Customers
  $1,454.4  $1,390.4 
Less allowance for doubtful accounts
   
(24.3)   
(29.6) 
Total
  $1,430.1  $1,360.8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93

Table of Contents
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Inventories:
  
  
Raw materials and packaging
  
$ 395.4   
$ 397.3 
Finished goods
  
 1,224.3   
 1,163.1 
Grain
  
 
73.0   
 
72.6 
Excess of FIFO over LIFO cost (a)
  
 (209.1)   
 (219.3) 
Total
  
$1,483.6   
$1,413.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Inventories of $893.8 million as of May 28, 2017, and $841.0 million as of May 29, 2016, were valued at LIFO. The difference between replacement cost
and the stated LIFO inventory value is not materially different from the reserve for the LIFO valuation method.
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets:
  
  
Other receivables
  
$ 163.7   
$ 159.3 
Prepaid expenses
  
 
168.9   
 
177.9 
Derivative receivables, primarily commodity-related
  
 
35.0   
 
44.6 
Grain contracts
  
 
2.7   
 
1.8 
Miscellaneous
  
 
11.3   
 
15.4 
Total
  
$ 381.6   
$ 399.0 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 28, 
2017
   
May 29, 
2016 
Land, buildings, and equipment:
  
  
Land
  
$
79.8   
$
92.9 
Buildings
  
 2,249.2   
 2,236.0 
Buildings under capital lease
  
 
0.3   
 
0.3 
Equipment
  
 6,095.9   
 5,945.6 
Equipment under capital lease
  
 
3.0   
 
3.0 
Capitalized software
  
 
545.4   
 
523.0 
Construction in progress
  
 
553.0   
 
702.7 
Total land, buildings, and equipment
  
 9,526.6   
 9,503.5 
Less accumulated depreciation
  
 (5,838.9)    
 (5,759.9) 
Total
  
$ 3,687.7   
$ 3,743.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Other assets:
  
  
Investments in and advances to joint ventures
  
$ 505.3   
$ 518.9 
Pension assets
  
 
144.9   
 
90.9 
Exchangeable note with related party
  
 
—   
 
12.7 
Life insurance
  
 
25.6   
 
26.3 
Miscellaneous
  
 
110.1   
 
102.9 
Total
  
$ 785.9   
$ 751.7 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
94

Table of Contents
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Other current liabilities:
  
  
Accrued trade and consumer promotions
  
$ 482.6   
$ 563.7 
Accrued payroll
  
 
326.6   
 
386.4 
Dividends payable
  
 
21.5   
 
23.8 
Accrued taxes
  
 
58.0   
 
110.5 
Accrued interest, including interest rate swaps
  
 
83.8   
 
90.4 
Grain contracts
  
 
5.6   
 
5.5 
Restructuring and other exit costs reserve
  
 
85.0   
 
76.6 
Derivative payable
  
 
18.1   
 
35.6 
Miscellaneous
  
 
291.0   
 
302.5 
Total
  
$1,372.2   
$1,595.0 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 28,
2017    
May 29,
2016  
Other noncurrent liabilities:
  
  
Accrued compensation and benefits, including obligations for underfunded
other postretirement benefit and postemployment benefit plans
  
$1,249.7   
$1,755.0 
Accrued taxes
  
 
162.3   
 
204.0 
Miscellaneous
  
 
111.1   
 
128.6 
Total
  
$1,523.1   
$2,087.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Certain Consolidated Statements of Earnings amounts are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Depreciation and amortization
  
$603.6   
$608.1   
$588.3 
Research and development expense
  
 218.2   
 222.1   
 229.4 
Advertising and media expense (including production and communication costs)
  
 623.8   
 754.4   
 823.1 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The components of interest, net are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Expense (Income), in Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Interest expense
  
$306.7   
$319.6   
$335.5 
Capitalized interest
  
 
(4.6)   
 
(7.7)   
 
(6.9) 
Interest income
  
 
(7.0)    
 
(8.1)   
 (13.2) 
Interest, net
  
$295.1   
$303.8   
$315.4 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Certain Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows amounts are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2017    
2016    
2015  
Cash interest payments
  
$285.8   
$292.0   
$305.3 
Cash paid for income taxes
  
 551.1   
 533.8   
 562.6 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
95

Table of Contents
NOTE 18. QUARTERLY DATA (UNAUDITED)
Summarized quarterly data for fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2016 follows:
 
In Millions, Except Per
    Share Amounts
  
First Quarter
   
Second Quarter
   
Third Quarter
   
Fourth Quarter
 
  
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
 
  
2017    
2016    
2017    
2016    
2017    
2016    
2017    
2016  
Net sales
  $3,907.9   $4,207.9   $4,112.1   $4,424.9   $3,793.2   $4,002.4   $3,806.6   $3,927.9 
Gross margin
   1,416.9    1,554.6    1,519.5    1,540.6    1,307.7    1,357.5    1,319.7    1,376.8 
Net earnings attributable
to General Mills
   
409.0    
426.6    
481.8    
529.5    
357.8    
361.7    
408.9    
379.6 
EPS:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Basic
  $
0.68   $
0.71   $
0.82   $
0.88   $
0.62   $
0.61   $
0.70   $
0.63 
Diluted
  $
0.67   $
0.69   $
0.80   $
0.87   $
0.61   $
0.59   $
0.69   $
0.62 
Dividends per share
  $
0.48   $
0.44   $
0.48   $
0.44   $
0.48   $
0.44   $
0.48   $
0.46 
Market price of common stock:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
High
  $ 72.64   $ 59.55   $ 71.42   $ 59.23   $ 63.87   $ 60.14   $ 61.16   $ 65.36 
Low
  $ 62.78   $ 54.36   $ 60.65   $ 55.41   $ 59.23   $ 54.12   $ 55.91   $ 58.85 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The effective tax rate for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016 was 19.2 percent, primarily driven by tax credits and the impact of the divestiture of our business in
Venezuela.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in Venezuela. As a result of
this transaction, we recorded a pre-tax loss of $37.6 million. In addition, we sold our General Mills Argentina S.A. foodservice business in Argentina to a third
party and recorded a pre-tax loss of $14.8 million.
 
96

Table of Contents
Glossary
Accelerated depreciation associated with restructured assets. The increase in depreciation expense caused by updating the salvage value and shortening the
useful life of depreciable fixed assets to coincide with the end of production under an approved restructuring plan, but only if impairment is not present.
AOCI . Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Adjusted average total capital. Notes payable, long-term debt including current portion, redeemable interest, noncontrolling interests, and stockholders’ equity
excluding AOCI, and certain after-tax earnings adjustments are used to calculate adjusted return on average total capital. The average is calculated using the
average of the beginning of fiscal year and end of fiscal year Consolidated Balance Sheet amounts for these line items.
Adjusted operating profit margin. Operating profit adjusted for certain items affecting year-over-year comparability, divided by net sales.
Adjusted return on average total capital. Net earnings including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests, excluding after-tax net interest,
and adjusted for certain items affecting year-over-year comparability, divided by adjusted average total capital.
Average total capital. Notes payable, long-term debt including current portion, redeemable interest, noncontrolling interests, and stockholders’ equity are used to
calculate return on average total capital. The average is calculated using the average of the beginning of fiscal year and end of fiscal year Consolidated Balance
Sheet amounts for these line items.
Constant currency. Financial results translated to United States dollars using constant foreign currency exchange rates based on the rates in effect for the
comparable prior-year period. To present this information, current period results for entities reporting in currencies other than United States dollars are translated
into United States dollars at the average exchange rates in effect during the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, rather than the actual average exchange
rates in effect during the current fiscal year. Therefore, the foreign currency impact is equal to current year results in local currencies multiplied by the change in
the average foreign currency exchange rate between the current fiscal period and the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year.
Core working capital. Accounts receivable plus inventories less accounts payable, all as of the last day of our fiscal year.
Derivatives. Financial instruments such as futures, swaps, options, and forward contracts that we use to manage our risk arising from changes in commodity prices,
interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and equity prices.
Euribor. European Interbank Offered Rate.
Fair value hierarchy. For purposes of fair value measurement, we categorize assets and liabilities into one of three levels based on the assumptions (inputs) used
in valuing the asset or liability. Level 1 provides the most reliable measure of fair value, while Level 3 generally requires significant management judgment. The
three levels are defined as follows:
 
 
Level 1:
Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
 
 
Level 2:
Observable inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets or
quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in inactive markets.
 
 
Level 3:
Unobservable inputs reflecting management’s assumptions about the inputs used in pricing the asset or liability.
Fixed charge coverage ratio. The sum of earnings before income taxes and fixed charges (before tax), divided by the sum of the fixed charges (before tax) and
interest.
Focus 6 platforms. The Focus 6 platforms for the Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment consist of cereal, yogurt, snacks, frozen meals, biscuits, and baking
mixes.
Foundation businesses. Foundation businesses consist primarily of refrigerated dough, desserts, and soup in our North America Retail segment and bakery flour
and frozen dough products in our Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment, as well as other product lines not included in Growth businesses.
Free cash flow. Net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of land, buildings, and equipment.
 
97

Table of Contents
Free cash flow conversion rate. Free cash flow divided by our net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests adjusted for
certain items affecting year-over-year comparability.
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Guidelines, procedures, and practices that we are required to use in recording and reporting accounting
information in our financial statements.
Goodwill. The difference between the purchase price of acquired companies plus the fair value of any noncontrolling and redeemable interests and the related fair
values of net assets acquired.
Growth businesses.  Growth businesses include cereal, snack bars, the natural and organic portfolio, hot snacks, Mexican products, and yogurt in our North
America Retail segment; our Europe & Australia segment; our Asia & Latin America segment; and our Focus 6 platforms in our Convenience Stores &
Foodservice segment.
Gross margin. Net sales less cost of sales.
Hedge accounting. Accounting for qualifying hedges that allows changes in a hedging instrument’s fair value to offset corresponding changes in the hedged item
in the same reporting period. Hedge accounting is permitted for certain hedging instruments and hedged items only if the hedging relationship is highly effective,
and only prospectively from the date a hedging relationship is formally documented.
Holistic Margin Management (HMM). Company-wide initiative to use productivity savings, mix management and price realization to offset input cost inflation,
protect margins and generate funds to reinvest in sales-generating activities.
Interest bearing instruments. Notes payable, long-term debt, including current portion, cash and cash equivalents, and certain interest bearing investments
classified within prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets.
LIBOR. London Interbank Offered Rate.
Mark-to-market. The act of determining a value for financial instruments, commodity contracts, and related assets or liabilities based on the current market price
for that item.
Net mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on derivative contracts that will be allocated to
segment operating profit when the exposure we are hedging affects earnings.
Net price realization. The impact of list and promoted price changes, net of trade and other price promotion costs.
Net realizable value. The estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation.
Noncontrolling interests. Interests of consolidated subsidiaries held by third parties.
Notional principal amount. The principal amount on which fixed-rate or floating-rate interest payments are calculated.
OCI. Other comprehensive income (loss).
Operating cash flow conversion rate. Net cash provided by operating activities, divided by net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests.
Operating cash flow to debt ratio. Net cash provided by operating activities, divided by the sum of notes payable and long-term debt, including the current
portion.
Organic net sales growth.  Net sales growth adjusted for foreign currency translation, as well as acquisitions, divestitures, and a 53 rd week impact, when
applicable.
Project-related costs.  Costs incurred related to our restructuring initiatives not included in restructuring charges.
Redeemable interest. Interest of consolidated subsidiaries held by a third party that can be redeemed outside of our control and therefore cannot be classified as a
noncontrolling interest in equity.
Reporting unit. An operating segment or a business one level below an operating segment.
 
98

Table of Contents
Return on average total capital. Net earnings including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests, excluding after-tax net interest, divided
by average total capital.
Segment operating profit margin. Segment operating profit divided by net sales for the segment.
Strategic Revenue Management (SRM). A company-wide capability focused on generating sustainable benefits from net price realization and mix by identifying
and executing against specific opportunities to apply tools including pricing, sizing, mix management, and promotion optimization across each of our businesses.
Supply chain input costs. Costs incurred to produce and deliver product, including costs for ingredients and conversion, inventory management, logistics, and
warehousing.
Total debt. Notes payable and long-term debt, including current portion.
Translation adjustments. The impact of the conversion of our foreign affiliates’ financial statements to United States dollars for the purpose of consolidating our
financial statements.
Variable interest entities (VIEs). A legal structure that is used for business purposes that either (1) does not have equity investors that have voting rights and share
in all the entity’s profits and losses or (2) has equity investors that do not provide sufficient financial resources to support the entity’s activities.
Working capital. Current assets and current liabilities, all as of the last day of our fiscal year.
 
ITEM 9
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
 
ITEM 9A
Controls and Procedures
We, under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, have evaluated the
effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) under the 1934 Act). Based on that evaluation, our
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of May 28, 2017, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or submit under the 1934 Act is (1) recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time
periods specified in applicable rules and forms, and (2) accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Financial Officer, in a manner that allows timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the 1934 Act) during our fiscal quarter ended May 28,
2017, that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
 
99

Table of Contents
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
The management of General Mills, Inc. is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in
Rule 13a-15(f) under the 1934 Act. The Company’s internal control system was designed to provide reasonable assurance to our management and the Board of
Directors regarding the preparation and fair presentation of published financial statements. Under the supervision and with the participation of management,
including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as of May 28, 2017. In making this assessment, management used the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO) in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) .
Based on our assessment using the criteria set forth by COSO in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) , management concluded that our internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of May 28, 2017.
KPMG LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, has issued a report on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
 
/s/ J. L. Harmening
  
/s/ D. L. Mulligan
J. L. Harmening
  
D. L. Mulligan
Chief Executive Officer
  
Executive Vice President and Chief
  
Financial Officer
June 29, 2017
Our independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our internal control over financial reporting is included in the “Report of Independent
Registered Public Accounting Firm” in Item8 of this report.
 
ITEM 9B
Other Information
None.
PART III
 
ITEM 10
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
The information contained in the sections entitled “Proposal Number 1 — Election of Directors,” “Shareholder Director Nominations,” and “Section 16(a)
Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by
reference.
Information regarding our executive officers is set forth in Item 1 of this report.
The information regarding our Audit Committee, including the members of the Audit Committee and audit committee financial experts, set forth in the section
entitled “Board Committees and Their Functions” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein
by reference.
We have adopted a Code of Conduct applicable to all employees, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, and principal accounting
officer. A copy of the Code of Conduct is available on our website at www.generalmills.com. We intend to post on our website any amendments to our Code of
Conduct and any waivers from our Code of Conduct for principal officers.
 
ITEM 11
Executive Compensation
The information contained in the sections entitled “Executive Compensation,” “Director Compensation,” and “Overseeing Risk Management” in our definitive
Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
 
ITEM 12
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information contained in the section entitled “Ownership of General Mills Common Stock by Directors, Officers and Certain Beneficial Owners” and “Equity
Compensation Plan Information” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.
 
100

Table of Contents
ITEM 13
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information set forth in the sections entitled “Board Independence and Accountability” and “Related Person Transactions” contained in our definitive Proxy
Statement for our 2017 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
 
ITEM 14
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information contained in the section entitled “Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm Fees” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2017 Annual
Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
PART IV
 
ITEM 15
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
 
1.
Financial Statements:
The following financial statements are included in Item 8 of this report:
Consolidated Statements of Earnings for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2017, May 29, 2016, and May 31, 2015.
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2017, May 29, 2016, and May 31, 2015.
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2017, May 29, 2016, and May 31, 2015.
Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2017, May 29, 2016, and May 31, 2015.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Report of Management Responsibilities.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
 
2.
Financial Statement Schedule:
For the fiscal years ended May 28, 2017, May 29, 2016, and May 31, 2015:
II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
 
3.
Exhibits:
 
Exhibit No. 
Description
    3.1
 
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form
10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009).
    3.2
 
By-laws of the Registrant (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 8,
2016).
    4.1
 
Indenture, dated as of February 1, 1996, between the Registrant and U.S. Bank National Association (f/k/a First Trust of Illinois, National
Association) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed February 6, 1996 (File
no. 333-00745)).
    4.2
 
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 18, 2009, between the Registrant and U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009).
  10.1*
 
2001 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010).
 
101

Table of Contents
  10.2*
  
2005 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.3*
  
2006 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.4*
  
2007 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.5*
  
2009 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.6*
  
2011 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended May 31, 2015).
  10.7*
  
2011 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011).
  10.8*
  
2016 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2016).
  10.9*
  
Executive Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended November 28, 2010).
  10.10*
  
Separation Pay and Benefits Program for Officers (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended May 25, 2014).
  10.11*
  
Supplemental Savings Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended February 22, 2009).
  10.12*
  
Supplemental Retirement Plan (Grandfathered) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.12 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.13*
  
2005 Supplemental Retirement Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.14*
  
Deferred Compensation Plan (Grandfathered) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.15*
  
2005 Deferred Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.16*
  
Executive Survivor Income Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended May 29, 2005).
  10.17*
  
Supplemental Benefits Trust Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011).
  10.18*
  
Supplemental Benefits Trust Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011).
  10.19*
  
Form of Performance Share Unit Award Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-
Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 24, 2014)
  10.20
  
Agreements, dated November 29, 1989, by and between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2000).
  10.21
  
Protocol and Addendum No. 1 to Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated November 21, 1989, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 27, 2001).
 
102

Table of Contents
  10.22
  
Addendum No. 2 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated March 16, 1993, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 10.18 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 30, 2004).
  10.23
  
Addendum No. 3 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, effective as of March 15, 1993, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2000).
  10.24 +
  
Addenda Nos. 4 and 5 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 10.26 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009).
  10.25
  
Addendum No. 10 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated January 1, 2010, among the Registrant, Nestle S.A. and CPW S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended February 28, 2010).
  10.26 +
  
Addendum No. 11 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated July 17, 2012, among the Registrant, Nestle S.A., and CPW S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 26, 2012).
  10.27
  
Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of May 18, 2016, among General Mills, Inc., the several financial institutions from time to time party to the
agreement and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed May 18, 2016).
  10.28
  
Extension Agreement, dated April 26, 2017, among General Mills Inc., the several financial institutions from time to time party to the agreement
and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed May 1, 2017).
  12.1
  Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
  21.1
  Subsidiaries of the Registrant.
  23.1
  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
  31.1
  Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
  31.2
  Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
  32.1
  Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
  32.2
  Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101
  
The following materials from the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2017 formatted in eXtensible
Business Reporting Language: (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Earnings; (iii) the Consolidated Statements
of Comprehensive Income; (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest; (v) the Consolidated Statements of Cash
Flows; (vi) the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; and (vii) Schedule II – Valuation of Qualifying Accounts.
 
*
Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit pursuant to Item 15 of Form 10-K.
+
Confidential information has been omitted from the exhibit and filed separately with the SEC pursuant to Rule 24b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of our long-term debt are not filed and, in lieu
thereof, we agree to furnish copies to the SEC upon request.
 
103

Table of Contents
ITEM 16
Form 10-K Summary
None.
 
104

Table of Contents
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
 
 
GENERAL MILLS, INC.
Dated: June 29, 2017
 
 By:  /s/ Jerald A. Young
 
 
 Name:    Jerald A. Young
 
 
 Title:      Vice President, Controller
 
105

Table of Contents
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
Signature
  
Title
 
Date
/s/ Jeffrey L Harmening
Jeffrey L. Harmening
  
Chief Executive Officer
and Director (Principal Executive Officer)
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan
Donal L. Mulligan
  
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Jerald A. Young
Jerald A. Young
  
Vice President, Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Bradbury H. Anderson
Bradbury H. Anderson
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Alicia S. Boler Davis
Alicia S. Boler Davis
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ R. Kerry Clark
R. Kerry Clark
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ David M. Cordani
David M. Cordani
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Roger W. Ferguson Jr.
Roger W. Ferguson Jr.
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Henrietta H. Fore
Henrietta H. Fore
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Maria G. Henry
Maria G. Henry
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Heidi G. Miller
Heidi G. Miller
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Steve Odland
Steve Odland
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Kendall J. Powell
Kendall J. Powell
  
Chairman of the Board and Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Robert L. Ryan
Robert L. Ryan
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Eric D. Sprunk
Eric D. Sprunk
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
/s/ Dorothy A. Terrell
Dorothy A. Terrell
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017

/s/ Jorge A. Uribe
Jorge A. Uribe
  
Director
 
June 29, 2017
 
106

Table of Contents
General Mills, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Schedule II—Valuation of Qualifying Accounts
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
    2017      
    2016      
    2015     
Allowance for doubtful accounts:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $    29.6  
 
$  25.3  
 
$  21.0 
Additions charged to expense
  
 
16.6  
 
21.4  
 
19.8 
Bad debt write-offs
  
 
(23.2)  
 
(17.5)  
 
(12.5) 
Other adjustments and reclassifications
  
 
1.3  
 
0.4  
 
(3.0) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at end of year
  
 $   24.3  
 
$  29.6  
 
$  25.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $ 227.0  
 
$215.4  
 
$221.6 
Additions charged to expense
  
 
5.2  
 
(1.5)  
 
2.9 
Adjustments due to acquisitions, translation of amounts, and other
  
 
(0.4)  
 
13.1  
 
(9.1) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at end of year
  
 $ 231.8  
 
$227.0  
 
$215.4 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reserve for restructuring and other exit charges:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $   76.6  
 
$120.8  
 
$    3.5 
Additions charged to expense, including translation amounts
  
 
104.0  
 
70.2  
 
185.1 
Net amounts utilized for restructuring activities
  
 
(95.6)  
 
(114.4)  
 
(67.8) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at end of year
  
 $   85.0  
 
$76.6  
 
$120.8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reserve for LIFO valuation:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $ 219.3  
 
$214.2  
 
$216.9 
Increase (decrease)
  
 
(10.2)  
 
5.1  
 
(2.7) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at end of year
  
 $ 209.1  
 
$219.3  
 
$214.2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107

Table of Contents
Exhibit Index
 
Exhibit No.  
Description
12.1  
  
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
21.1  
  
Subsidiaries of the Registrant.
23.1  
  
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
31.1  
  
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2  
  
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1  
  
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.2  
  
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101   
  
The following materials from the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2017 formatted in
eXtensible Business Reporting Language: (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Earnings; (iii) the
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Earnings; (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest; (v) the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows; (vi) the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; and (vii) Schedule II – Valuation of
Qualifying Accounts.
 
108

EXHIBIT 12.1
COMPUTATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
 
 
  
Fiscal Year Ended
 
In Millions, Except Ratios
  
May 28, 
2017
  
May 29, 
2016
  
May 31, 
2015
  
May 25, 
2014
  
May 26, 
2013
 
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures
  $2,271.3  $2,403.6  $1,761.9  $2,655.0  $2,534.9 
Distributed income of equity investees
   
75.6   
75.1   
72.6   
90.5   
115.7 
Plus: Fixed charges (1)
   
374.8   
386.8   
403.5   
389.8   
400.1 
Plus: Amortization of capitalized interest, net of interest capitalized
   
(0.9)   
(3.4)   
(3.0)   
(0.8)   
(0.4) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings available to cover fixed charges
  $2,720.8  $2,862.1  $2,235.0  $3,134.5  $3,050.3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
   
7.26   
7.40   
5.54   
8.04   
7.62 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)   Fixed charges:
  
 
 
 
 
Interest expense
  $ 306.7  $ 319.6  $ 335.5  $ 323.4  $ 333.8 
Preferred distributions to noncontrolling interests
   
5.4   
4.2   
3.5   
3.4   
3.7 
Rentals (1/3)
   
62.7   
63.0   
64.5   
63.0   
62.6 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total fixed charges
  $ 374.8  $ 386.8  $ 403.5  $ 389.8  $ 400.1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, earnings represent earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings of joint ventures,
distributed income of equity investees, fixed charges, and amortization of capitalized interest, net of interest capitalized. Fixed charges represent gross interest
expense (excluding interest on taxes) and subsidiary preferred distributions to noncontrolling interest holders, plus one-third (the proportion deemed representative
of the interest factor) of rent expense.

Exhibit 21.1
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
 
Company Name
  
Country
AB F C.V.
  
Netherlands
AESR, LLC
  
Delaware
ANNIE’S BAKING, LLC
  
Delaware
ANNIE’S ENTERPRISES, INC.
  
Vermont
ANNIE’S HOMEGROWN, INC.
  
Delaware
ANNIE’S, INC.
  
Delaware
C.P.A. CEREAL PARTNERS HANDELSGESELLSCHAFT m.b.H & Co. OHG
  
Austria
C.P.D. CEREAL PARTNERS DEUTSCHLAND GmbH & Co. oHG
  
Germany
C.P.W. HELLAS BREAKFAST CEREALS SOCIETE ANONYME
  
Greece
C.P.W. MEXICO S. de R.L. de C.V.
  
Mexico
CEREAL ASSOCIADOS PORTUGAL, A.E.I.E.
  
Portugal
CEREAL PARTNERS (MALAYSIA) SDN. BHD.
  
Malaysia
CEREAL PARTNERS AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED
  
Australia
CEREAL PARTNERS CZECH REPUBLIC, s.r.o.
  
Czech Republic
CEREAL PARTNERS ESPANA, A.E.I.E.
  
Spain
CEREAL PARTNERS FRANCE, SNC
  
France
CEREAL PARTNERS GIDA TICARET LIMITED SIRKETI
  
Turkey
CEREAL PARTNERS HUNGARIA KFT.
  
Hungary
CEREAL PARTNERS MEXICO, S.A. DE C.V.
  
Mexico
CEREAL PARTNERS NIGERIA LIMITED
  
Nigeria
CEREAL PARTNERS POLAND TORUN-PACIFIC Sp. z.o.o.
  
Poland
CEREAL PARTNERS RUS LLC
  
Russian Federation
CEREAL PARTNERS SLOVAK REPUBLIC, s.r.o.
  
Slovakia
CEREAL PARTNERS U.K.
  
United Kingdom
CEREALES C.P.W. CHILE LIMITADA (SRL)
  
Chile
CEREALES CPW PERU LIMITADA
  
Peru
CEREALES PARTNERS LATIN AMERICA LLC, SUCURSAL COLOMBIA
  
Colombia
CEREALES PARTNERS LATIN AMERICA LLC
  
Delaware
COLOMBO, INC.
  
Delaware
CP COLOMBIA ACP
  
Colombia
CP MIDDLE EAST FZCO
  
United Arab Emirates
CP SUISSE
  
Switzerland
CPW AMA DWC—LLC
  
United Arab Emirates
CPW BRASIL LTDA.
  
Brazil
CPW CEREAL PARTNERS WORLDWIDE—Breakfast Cereals Joint Venture
  
Switzerland
CPW DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
  
Dominican Republic
CPW HONG KONG LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
CPW NEW ZEALAND
  
New Zealand
CPW OPERATIONS S.A.R.L.
  
Switzerland
CPW PHILIPPINES, INC.
  
Philippines
CPW ROMANIA
  
Romania

CPW S.A.
  
Switzerland
CPW SINGAPORE (PTE.) LTD.
  
Singapore
CPW TIANJIN LIMITED
  
China
EPIC PROVISIONS, LLC
  
Delaware
FOODSHOULDTASTEGOOD, INC.
  
Delaware
GARDETTO’S BAKERY, INC.
  
Wisconsin
GCOM ENTERPRISES, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS (CHINA) HOLDING CO., LTD.
  
China
GENERAL MILLS (THAILAND) COMPANY LIMITED
  
Thailand
GENERAL MILLS ARGENTINA L.S., LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS ASIA PTE. LTD.
  
Singapore
GENERAL MILLS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
  
Australia
GENERAL MILLS BELGIUM, VOF
  
Belgium
GENERAL MILLS BELGIUM, VOF, PORTUGAL BRANCH
  
Portugal
GENERAL MILLS BERWICK LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS BRASIL ALIMENTOS LTDA
  
Brazil
GENERAL MILLS CANADA B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS CANADA CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING FIVE LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING FOUR CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING ONE CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING SIX CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING THREE CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING TWO CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CAPITAL, INC.
  
Nevada
GENERAL MILLS CEREALS, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS CHINA HOLDINGS LIMITED
  
Mauritius
GENERAL MILLS CONTINENTAL INC. S.A.
  
Chile
GENERAL MILLS DE MEXICO, S. DE R.L. DE C.V.
  
Mexico
GENERAL MILLS DIRECT MARKETING, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS DL GP
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS EASTERN EUROPE s.r.o.
  
Czech Republic
GENERAL MILLS ESPANA B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS ESPANA B.V.—SPANISH BRANCH
  
Spain
GENERAL MILLS FINANCE, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS FOOD PRODUCTS INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
  
India
GENERAL MILLS FOODS (NANJING) CO. LTD.
  
China
GENERAL MILLS FOODS (SANHE) CO., LTD.
  
China
GENERAL MILLS FOODS ASIA LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS FOUNDATION
  
Minnesota
GENERAL MILLS FRANCE SAS
  
France
GENERAL MILLS FROZEN FOODS (GUANGZHOU) LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS FROZEN FOODS (SHANGHAI) LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL FINANCE LTD.
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS EIGHT GP
  
Bermuda

GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS ELEVEN GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS FIVE GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS NINE GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS SIX LTD.
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TEN GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TWELVE GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TWO GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GMBH
  
Germany
GENERAL MILLS HELLAS S.A.
  
Greece
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED
  
Australia
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (FRANCE) SAS
  
France
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (U.K.) LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING A (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING C (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING D (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING F (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING G (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING H (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING J (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING ONE (GERMANY) GmbH
  
Germany
GENERAL MILLS HONG KONG LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS IBERICA, S.A. UNIPERSONAL
  
Spain
GENERAL MILLS INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
  
India
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES TWO, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL FINANCE, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL FRANCE SAS
  
France
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS, LLC (Dutch Tax Resident)
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL LIMITED
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL LIMITED, JAPANESE BRANCH
  
Japan
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL SÀRL
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS IP HOLDINGS I, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS IP HOLDINGS II, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS ISRAEL LTD
  
Israel
GENERAL MILLS ITALIA SRL
  
Italy
GENERAL MILLS KOREA CO., LTD.
  
Korea, Republic of
GENERAL MILLS LANDES (SAS)
  
France
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG FINANCE S.A R.L.
  
Luxembourg
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG FINANCE S.A.R.L, NYON BRANCH
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG ONE S.A. R.L.
  
Luxembourg
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG ONE, U.S. BRANCH
  
Minnesota
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG S.A.R.L.
  
Luxembourg
GENERAL MILLS MAARSSEN HOLDING, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS MALAYSIA SDN. BHD.
  
Malaysia

GENERAL MILLS MANUFACTURING AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED
  
Australia
GENERAL MILLS MARKETING, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS MAURITIUS, INC.
  
Mauritius
GENERAL MILLS MENAT DMCC
  
United Arab Emirates
GENERAL MILLS MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA FZE
  
United Arab Emirates
GENERAL MILLS MIDDLE EAST SAL
  
Lebanon
GENERAL MILLS MISSOURI, INC.
  
Minnesota
GENERAL MILLS NEW ZEALAND LIMITED
  
New Zealand
GENERAL MILLS NORWAY AS
  
Norway
GENERAL MILLS OPERATIONS, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS PENSION TRUSTEE LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS PROPERTIES, INC.
  
New York
GENERAL MILLS RH, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS RIGHTS HOLDINGS, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS SALES, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS SALES, INC., PUERTO RICO BRANCH
  
Puerto Rico
GENERAL MILLS SAN ADRIAN, S.L. UNIPERSONAL
  
Spain
GENERAL MILLS SCANDINAVIA AB
  
Sweden
GENERAL MILLS SERVICES (UK) LTD.
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS SERVICES, INC.
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS SINGAPORE PTE. LTD.
  
Singapore
GENERAL MILLS SOUTH AFRICA (PROPRIETARY) LIMITED
  
South Africa
GENERAL MILLS SPECIALTY PRODUCTS, LLC
  
Delaware
GENERAL MILLS SWISS FOUR GMBH
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS SWISS THREE GMBH
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS TAIWAN LIMITED
  
Taiwan
GENERAL MILLS TRADING (SHANGHAI) CO. LIMITED
  
China
GENERAL MILLS UK LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS VENTAS DE MEXICO, S. DE R.L. DE C.V.
  
Mexico
GENERAL MILLS, INC.
  
Delaware
GIGANTE VERDE S. de R.L. de C.V.
  
Mexico
GIGANTE VERDE, LLC
  
Delaware
GLOBAL HOLDINGS ONE MANAGEMENT LLC
  
Delaware
GM CEREALS HOLDINGS, INC.
  
Delaware
GM CEREALS MANAGER, INC.
  
Delaware
GM CEREALS PROPERTIES, INC.
  
Delaware
GREEN GIANT INTERNATIONAL, LLC
  
Minnesota
GUANGZHOU PILLSBURY V. PEARL FOODS CO., LTD.
  
China
HAAGEN-DAZS ARRAS SNC
  
France
HAAGEN-DAZS BELGIUM (BV BA)
  
Belgium
HAAGEN-DAZS INTERNATIONAL SHOPPE COMPANY, INC.
  
Minnesota
HAAGEN-DAZS JAPAN, INC.
  
Japan
HAAGEN-DAZS KOREA CO., LTD.
  
Korea, Republic of
HAAGEN-DAZS NEDERLAND N.V.
  
Netherlands
HD DISTRIBUTORS (THAILAND) CO., LTD.
  
Thailand

HD MARKETING & DISTRIBUTION SDN. BHD.
  
Malaysia
HDIP, INC.
  
Delaware
IMMACULATE BAKING COMPANY
  
Delaware
INO FITA GMBH
  
Germany
KAMPOS ESTIASI S.A.
  
Greece
KCLM RESEARCH IN NUTRITION INC.
  
Canada
LA SALTENA S.A.
  
Argentina
LATICINIOS CAROLINA LTDA
  
Brazil
LIBERTE MARQUES SARL
  
Luxembourg
LIBERTÉ USA, LLC
  
Delaware
MILL CITY, LLC
  
Delaware
MOUNTAIN HIGH LLC
  
Delaware
NAPA VALLEY KITCHENS, INC.
  
California
NOBLEVAL SARL
  
France
NORTHGATE PARTNERS LLC
  
North Dakota
PET INCORPORATED
  
Delaware
PINEDALE HOLDINGS PTE LIMITED
  
Singapore
RODOVERY TRANSPORTES LTDA
  
Brazil
SERETRAM (SAS)
  
France
SHANGHAI HAAGEN-DAZS FOOD TRADING CO., LTD.
  
China
SHANGHAI PILLSBURY FROZEN FOODS, LIMITED
  
China
SMALL PLANET FOODS, INC.
  
Washington
SODIMA SAS
  
France
THE PASTA MASTER PTY. LTD.
  
Australia
THE PILLSBURY COMPANY, LLC
  
Delaware
TRANSYOKI—TRANSPORTES YOKI LTDA.
  
Brazil
WASHBURN INVESTMENT OFFICE LLC
  
Delaware
Y.O. C.V.
  
Netherlands
YOKI DISTRIBUIDORA DE ALIMENTOS LTDA.
  
Brazil
YOPLAIT BENELUX NV
  
Belgium
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING A (FRANCE) SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT CANADA HOLDING CO./YOPLAIT CANADA HOLDING CIE
  
Canada
YOPLAIT DAIRY CO., LTD.
  
China
YOPLAIT FRANCE SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT INTERNATIONAL SARL
  
Switzerland
YOPLAIT IRELAND LIMITED
  
Ireland
YOPLAIT LIBERTE CANADA CO./YOPLAIT LIBERTE CANADA CIE
  
Canada
YOPLAIT MARQUES SNC
  
France
YOPLAIT SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT SVERIGE AB
  
Sweden
YOPLAIT UK LTD
  
United Kingdom
YOPLAIT USA, INC.
  
Delaware

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
General Mills, Inc.:
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (Nos. 333-198079 and 333-202215) on Form S-3 and registration statements
(Nos. 2-50327, 2-53523, 2-95574, 33-27628, 33-32059, 333-32509, 333-90012, 333-131195, 333-139997, 333-148820, 333-163849, 333-179622, and
333-215259) on Form S-8 of General Mills, Inc. of our report dated June 29, 2017, with respect to the consolidated balance sheets of General Mills, Inc. as of
May 28, 2017 and May 29, 2016, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, comprehensive income, total equity and redeemable interest, and cash flows
for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended May 28, 2017, and the related financial statement schedule, and the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting as of May 28, 2017, which report appears in the May 28, 2017 annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Minneapolis, Minnesota
June 29, 2017

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Jeffrey L. Harmening, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
(a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: June 29, 2017
/s/ Jeffrey L. Harmening
Jeffrey L. Harmening
Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Donal L. Mulligan, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
(a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: June 29, 2017
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan
Donal L. Mulligan
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Jeffrey L. Harmening , Chief Executive Officer of General Mills, Inc. (the “Company”), certify, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,
18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:
(1) the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2017 (the “Report”), fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m or 78o(d)); and
(2) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: June 29, 2017
/s/ Jeffrey L. Harmening
Jeffrey L. Harmening
Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Donal L. Mulligan, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of General Mills, Inc. (the “Company”), certify, pursuant to Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:
(1) the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2017 (the “Report”), fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m or 78o(d)); and
(2) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: June 29, 2017
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan
Donal L. Mulligan
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
