Table of Contents
  
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
 
x
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED
May 29, 2016
 
¨
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 FOR THE TRANSITION PERIOD
FROM              TO             
Commission file number: 001-01185
 
 
GENERAL MILLS, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Delaware
 
41-0274440
(State or other jurisdiction of
 
(I.R.S. Employer
incorporation or organization)
 
Identification No.)
Number One General Mills Boulevard
 
Minneapolis, Minnesota
 
55426
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
(763) 764-7600
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 
Title of each class
 
Name of each exchange
on which registered
Common Stock, $.10 par value
 
New York Stock Exchange
Floating Rate Notes due 2020
 
New York Stock Exchange
2.100% Notes due 2020
 
New York Stock Exchange
1.000% Notes due 2023
 
New York Stock Exchange
1.500% Notes due 2027
 
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ¨ No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90 days. Yes x No ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
and post such files). Yes x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.
x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
 
Large accelerated filer
 x
  
Accelerated filer ¨
Non-accelerated filer
 ¨   (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
  
Smaller reporting company ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). Yes ¨ No x
Aggregate market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, based on the closing price of $58.41 per share as reported on the New York
Stock Exchange on November 27, 2015 (the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter): $34,654.2 million.
Number of shares of Common Stock outstanding as of June 13, 2016: 597,020,906 (excluding 157,592,422 shares held in the treasury).
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the registrant’s Proxy Statement for its 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders are incorporated by reference into Part III.

Table of Contents
Table of Contents
 
 
  
 
  
Page 
Part I
  
  
Item 1
  Business
  
 
3  
Item 1A
  Risk Factors
  
 
7  
Item 1B
  Unresolved Staff Comments
  
 13  
Item 2
  Properties
  
 13  
Item 3
  Legal Proceedings
  
 14  
Item 4
  Mine Safety Disclosures
  
 14  
Part II
  
  
Item 5
  
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of
Equity Securities
  
 15  
Item 6
  Selected Financial Data
  
 16  
Item 7
  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
  
 17  
Item 7A
  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
  
 48  
Item 8
  Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
  
 50  
Item 9
  Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
  
 106  
Item 9A
  Controls and Procedures
  
 106  
Item 9B
  Other Information
  
 107  
Part III
  
  
Item 10
  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
  
 107  
Item 11
  Executive Compensation
  
 107  
Item 12
  Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
  
 107  
Item 13
  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
  
 107  
Item 14
  Principal Accounting Fees and Services
  
 108  
Part IV
  
  
Item 15
  Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
  
 108  
Signatures  
  
 111  
 
2

Table of Contents
PART I
 
ITEM 1
Business
General Mills, Inc. was incorporated in Delaware in 1928. The terms “General Mills,” “Company,” “registrant,” “we,” “us,” and “our” mean General Mills, Inc.
and all subsidiaries included in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report unless the context indicates otherwise.
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.
COMPANY OVERVIEW
We are a leading global manufacturer and marketer of branded consumer foods sold through retail stores. We also are a leading supplier of branded and unbranded
food products to the North American foodservice and commercial baking industries. We manufacture our products in 13 countries and market them in more than
100 countries. In addition to our consolidated operations, we have 50 percent interests in two strategic joint ventures that manufacture and market food products
sold in more than 130 countries worldwide.
We manage and review the financial results of our business under three operating segments: U.S. Retail; International; and Convenience Stores and Foodservice.
See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) in Item 7 of this report for a description of our segments.
For financial information by segment and geographic area, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
We offer a variety of food products that provide great taste, nutrition, convenience and value for consumers around the world, with a focus on five large global
categories:
 
 
•
 ready-to-eat cereal;
 
 
•
 convenient meals, including meal kits, ethnic meals, pizza, soup, side dish mixes, frozen breakfast, and frozen entrees;
 
 
•
 snacks, including grain, fruit and savory snacks, nutrition bars, and frozen hot snacks;
 
 
•
 yogurt; and
 
 
•
 super-premium ice cream.
Other significant product categories include:
 
 
•
 baking mixes and ingredients; and
 
 
•
 refrigerated and frozen dough.
Our Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW) joint venture with Nestlé S.A. (Nestlé) competes in the ready-to-eat cereal category in markets outside North America, and
our Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ) joint venture competes in the super-premium ice cream category in Japan. For net sales contributed by each class of similar
products, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Customers. Our primary customers are grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, drug, dollar and discount chains, e-commerce
grocery providers, commercial and noncommercial foodservice distributors and operators, restaurants, and convenience stores. We generally sell to these customers
through our direct sales force. We use broker and distribution arrangements for certain products and to serve certain types of customers. For further information on
our customer credit and product return practices, please refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. During fiscal 2016, Wal-
Mart Stores, Inc. and its
 
3

Table of Contents
affiliates (Wal-Mart) accounted for 20 percent of our consolidated net sales and 30 percent of net sales of our U.S. Retail segment. No other customer accounted for
10 percent or more of our consolidated net sales. For further information on significant customers, please refer to Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements
in Item 8 of this report.
Competition. The consumer foods industry is highly competitive, with numerous manufacturers of varying sizes in the United States and throughout the world. The
food categories in which we participate also are very competitive. Our principal competitors in these categories all have substantial financial, marketing, and other
resources. Competition in our product categories is based on product innovation, product quality, price, brand recognition and loyalty, effectiveness of marketing,
promotional activity, and the ability to identify and satisfy consumer preferences. Our principal strategies for competing in each of our segments include unique
consumer insights, effective customer relationships, superior product quality, innovative advertising, product promotion, product innovation aligned with
consumers’ needs, an efficient supply chain, and price. In most product categories, we compete not only with other widely advertised, branded products, but also
with regional brands and with generic and private label products that are generally sold at lower prices. Internationally, we compete with both multi-national and
local manufacturers, and each country includes a unique group of competitors.
Raw materials, ingredients, and packaging. The principal raw materials that we use are grains (wheat, oats, and corn), sugar, dairy products, vegetables, fruits,
meats, vegetable oils, and other agricultural products. We also use substantial quantities of carton board, corrugated, plastic and metal packaging materials,
operating supplies, and energy. Most of these inputs for our domestic and Canadian operations are purchased from suppliers in the United States. In our
international operations, inputs that are not locally available in adequate supply may be imported from other countries. The cost of these inputs may fluctuate
widely due to external conditions such as weather, product scarcity, limited sources of supply, commodity market fluctuations, currency fluctuations, and changes
in governmental agricultural and energy policies and regulations. We have some long-term fixed price contracts, but the majority of our inputs are purchased on the
open market. We believe that we will be able to obtain an adequate supply of needed inputs. Occasionally and where possible, we make advance purchases of items
significant to our business in order to ensure continuity of operations. Our objective is to procure materials meeting both our quality standards and our production
needs at price levels that allow a targeted profit margin. Since these inputs generally represent the largest variable cost in manufacturing our products, to the extent
possible, we often manage the risk associated with adverse price movements for some inputs using a variety of risk management strategies. We also have a grain
merchandising operation that provides us efficient access to, and more informed knowledge of, various commodity markets, principally wheat and oats. This
operation holds physical inventories that are carried at fair market value and uses derivatives to manage its net inventory position and minimize its market
exposures.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Our research and development resources are focused on new product development, product improvement, process design and improvement, packaging, and
exploratory research in new business and technology areas. Research and development expenditures were $222 million in fiscal 2016, $229 million in fiscal 2015,
and $244 million in fiscal 2014.
TRADEMARKS AND PATENTS
Our products are marketed under a variety of valuable trademarks. Some of the more important trademarks used in our global operations (set forth in italics in this
report) include Annie’s, Betty Crocker , Bisquick , Bugles , Cascadian Farm , Cheerios , Chex , Cinnamon Toast Crunch , Cocoa Puffs , Cookie Crisp , Fiber One ,
Food Should Taste Good , Fruit by the Foot , Fruit Gushers , Fruit Roll-Ups , Gardetto’s , Go-Gurt , Gold Medal , Golden Grahams , Häagen-Dazs , Helpers ,
Jeno’s , Jus-Rol , Kitano , Kix , La Salteña , Lärabar , Latina , Liberté , Lucky Charms , Muir Glen , Nature Valley , Oatmeal Crisp , Old El Paso , Pillsbury ,
Progresso , Raisin Nut Bran , Total , Totino’s , Trix , Wanchai Ferry , Wheaties , Yoki , and Yoplait . We protect these marks as appropriate through registrations in
the United States and other jurisdictions. Depending on the jurisdiction, trademarks are generally valid as long as they are in use or their registrations are properly
maintained and they have not been found to have become generic. Registrations of trademarks can also generally be renewed indefinitely as long as the trademarks
are in use.
 
4

Table of Contents
Some of our products are marketed under or in combination with trademarks that have been licensed from others, including Reese’s Puffs for cereal, Hershey’s for
a variety of products, Green Giant for vegetables in certain countries, and Cinnabon for refrigerated dough, frozen pastries, and baking products. Our fruit snacks
business uses a variety of licensed trademarks, including Mott’s , Minions , Sunkist , Scooby Doo , Batman , Tom and Jerry , Hello Kitty , Thomas the Tank Engine ,
and various Warner Bros. and Nickelodeon characters. Our yogurt business uses a variety of licensed trademarks, including various Disney, Marvel, Warner Bros.,
and Nickelodeon characters.
Our cereal trademarks are licensed to CPW and may be used in association with the Nestlé trademark. Nestlé licenses certain of its trademarks to CPW, including
the Nestlé and Uncle Toby’s trademarks. The Häagen-Dazs trademark is licensed royalty-free and exclusively to Nestlé for ice cream and other frozen dessert
products in the United States and Canada. The Häagen-Dazs trademark is also licensed to HDJ. The J. M. Smucker Company holds an exclusive royalty-free
license to use the Pillsbury brand and the Pillsbury Doughboy character in the dessert mix and baking mix categories in the United States and under limited
circumstances in Canada and Mexico.
The Yoplait trademark and other related trademarks are owned by Yoplait Marques SNC, an entity in which we own a 50 percent interest. These marks are licensed
exclusively to Yoplait SAS, an entity in which we own a 51 percent interest. Yoplait SAS licenses these trademarks to its franchisees. The Liberté trademark and
other related trademarks are owned by Liberté Marques Sàrl, an entity in which we own a 50 percent interest.
We continue our focus on developing and marketing innovative, proprietary products. We consider the collective rights under our various patents, which expire
from time to time, a valuable asset, but we do not believe that our businesses are materially dependent upon any single patent or group of related patents.
SEASONALITY
In general, demand for our products is evenly balanced throughout the year. However, within our U.S. Retail segment demand for refrigerated dough, frozen baked
goods, and baking products is stronger in the fourth calendar quarter. Demand for Progresso soup is higher during the fall and winter months. Internationally,
demand for Häagen-Dazs ice cream is higher during the summer months and demand for baking mix and dough products increases during winter months. Due to
the offsetting impact of these demand trends, as well as the different seasons in the northern and southern hemispheres, our International segment net sales are
generally evenly balanced throughout the year.
BACKLOG
Orders are generally filled within a few days of receipt and are subject to cancellation at any time prior to shipment. The backlog of any unfilled orders as of
May 29, 2016, was not material.
WORKING CAPITAL
A description of our working capital is included in the Liquidity section of MD&A in Item 7 of this report. Our product return practices are described in Note 2 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
EMPLOYEES
As of May 29, 2016, we had approximately 39,000 full- and part-time employees.
FOOD QUALITY AND SAFETY REGULATION
The manufacture and sale of consumer food products is highly regulated. In the United States, our activities are subject to regulation by various federal government
agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, Department of Agriculture, Federal Trade Commission, Department of Commerce, and Environmental
Protection Agency, as well as various state and local agencies. Our business is also regulated by similar agencies outside of the United States.
 
5

Table of Contents
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
As of May 29, 2016, we were involved with two active cleanup sites associated with the alleged or threatened release of hazardous substances or wastes located in
Minneapolis, Minnesota and Moonachie, New Jersey. These matters involve several different actions, including administrative proceedings commenced by
regulatory agencies and demand letters by regulatory agencies and private parties.
Our operations are subject to the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act, and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, and all similar state, local, and foreign environmental laws and
regulations applicable to the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Based on current facts and circumstances, we believe that neither the results of our environmental proceedings nor our compliance in general with environmental
laws or regulations will have a material adverse effect upon our capital expenditures, earnings, or competitive position.
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
The section below provides information regarding our executive officers as of June 30, 2016:
Richard C. Allendorf , age 55, is Senior Vice President, General Counsel, and Secretary. Mr. Allendorf joined General Mills in 2001 from The Pillsbury
Company. He was promoted to Vice President, Deputy General Counsel in 2010, first overseeing the legal affairs of the U.S. Retail segment and Consumer Food
Sales and then, in August 2012, overseeing the legal affairs of the International segment and Global Ethics and Compliance. He was named to his present position
in February 2015. Prior to joining General Mills, he practiced law with the Shearman and Sterling and Mackall, Crounse and Moore law firms. He was in finance
with General Electric prior to his legal career.
John R. Church , age 50, is Executive Vice President, Supply Chain. Mr. Church joined General Mills in 1988 as a Product Developer in the Big G cereals
division and held various positions before becoming Vice President, Engineering in 2003. In 2005, his role was expanded to include development of the Company’s
strategy for the global sourcing of raw materials and manufacturing capabilities. He was named Vice President, Supply Chain Operations in 2007, Senior Vice
President, Supply Chain in 2008, and to his present position in July 2013.
Peter C. Erickson , age 55, is Executive Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality. Mr. Erickson joined General Mills in 1994 as part of the Colombo
yogurt acquisition. He has held various positions in Research & Development and became Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality in 2003 and Senior
Vice President, Innovation, Technology and Quality in 2006. He was named to his present position in July 2013.
Jeffrey L. Harmening , age 49, is Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, U.S. Retail. Mr. Harmening joined General Mills in 1994 and served in
various marketing roles in the Betty Crocker, Yoplait, and Big G cereal divisions. He was promoted to Marketing Director in 2000 and held leadership roles in Big
G New Enterprises and Foodservice New Business. He was named Vice President, Marketing for CPW in 2003 and a Vice President of the Big G cereal division in
2007. In 2011, he was promoted to Senior Vice President for the Big G cereal division. Mr. Harmening was appointed Senior Vice President, Chief Executive
Officer of CPW in July 2012, and he was named to his present position in May 2014. Mr. Harmening was appointed President, Chief Operating Officer effective
July 1, 2016.
Donal L. Mulligan , age 55, is Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Mulligan joined General Mills in 2001 from The Pillsbury Company. He
served as Vice President, Financial Operations for our International division until 2004, when he was named Vice President, Financial Operations for Operations
and Technology. Mr. Mulligan was appointed Treasurer of General Mills in 2006, Senior Vice President, Financial Operations in 2007, and was elected to his
present position in 2007. From 1987 to 1998, he held several international positions at PepsiCo, Inc. and YUM! Brands, Inc. Mr. Mulligan is a director of Tennant
Company.
 
6

Table of Contents
Kimberly A. Nelson , age 53, is Senior Vice President, External Relations, and President of the General Mills Foundation. Ms. Nelson joined General Mills in 1988
and has held marketing leadership roles in the Big G cereal, Snacks, and Meals divisions. She was elected Vice President, President, Snacks in 2004, Senior Vice
President, President, Snacks in 2008, and Senior Vice President, External Relations in September 2010. She was named President of the General Mills Foundation
in 2011.
Shawn P. O’Grady , age 52, is Senior Vice President, President, Sales & Channel Development. Mr. O’Grady joined General Mills in 1990 and held several
marketing roles in the Snacks, Meals and Big G cereal divisions. He was promoted to Vice President in 1998 and held marketing positions in the Betty Crocker and
Pillsbury USA divisions. In 2004, he moved into Consumer Foods Sales, becoming Vice President, President, U.S. Retail Sales in 2007, and Senior Vice President,
President, Consumer Foods Sales Division in 2010. He was promoted to his current position in June 2012.
Christopher D. O’Leary , age 56, is Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, International. Mr. O’Leary joined General Mills in 1997 as Vice
President, Corporate Growth. He was elected a Senior Vice President in 1999 and President of the Meals division in 2001. Mr. O’Leary was named to his present
position in 2006. Prior to joining General Mills, he spent 17 years at PepsiCo, Inc., last serving as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Hostess Frito-Lay
business in Canada. Mr. O’Leary is a director of Telephone and Data Systems, Inc.
Kendall J. Powell , age 62, is Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of General Mills. Mr. Powell joined General Mills in 1979 and served in a
variety of positions before becoming a Vice President in 1990. He became President of the Yoplait division in 1996, President of the Big G cereal division in 1997,
and Senior Vice President of General Mills in 1998. From 1999 to 2004, he served as Chief Executive Officer of CPW. He returned from CPW in 2004 and was
elected Executive Vice President. Mr. Powell was elected President and Chief Operating Officer of General Mills with overall global operating responsibility for
the Company in 2006, Chief Executive Officer in 2007, and Chairman of the Board in 2008. He is a director of Medtronic, Inc.
Jacqueline Williams-Roll , age 47, is Senior Vice President, Human Resources. Ms. Williams-Roll joined General Mills in 1995. She held human resources
leadership roles in Supply Chain, Finance, Marketing and Organization Effectiveness, and she also worked a large part of her career on businesses outside of the
United States. She was named Vice President, Human Resources, International in 2010, and then promoted to Senior Vice President, Human Resources Operations
in September 2013. She was named to her present position in September 2014. Prior to joining General Mills, she held sales and management roles with Jenny
Craig International.
Jerald A. Young , age 59, is Vice President, Controller. Mr. Young joined General Mills in 2001 from The Pillsbury Company. He was appointed Vice President of
Finance for the Bakeries and Foodservice Division while at Pillsbury in 2000. Mr. Young was subsequently appointed Vice President Internal Audit in 2005 and
Vice President, Supply Chain in 2008. He was named to his present position in August 2011.
WEBSITE ACCESS
Our website is www.GeneralMills.com. We make available, free of charge in the “Investors” portion of this website, annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (1934 Act) as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). Reports of beneficial ownership filed pursuant to Section 16(a) of the 1934 Act are also available on our website.
 
ITEM 1A
Risk Factors
Our business is subject to various risks and uncertainties. Any of the risks described below could materially, adversely affect our business, financial condition, and
results of operations.
 
7

Table of Contents
The food categories in which we participate are very competitive, and if we are not able to compete effectively, our results of operations could be
adversely affected.
The food categories in which we participate are very competitive. Our principal competitors in these categories all have substantial financial, marketing, and other
resources. In most product categories, we compete not only with other widely advertised branded products, but also with regional brands and with generic and
private label products that are generally sold at lower prices. Competition in our product categories is based on product innovation, product quality, price, brand
recognition and loyalty, effectiveness of marketing, promotional activity, and the ability to identify and satisfy consumer preferences. If our large competitors were
to seek an advantage through pricing or promotional changes, we could choose to do the same, which could adversely affect our margins and profitability. If we did
not do the same, our revenues and market share could be adversely affected. Our market share and revenue growth could also be adversely impacted if we are not
successful in introducing innovative products in response to changing consumer demands or by new product introductions of our competitors. If we are unable to
build and sustain brand equity by offering recognizably superior product quality, we may be unable to maintain premium pricing over generic and private label
products.
We may be unable to maintain our profit margins in the face of a consolidating retail environment.
There has been significant consolidation in the grocery industry, resulting in customers with increased purchasing power. In addition, large retail customers may
seek to use their position to improve their profitability through improved efficiency, lower pricing, increased reliance on their own brand name products, increased
emphasis on generic and other economy brands, and increased promotional programs. If we are unable to use our scale, marketing expertise, product innovation,
knowledge of consumers’ needs, and category leadership positions to respond to these demands, our profitability and volume growth could be negatively impacted.
In addition, the loss of any large customer for an extended length of time could adversely affect our sales and profits. In fiscal 2016, Wal-Mart accounted for 20
percent of our consolidated net sales and 30 percent of net sales of our U.S. Retail segment. For more information on significant customers, please see Note 7 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Price changes for the commodities we depend on for raw materials, packaging, and energy may adversely affect our profitability.
The principal raw materials that we use are commodities that experience price volatility caused by external conditions such as weather, product scarcity, limited
sources of supply, commodity market fluctuations, currency fluctuations, and changes in governmental agricultural and energy policies and regulations.
Commodity price changes may result in unexpected increases in raw material, packaging, and energy costs. If we are unable to increase productivity to offset these
increased costs or increase our prices, we may experience reduced margins and profitability. We do not fully hedge against changes in commodity prices, and the
risk management procedures that we do use may not always work as we intend.
Volatility in the market value of derivatives we use to manage exposures to fluctuations in commodity prices will cause volatility in our gross margins and
net earnings.
We utilize derivatives to manage price risk for some of our principal ingredient and energy costs, including grains (oats, wheat, and corn), oils (principally
soybean), dairy products, natural gas, and diesel fuel. Changes in the values of these derivatives are recorded in earnings currently, resulting in volatility in both
gross margin and net earnings. These gains and losses are reported in cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings and in unallocated corporate items
outside our segment operating results until we utilize the underlying input in our manufacturing process, at which time the gains and losses are reclassified to
segment operating profit. We also record our grain inventories at fair value. We may experience volatile earnings as a result of these accounting treatments.
 
8

Table of Contents
If we are not efficient in our production, our profitability could suffer as a result of the highly competitive environment in which we operate.
Our future success and earnings growth depend in part on our ability to be efficient in the production and manufacture of our products in highly competitive
markets. Gaining additional efficiencies may become more difficult over time. Our failure to reduce costs through productivity gains or by eliminating redundant
costs resulting from acquisitions or divestitures could adversely affect our profitability and weaken our competitive position. Many productivity initiatives involve
complex reorganization of manufacturing facilities and production lines. Such manufacturing realignment may result in the interruption of production, which may
negatively impact product volume and margins. We are currently pursuing several multi-year restructuring and cost savings initiatives designed to increase our
efficiency and reduce expenses. If we are unable to execute those initiatives as planned, we may not realize all or any of the anticipated benefits, which could
adversely affect our business and results of operations.
Disruption of our supply chain could adversely affect our business.
Our ability to make, move, and sell products is critical to our success. Damage or disruption to raw material supplies or our manufacturing or distribution
capabilities due to weather, including any potential effects of climate change, natural disaster, fire, terrorism, cyber-attack, pandemic, strikes, import restrictions, or
other factors could impair our ability to manufacture or sell our products. Our suppliers’ policies and practices can damage our reputation and the quality and safety
of our products. Failure to take adequate steps to mitigate the likelihood or potential impact of such events, or to effectively manage such events if they occur,
particularly when a product is sourced from a single supplier or location, could adversely affect our business and results of operations, as well as require additional
resources to restore our supply chain.
Concerns with the safety and quality of food products could cause consumers to avoid certain food products or ingredients.
We could be adversely affected if consumers in our principal markets lose confidence in the safety and quality of certain food products or ingredients. Adverse
publicity about these types of concerns, whether or not valid, may discourage consumers from buying our products or cause production and delivery disruptions.
If our food products become adulterated, misbranded, or mislabeled, we might need to recall those items and may experience product liability claims if
consumers are injured.
We may need to recall some of our products if they become adulterated, misbranded, or mislabeled. A widespread product recall could result in significant losses
due to the costs of a recall, the destruction of product inventory, and lost sales due to the unavailability of product for a period of time. We could also suffer losses
from a significant product liability judgment against us. A significant product recall or product liability case could also result in adverse publicity, damage to our
reputation, and a loss of consumer confidence in our food products, which could have an adverse effect on our business results and the value of our brands.
We may be unable to anticipate changes in consumer preferences and trends, which may result in decreased demand for our products.
Our success depends in part on our ability to anticipate the tastes and eating habits of consumers and to offer products that appeal to their preferences. Consumer
preferences and category-level consumption may change from time to time and can be affected by a number of different trends and other factors. If we fail to
anticipate, identify or react to these changes and trends, or to introduce new and improved products on a timely basis, we may experience reduced demand for our
products, which would in turn cause our revenues and profitability to suffer. Similarly, demand for our products could be affected by consumer concerns regarding
the health effects of ingredients such as sodium, trans fats, genetically modified organisms, sugar, processed wheat, or other product ingredients or attributes.
We may be unable to grow our market share or add products that are in faster growing and more profitable categories.
The food industry’s growth potential is constrained by population growth. Our success depends in part on our ability to grow our business faster than populations
are growing in the markets that we serve. One way to achieve that growth is to enhance our portfolio by adding innovative new products in faster growing and more
profitable categories. Our future results will also depend on our ability to increase market share in our existing product categories. If we do not succeed in
developing innovative products for new and existing categories, our growth may slow, which could adversely affect our profitability.
 
9

Table of Contents
Economic downturns could limit consumer demand for our products.
The willingness of consumers to purchase our products depends in part on local economic conditions. In periods of economic uncertainty, consumers may purchase
more generic, private label, and other economy brands and may forego certain purchases altogether. In those circumstances, we could experience a reduction in
sales of higher margin products or a shift in our product mix to lower margin offerings. In addition, as a result of economic conditions or competitive actions, we
may be unable to raise our prices sufficiently to protect margins. Consumers may also reduce the amount of food that they consume away from home at customers
that purchase products from our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment. Any of these events could have an adverse effect on our results of operations.
Our results may be negatively impacted if consumers do not maintain their favorable perception of our brands.
Maintaining and continually enhancing the value of our many iconic brands is critical to the success of our business. The value of our brands is based in large part
on the degree to which consumers react and respond positively to these brands. Brand value could diminish significantly due to a number of factors, including
consumer perception that we have acted in an irresponsible manner, adverse publicity about our products, our failure to maintain the quality of our products, the
failure of our products to deliver consistently positive consumer experiences, concerns about food safety, or our products becoming unavailable to consumers.
Consumer demand for our products may also be impacted by changes in the level of advertising or promotional support. The growing use of social and digital
media by consumers, us, and third parties increases the speed and extent that information or misinformation and opinions can be shared. Negative posts or
comments about us, our brands, or our products on social or digital media could seriously damage our brands and reputation. If we do not maintain the favorable
perception of our brands, our business results could be negatively impacted.
Our international operations are subject to political and economic risks.
In fiscal 2016, 28 percent of our consolidated net sales were generated outside of the United States. We are accordingly subject to a number of risks relating to
doing business internationally, any of which could significantly harm our business. These risks include:
 
•  political and economic instability;
•  exchange controls and currency exchange rates;
•  nationalization of operations;
•  compliance with anti-corruption regulations;
•  foreign tax treaties and policies; and
•  restriction on the transfer of funds to and from foreign countries, including potentially negative tax consequences.
Our financial performance on a U.S. dollar denominated basis is subject to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. These fluctuations could cause material
variations in our results of operations. Our principal exposures are to the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Chinese
renminbi, euro, Japanese yen, Mexican peso, and Swiss franc. From time to time, we enter into agreements that are intended to reduce the effects of our exposure to
currency fluctuations, but these agreements may not be effective in significantly reducing our exposure.
New regulations or regulatory-based claims could adversely affect our business.
Our facilities and products are subject to many laws and regulations administered by the United States Department of Agriculture, the Federal Food and Drug
Administration, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and other federal, state, local, and foreign governmental agencies relating to the production,
packaging, labelling, storage, distribution, quality, and safety of food products and the health and safety of our employees. Our failure to
 
10

Table of Contents
comply with such laws and regulations could subject us to lawsuits, administrative penalties, and civil remedies, including fines, injunctions, and recalls of our
products. We advertise our products and could be the target of claims relating to alleged false or deceptive advertising under federal, state, and foreign laws and
regulations. We may also be subject to new laws or regulations restricting our right to advertise our products, including proposals to limit advertising to children.
Changes in laws or regulations that impose additional regulatory requirements on us could increase our cost of doing business or restrict our actions, causing our
results of operations to be adversely affected.
We are subject to various federal, state, local, and foreign environmental laws and regulations. Our failure to comply with environmental laws and regulations
could subject us to lawsuits, administrative penalties, and civil remedies. We are currently party to a variety of environmental remediation obligations. Due to
regulatory complexities, uncertainties inherent in litigation, and the risk of unidentified contaminants on current and former properties of ours, the potential exists
for remediation, liability, indemnification, and compliance costs to differ from our estimates. We cannot guarantee that our costs in relation to these matters, or
compliance with environmental laws in general, will not exceed our established liabilities or otherwise have an adverse effect on our business and results of
operations.
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness, which could limit financing and other options and in some cases adversely affect our ability to pay
dividends.
As of May 29, 2016, we had total debt, redeemable interests, and noncontrolling interests of $9.6 billion. The agreements under which we have issued indebtedness
do not prevent us from incurring additional unsecured indebtedness in the future. Our level of indebtedness may limit our:
 
•  ability to obtain additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, or general corporate purposes, particularly if the ratings assigned to our debt
securities by rating organizations were revised downward; and
•  flexibility to adjust to changing business and market conditions and may make us more vulnerable to a downturn in general economic conditions.
There are various financial covenants and other restrictions in our debt instruments and noncontrolling interests. If we fail to comply with any of these
requirements, the related indebtedness (and other unrelated indebtedness) could become due and payable prior to its stated maturity and our ability to obtain
additional or alternative financing may also be adversely affected.
Our ability to make scheduled payments on or to refinance our debt and other obligations will depend on our operating and financial performance, which in turn is
subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business, and other factors beyond our control.
Global capital and credit market issues could negatively affect our liquidity, increase our costs of borrowing, and disrupt the operations of our suppliers
and customers.
We depend on stable, liquid, and well-functioning capital and credit markets to fund our operations. Although we believe that our operating cash flows, financial
assets, access to capital and credit markets, and revolving credit agreements will permit us to meet our financing needs for the foreseeable future, there can be no
assurance that future volatility or disruption in the capital and credit markets will not impair our liquidity or increase our costs of borrowing. We also utilize interest
rate derivatives to reduce the volatility of our financing costs. If we are not effective in hedging this volatility, we may experience an increase in our costs of
borrowing. Our business could also be negatively impacted if our suppliers or customers experience disruptions resulting from tighter capital and credit markets or
a slowdown in the general economy.
Volatility in the securities markets, interest rates, and other factors could substantially increase our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit,
and postemployment benefit costs.
We sponsor a number of defined benefit plans for employees in the United States, Canada, and various foreign locations, including defined benefit pension, retiree
health and welfare, severance, and other postemployment plans. Our major defined benefit pension plans are funded with trust assets invested in a globally
diversified portfolio of
 
11

Table of Contents
securities and other investments. Changes in interest rates, mortality rates, health care costs, early retirement rates, investment returns, and the market value of plan
assets can affect the funded status of our defined benefit plans and cause volatility in the net periodic benefit cost and future funding requirements of the plans. A
significant increase in our obligations or future funding requirements could have a negative impact on our results of operations and cash flows from operations.
Our business operations could be disrupted if our information technology systems fail to perform adequately or are breached.
Information technology serves an important role in the efficient and effective operation of our business. We rely on information technology networks and systems,
including the internet, to process, transmit, and store electronic information to manage a variety of business processes and to comply with regulatory, legal, and tax
requirements. Our information technology systems and infrastructure are critical to effectively manage our key business processes including digital marketing,
order entry and fulfillment, supply chain management, finance, administration, and other business processes. These technologies enable internal and external
communication among our locations, employees, suppliers, customers, and others and include the receipt and storage of personal information about our employees,
consumers, and proprietary business information. Our information technology systems, some of which are dependent on services provided by third parties, may be
vulnerable to damage, interruption, or shutdown due to any number of causes such as catastrophic events, natural disasters, fires, power outages, systems failures,
telecommunications failures, security breaches, computer viruses, hackers, employee error or malfeasance, and other causes. Increased cyber-security threats pose a
potential risk to the security and viability of our information technology systems, as well as the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data stored on those
systems. The failure of our information technology systems to perform as we anticipate could disrupt our business and result in transaction errors, processing
inefficiencies, data loss, legal claims or proceedings, regulatory penalties, and the loss of sales and customers. Any interruption of our information technology
systems could have operational, reputational, legal, and financial impacts that may have a material adverse effect on our business.
A change in the assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses or a different weighted-average cost of capital used to value our
reporting units or our indefinite-lived intangible assets could negatively affect our consolidated results of operations and net worth.
As of May 29, 2016, we had $12.9 billion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Goodwill for each of our reporting units is tested for impairment
annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. We compare the carrying value of the net assets of a
reporting unit, including goodwill, to the fair value of the unit. If the fair value of the net assets of the reporting unit is less than the net assets including goodwill,
impairment has occurred. Our estimates of fair value are determined based on a discounted cash flow model. Growth rates for sales and profits are determined
using inputs from our long-range planning process. We also make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other
factors. While we currently believe that our goodwill is not impaired, different assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses could result in
significant impairment losses.
We evaluate the useful lives of our intangible assets, primarily intangible assets associated with the Pillsbury , Totino’s , Progresso , Yoplait , Old El Paso , Yoki ,
Häagen-Dazs , and Annie’s brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life requires significant judgments and
assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological
advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required
maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are also tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value
may not be recoverable. Our estimate of the fair value of the brands is based on a discounted cash flow model using inputs including projected revenues from our
long-range plan, assumed royalty rates which could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a discount rate. Our Uncle Toby’s and Mountain High brands have
experienced declining business performance. Our strategies for fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2018 will focus our growth investments on our brands and platforms with the
strongest profitable growth potential. As a result, certain parts of our U.S. Retail segment could experience reduced future sales projections. We
 
12

Table of Contents
performed a sensitivity analysis for certain brand intangible assets and determined that, while not impaired as of May 29, 2016, the Progresso and Food Should
Taste Good brands had risk of decreasing coverage. We will continue to monitor these businesses. For further information on goodwill and intangible assets, please
refer to Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Our failure to successfully integrate acquisitions into our existing operations could adversely affect our financial results.
From time to time, we evaluate potential acquisitions or joint ventures that would further our strategic objectives. Our success depends, in part, upon our ability to
integrate acquired and existing operations. If we are unable to successfully integrate acquisitions, our financial results could suffer. Additional potential risks
associated with acquisitions include additional debt leverage, the loss of key employees and customers of the acquired business, the assumption of unknown
liabilities, the inherent risk associated with entering a geographic area or line of business in which we have no or limited prior experience, failure to achieve
anticipated synergies, and the impairment of goodwill or other acquisition-related intangible assets.
 
ITEM 1B
Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
 
ITEM 2
Properties
We own our principal executive offices and main research facilities, which are located in the Minneapolis, Minnesota metropolitan area. We operate numerous
manufacturing facilities and maintain many sales and administrative offices, warehouses, and distribution centers around the world.
As of May 29, 2016, we operated 59 facilities for the production of a wide variety of food products. Of these facilities, 30 are located in the United States (1 of
which is leased), 4 in the Greater China region, 2 in the Asia/Middle East/Africa Region (1 of which is leased), 4 in Canada (2 of which are leased), 10 in
Europe/Australia, and 9 in Latin America and Mexico. The following is a list of the locations of our principal production facilities, which primarily support the
segment noted:
 
U.S. Retail
  
  
• Carson, California
  
• Reed City, Michigan
  • Buffalo, New York
• Covington, Georgia
  
• Fridley, Minnesota
  • Cincinnati, Ohio
• Belvidere, Illinois
  
• Hannibal, Missouri
  • Wellston, Ohio
• Cedar Rapids, Iowa
  
• Vineland, New Jersey
  • Murfreesboro, Tennessee
• Irapuato, Mexico
  
• Albuquerque, New Mexico
  • Milwaukee, Wisconsin
International
  
  
• Mt. Waverly, Australia
  
• Pouso Alegre, Brazil
  • Labatut, France
• Rooty Hill, Australia
  
• St. Hyacinthe, Canada
  • Le Mans, France
• Sao Bernardo do Campo, Brazil
  
• Guangzhou, China
  • Moneteau, France
• Cambara, Brazil
  
• Kunshan, China
  • Vienne, France
• Marilia, Brazil
  
• Sanhe, China
  • Anseong-si, Korea
• Nova Prata, Brazil
  
• Shanghai, China
  • San Adrian, Spain
• Paranavai, Brazil
  
• Arras, France
  
 
13

Table of Contents
Convenience Stores and Foodservice
  
  
• Chanhassen, Minnesota
  • Joplin, Missouri
  • Martel, Ohio
We operate numerous grain elevators in the United States in support of our domestic manufacturing activities. We also utilize approximately 12 million square feet
of warehouse and distribution space, nearly all of which is leased, that primarily supports our U.S. Retail segment. We own and lease a number of dedicated sales
and administrative offices around the world, totaling approximately 3 million square feet. We have additional warehouse, distribution, and office space in our plant
locations.
As part of our Häagen-Dazs business in our International segment, we operate 530 (all leased) and franchise 344 branded ice cream parlors in various countries
around the world, all outside of the United States and Canada.
 
ITEM 3
Legal Proceedings
We are the subject of various pending or threatened legal actions in the ordinary course of our business. All such matters are subject to many uncertainties and
outcomes that are not predictable with assurance. In our opinion, there were no claims or litigation pending as of May 29, 2016, that were reasonably likely to have
a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. See the information contained under the section entitled “Environmental
Matters” in Item 1 of this report for a discussion of environmental matters in which we are involved.
 
ITEM 4
Mine Safety Disclosures
None.
 
14

Table of Contents
PART II
 
ITEM 5
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “GIS.” On June 13, 2016, there were approximately 32,000 record holders of our
common stock. Information regarding the market prices for our common stock and dividend payments for the two most recent fiscal years is set forth in Note 18 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The following table sets forth information with respect to shares of our common stock that we purchased during the fiscal quarter ended May 29, 2016:
 
Period
  
Total Number
of Shares 
Purchased (a)   
Average 
Price Paid
Per Share   
Total Number of
Shares Purchased as 
Part of a Publicly 
Announced Program (b)   
Maximum Number of 
Shares that may yet be
Purchased Under the 
Program (b) 
February 29, 2016-
  
  
  
  
April 3, 2016
  
 
1,930    
$
59.37    
 
1,930    
 
75,871,561  
April 4, 2016-
  
  
  
  
May 1, 2016
  
 
13,035    
 
64.96    
 
13,035    
 
75,858,526  
May 2, 2016-
  
  
  
  
May 29, 2016
  
 
63,197    
 
61.75    
 
63,197    
 
75,795,329  
Total
  
 
78,162    
$
62.23    
 
78,162    
 
75,795,329  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
The total number of shares purchased includes shares of common stock withheld for the payment of withholding taxes upon the distribution of deferred
option units.
(b)
On May 6, 2014, our Board of Directors approved an authorization for the repurchase of up to 100,000,000 shares of our common stock. Purchases can be
made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans,
and accelerated repurchase programs. The Board did not specify an expiration date for the authorization.
 
15

Table of Contents
ITEM 6
Selected Financial Data
The following table sets forth selected financial data for each of the fiscal years in the five-year period ended May 29, 2016:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions, Except Per Share Data, Percentages and Ratios
  
2016
 
 
2015 (a)  
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
 
2012
 
Operating data:
  
 
 
 
 
Net sales
  $16,563.1  
 $17,630.3   $17,909.6   $17,774.1   $16,657.9  
Gross margin (b)
   
5,829.5  
  
5,949.2    
6,369.8    
6,423.9    
6,044.7  
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
   
3,118.9  
  
3,328.0    
3,474.3    
3,552.3    
3,380.7  
Operating profit
   
2,707.4  
  
2,077.3    
2,957.4    
2,851.8    
2,562.4  
Total segment operating profit (c)
   
2,999.5  
  
3,035.0    
3,153.9    
3,222.9    
3,011.6  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
   
1,697.4  
  
1,221.3    
1,824.4    
1,855.2    
1,567.3  
Advertising and media expense
   
754.4  
  
823.1    
869.5    
895.0    
913.7  
Research and development expense
   
222.1  
  
229.4    
243.6    
237.9    
245.4  
Average shares outstanding:
  
 
 
 
 
Diluted
   
611.9  
  
618.8    
645.7    
665.6    
666.7  
Earnings per share:
  
 
 
 
 
Diluted
  $
2.77  
 $
1.97   $
2.83   $
2.79   $
2.35  
Diluted, excluding certain items affecting comparability (c)
  $
2.92  
 $
2.86   $
2.82   $
2.72   $
2.56  
Operating ratios:
  
 
 
 
 
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales
   
35.2%   
33.7%   
35.6%   
36.1%   
36.3% 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses as a
percentage of net sales
   
18.8%   
18.9%   
19.4%   
20.0%   
20.3% 
Operating profit as a percentage of net sales
   
16.3%   
11.8%   
16.5%   
16.0%   
15.4% 
Adjusted operating profit as a percentage of net sales (b) (c)
   
16.8%   
15.9%   
16.2%   
16.3%   
16.7% 
Total segment operating profit as a percentage of net sales (c)
   
18.1%   
17.2%   
17.6%   
18.1%   
18.1% 
Effective income tax rate
   
31.4%   
33.3%   
33.3%   
29.2%   
32.1% 
Return on average total capital (b)
   
12.9%   
9.1%   
12.5%   
13.4%   
12.8% 
Adjusted return on average total capital (b) (c)
   
11.3%   
11.2%   
11.6%   
12.0%   
12.7% 
Balance sheet data:
  
 
 
 
 
Land, buildings, and equipment
  $ 3,743.6  
 $ 3,783.3   $ 3,941.9   $ 3,878.1   $ 3,652.7  
Total assets
   21,712.3  
  21,832.0    23,044.7    22,505.7    21,014.8  
Long-term debt, excluding current portion
   
7,057.7  
  
7,575.3    
6,396.6    
5,901.8    
6,139.5  
Total debt (b)
   
8,430.9  
  
9,191.5    
8,758.9    
7,944.8    
7,407.2  
Cash flow data:
  
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  $ 2,629.8  
 $ 2,542.8   $ 2,541.0   $ 2,926.0   $ 2,407.2  
Capital expenditures
   
729.3  
  
712.4    
663.5    
613.9    
675.9  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Free cash flow (b) (c)
   
1,900.5  
  
1,830.4    
1,877.5    
2,312.1    
1,731.3  
Fixed charge coverage ratio (b)
   
7.40  
  
5.54    
8.04    
7.62    
6.26  
Operating cash flow to debt ratio (b)
   
31.2%   
27.7%   
29.0%   
36.8%   
32.5% 
Share data:
  
 
 
 
 
Low stock price
  $
54.12  
 $
48.86   $
46.86   $
37.55   $
34.95  
High stock price
   
65.36  
  
57.14    
54.40    
50.93    
41.05  
Closing stock price
   
62.87  
  
56.15    
53.81    
48.98    
39.08  
Cash dividends per common share
   
1.78  
  
1.67    
1.55    
1.32    
1.22  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Fiscal 2015 was a 53-week year; all other fiscal years were 52 weeks.
(b)
See “Glossary” in Item 8 of this report for definition.
(c)
See “Non-GAAP Measures” in Item 7 of this report for our discussion of this measure not defined by generally accepted accounting principles.
 
16

Table of Contents
ITEM 7
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a global consumer foods company. We develop distinctive value-added food products and market them under unique brand names. We work continuously
to improve our core products and to create new products that meet consumers’ evolving needs and preferences. In addition, we build the equity of our brands over
time with strong consumer-directed marketing, innovative new products, and effective merchandising. We believe our brand-building strategy is the key to winning
and sustaining leading share positions in markets around the globe.
Our fundamental financial goal is to generate superior returns for our shareholders over the long term. We believe that increases in net sales, segment operating
profit, earnings per share (EPS), free cash flow conversion, cash return to shareholders, and return on average total capital are key drivers of financial performance
for our business.
Our long-term growth objectives are to consistently deliver:
 
•
 low single-digit annual growth in net sales;
 
•
 mid single-digit annual growth in total segment operating profit;
 
•
 high single-digit annual growth in diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability;
 
•
 improvement in adjusted return on average total capital;
 
•
 free cash flow conversion averaging above 95 percent of adjusted net earnings after tax; and
 
•
 cash return to shareholders averaging above 90 percent of free cash flow, including an attractive dividend yield.
We believe that this financial performance should result in long-term value creation for shareholders.
Fiscal 2016 was an important step toward returning to our long-term growth objectives. Our U.S. Retail segment improved its operating profit performance in fiscal
2016, excluding the impact of acquisitions and divestitures, primarily the North American Green Giant business (Green Giant) divestiture and 6 incremental
months of results from the acquisition of Annie’s, Inc. (Annie’s). Net sales as reported declined 5 percentage points in fiscal 2016, which included 2 percentage
points of decline from the net impact of Green Giant and Annie’s and 1 percentage point of decline from a 53 rd week in fiscal 2015. While net sales growth did not
meet our expectations, operating profit increased 1 percent, despite the 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 and the net unfavorable impact of the Green Giant divestiture and
Annie’s acquisition. Operating profit for the Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment increased 7 percent, driven primarily by our 6 priority product
platforms. Operating results for the International segment had good growth in developed markets that was tempered by slowdowns in developing markets.
International net sales as reported declined 10 percent, including 1 percentage point of decline from the divestiture of Green Giant, our Venezuela business, and our
foodservice business in Argentina, but grew 3 percent on a constant-currency basis. International segment operating profit declined 15 percent and was impacted by
12 percentage points of unfavorable foreign currency exchange and slowing economic growth in China and Brazil, as well as the effect of divestitures.
Our consolidated net sales for fiscal 2016 declined 6 percent to $16.6 billion, primarily driven by unfavorable foreign exchange, a 53 rd week in fiscal 2015, and the
net impact of acquisitions and divestitures. On a constant-currency basis, net sales decreased 2 percent. Operating profit of $2.7 billion increased 30 percent. Total
segment operating profit of $3.0 billion declined 1 percent and grew 1 percent on a constant-currency basis. Diluted EPS increased 41 percent to $2.77 per share.
Adjusted diluted EPS, which excludes certain items affecting comparability of results, rose 2 percent to $2.92 per share and increased 5 percent on a constant-
currency basis. Our return on average total capital was 12.9 percent, and return on adjusted average total capital increased 10 basis points to 11.3 percent. (See the
“Non-GAAP Measures” section below for discussion of total segment operating profit, adjusted diluted EPS, constant-currency net sales growth rates, constant-
currency International segment net sales growth rate, constant-currency total segment operating profit growth rate, constant-currency adjusted diluted EPS growth
rate, and adjusted return on average total capital, which are not defined by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)).
Net cash provided by operations totaled $2.6 billion in fiscal 2016 at a conversion rate of 151 percent of net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable
and noncontrolling interests. This cash generation supported capital investments totaling $729 million, and our resulting free cash flow was $1.9 billion at a
conversion rate of
 
17

Table of Contents
104 percent of adjusted net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests. We also returned significant cash to shareholders
through a 7 percent dividend increase and share repurchases totaling $607 million. Total cash returned to shareholders represented 79 percent of our free cash flow
(see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
We recorded the following achievements related to our other key operating objectives for fiscal 2016:
 
•
 We took steps to reshape our business portfolio to drive future growth with the divestiture of our North American Green Giant vegetable business and two
smaller divestures, the Venezuela canned meat business and the foodservice dough business in Argentina. We also acquired EPIC Provisions LLC (Epic),
broadening our product offerings in our U.S. natural and organic portfolio to include meat snacks, and we entered the growing Brazilian yogurt market
through the acquisition of Laticinios Carolina Ltda. (Carolina).
 
•
 We generated strong levels of supply chain productivity savings in fiscal 2016 through our ongoing Holistic Margin Management (HMM) efforts. We also
continued to execute our cost savings and organizational initiatives during the fiscal year. We expanded Project Century, an initiative to streamline our North
American distribution and manufacturing network, to our International segment supply chain. We also initiated Project Compass, with a focus on increasing
the agility and effectiveness of our International segment. Finally, we continued to realize benefits from Project Catalyst, a fiscal 2015 restructuring plan to
increase organizational effectiveness and reduce overhead expense. In aggregate, the initiatives taken in fiscal 2015 and 2016 generated almost $350 million
in cost savings during fiscal 2016.
A detailed review of our fiscal 2016 performance appears below in the section titled “Fiscal 2016 Consolidated Results of Operations.”
With strong savings in Fiscal 2016 and visibility to further savings over the next two years, we now expect our previously announced organizational restructuring
and cost-reduction initiatives, including Projects Century, Catalyst, and Compass, as well as administrative cost reductions, to generate total annual savings of $600
million by fiscal 2018. We are also undertaking further efforts to prioritize investments, reduce complexity, and streamline our operations to drive profitable sales
growth. As a result, we are increasing and accelerating our adjusted operating profit margin expansion target. We expect to achieve an adjusted operating profit
margin of 20 percent by fiscal 2018, an increase of 400 basis points over fiscal 2015 levels. Key drivers of margin expansion over the next two years will include:
 
 
•
 Strong levels of HMM productivity gains;
 
 
•
 Continuing savings from previously announced cost-reduction initiatives;
 
 
•
 Increased efficiency and prioritization of commercial investments, including trade and consumer spending;
 
 
•
 Continuing focus on complexity reduction through SKU optimization;
 
 
•
 Further supply chain optimization; and
 
 
•
 Continued expansion of zero-based budgeting across the business.
We will focus our fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2018 growth investments on our brands and platforms with the strongest profitable growth potential, including:
 
 
•
 In the U.S. Retail segment – Cereal, snack bars, the natural and organic portfolio, hot snacks, Mexican products, and yogurt;
 
 
•
 Our International segment;
 
18

Table of Contents
 
•
 In the Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment – Cereal, yogurt, snacks, frozen meals, biscuits, and baking mixes – the segment’s current Focus
6 platforms.
Net sales for these “growth” businesses, which comprise 75 percent of total company net sales and a similar proportion of operating profit, are expected to grow at
a low single-digit organic rate in fiscal 2017. In our “foundation” businesses, which comprise the remainder of the portfolio, we will only pursue selective growth
investments and will focus on reducing SKU complexity, optimizing commercial investments, and prioritizing profitable volume while making selective Consumer
First investments. We expect organic net sales to decline mid single-digits for these businesses in fiscal 2017. With this focused approach, we expect:
 
 
•
 Fiscal 2017 organic net sales growth ranging from flat to down 2 percent compared to fiscal 2016, but deliver a 6 to 8 percent increase in constant-
currency total segment operating profit.
 
 
•
 Fiscal 2017 adjusted operating profit margin to increase by approximately 150 basis points; and
 
 
•
 Constant-currency adjusted diluted EPS to grow 6 to 8 percent from the base of $2.92 earned in fiscal 2016.
Our fiscal 2017 plans call for continued strong cash returns to shareholders. The current annualized dividend rate of $1.92 per share is up 8 percent from the annual
dividend paid in fiscal 2016. Share repurchases in fiscal 2017 are expected to result in a net reduction in average diluted shares outstanding of approximately 1 to 2
percent.
The foregoing non-GAAP forward-looking financial measures are not reconcilable to the equivalent GAAP measure because we cannot accurately predict the
excluded variables that may impact these measures.
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.
FISCAL 2016 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal 2016 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2015. Included in fiscal 2016 is an additional month of results from Annie’s and Yoplait SAS (please
refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Fiscal 2016 net sales declined 6 percent to $16,563 million and decreased 2 percent on a constant-currency basis. Operating profit of $2,707 million was 30
percent higher than fiscal 2015. Total segment operating profit was $3,000 million, 1 percent lower than fiscal 2015 and 1 percent higher on a constant-currency
basis. In fiscal 2016, net earnings attributable to General Mills were $1,697 million, up 39 percent from $1,221 million in fiscal 2015, and we reported diluted
EPS of $2.77 in fiscal 2016, up 41 percent from $1.97 in fiscal 2015. Fiscal 2016 results include restructuring-related charges, a net gain from divestitures, and
gains from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories. Fiscal 2015 results include restructuring-related charges, an
indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge, tax impacts from the repatriation of historical foreign earnings, losses from the mark-to-market valuation of
certain commodity positions and grain inventories, integration costs resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s, and the impact of Venezuela currency devaluation.
Diluted EPS excluding these items affecting comparability totaled $2.92 in fiscal 2016, up 2 percent from $2.86 in fiscal 2015. Diluted EPS excluding certain items
affecting comparability on a constant-currency basis increased 5 percent compared to fiscal 2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description
of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
 
19

Table of Contents
Net sales declined 6 percent to $16,563 million in fiscal 2016 from $17,630 in fiscal 2015. The components of net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
 
(3) pts  
Net price realization and mix
  
 
1   pt   
Foreign currency exchange
  
 
(4) pts  
Net sales growth
  
 
(6) pts  
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Net sales growth for fiscal 2016 included a 1 percent decrease from acquisitions and divestitures, primarily Green Giant and Annie’s, reflecting 2 percentage points
of decline from volume (please refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report). The 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 contributed
approximately 1 percentage point of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting 1 percentage point of decline from volume.
Cost of sales decreased $948 million in fiscal 2016 to $10,734 million. In fiscal 2016, product mix drove a $486 million decrease in cost of sales and lower volume
drove a $369 million decrease. We recorded a $63 million net decrease in cost of sales related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and
grain inventories as described in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report, compared to a net increase of $90 million in fiscal 2015.
In fiscal 2016, we recorded $78 million of restructuring charges in cost of sales compared to $60 million in fiscal 2015. We also recorded a $3 million foreign
exchange loss in cost of sales in fiscal 2015 related to Venezuela currency devaluation.
We also expect to incur approximately $109 million of restructuring initiative project-related cash costs and recorded $58 million of these costs in cost of sales in
fiscal 2016 compared to $13 million in fiscal 2015 (please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Gross margin declined 2 percent in fiscal 2016 versus fiscal 2015. Gross margin as a percent of net sales of 35 percent increased 150 basis points compared to
fiscal 2015.
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses decreased $209 million in fiscal 2016 versus fiscal 2015 primarily due to an 8 percent decrease in
advertising and media expense, and savings from Project Catalyst, Project Compass, and our other cost-management initiatives (please refer to Note 4 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report). In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $5 million charge in SG&A expenses related to Venezuela currency
devaluation and $16 million of integration costs related to our acquisition of Annie’s. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales decreased 10 basis points compared
to fiscal 2015.
During fiscal 2016, we recorded an $148 million divestitures gain (net) from the sale of Green Giant, our subsidiary in Venezuela, and our foodservice business in
Argentina (please refer to Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs totaled $151 million in fiscal 2016 compared to $544 million in fiscal 2015.
In fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within
the segment. As a result, we recorded a $260 million impairment charge in fiscal 2015 related to the Green Giant brand intangible asset.
 
20

Table of Contents
Restructuring charges recorded in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs were $151 million in fiscal 2016 compared to $284 million in fiscal 2015. Total
charges associated with our restructuring initiatives recognized in fiscal 2016 and 2015 consisted of the following:
 
 
  
As Reported
   
Estimated
 
In Millions
  
Fiscal 2016
   
Fiscal 2015
   
Future
   
Total
   
Savings (b) 
  
  Charge  
Cash    Charge  
Cash   Charge   Cash   Charge   
Cash    
Compass
  $
54.7   
$ 36.1    $
—   
$
—    $
5    $ 24    $
60    $ 60       
Total Century (a)
   182.6   
 
34.1     181.8   
 12.0     
75     120     
439     166       
Catalyst
   
(7.5)  
 
47.8     148.4   
 45.0     
—     
25     
141     118       
Combination of certain operational facilities
   
—   
 
4.5     
13.9   
 
6.5     
1     
2     
15     
12       
Other
   
—   
 
0.1     
(0.6)  
 
0.1     
—     
—     
—     
—       
Total restructuring charges (a)
   229.8   
 122.6     343.5   
 63.6     
81     171     
655     356       
Project-related costs
   
57.5   
 
54.5     
13.2   
 
9.7     
38     
45     
109     109       
Restructuring charges and project-related costs
  $ 287.3   
$177.1    $ 356.7   
$73.3    $
119    $ 216    $
764    $465       
 
  
Future cumulative annual savings
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  $
600  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) Includes restructuring charges recorded in cost of sales of $78.4 million in fiscal 2016 and $59.6 million in fiscal 2015.
(b)Cumulative annual savings estimated by fiscal 2018. Includes savings from SG&A cost reduction projects.
Please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for more information regarding our restructuring activities.
Interest, net for fiscal 2016 totaled $304 million, $12 million lower than fiscal 2015, primarily driven by lower average debt balances, partially offset by changes
in the mix of debt.
Our consolidated effective tax rate for fiscal 2016 was 31.4 percent compared to 33.3 percent in fiscal 2015. The 1.9 percentage point decrease was primarily due
to the unfavorable impact of our repatriation of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015, partially offset by non-deductible expenses related to the Green Giant
divestiture in fiscal 2016. Our effective tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability was 29.8 percent in fiscal 2016 compared to 30.5 percent in fiscal
2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
After-tax earnings from joint ventures for fiscal 2016 increased to $88 million compared to $84 million in fiscal 2015 primarily driven by favorable input costs
in fiscal 2016, favorable product mix for Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ), and lapping an impairment charge of $3 million at Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW) in
South Africa in fiscal 2015, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency. On a constant-currency basis, after-tax earnings from joint ventures increased 12
percent (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of these measures not defined by GAAP). The change in net sales for each joint
venture is set forth in the following table:
 
 
  
As Reported 
 
Constant-Currency Basis 
  
  
Fiscal 2016 
vs. 2015 
 
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
CPW
  
 
(12)%  
 
Flat  
HDJ
  
 
Flat  
 
 
5  
Joint Ventures
  
 
(10)%  
 
1% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21

Table of Contents
The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
Fiscal 2016 vs. Fiscal 2015
  
CPW      
HDJ  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
 
Flat      
 11 pts  
Net price realization and mix
  
 
Flat      
 (6) pts  
Foreign currency exchange
  
 (12) pts      
 (5) pts  
Net sales growth
  
 (12) pts      
 
Flat  
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Average diluted shares outstanding decreased by 7 million in fiscal 2016 from fiscal 2015 due to share repurchases, partially offset by option exercises.
FISCAL 2015 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal 2015 had 53 weeks compared to 52 weeks in fiscal 2014.
Fiscal 2015 net sales declined 2 percent to $17,630 million and increased 1 percent on a constant-currency basis. Operating profit of $2,077 million was 30
percent lower than fiscal 2014. Total segment operating profit was $3,035 million, 4 percent lower than fiscal 2014 and 2 percent lower on a constant-currency
basis. In fiscal 2015, net earnings attributable to General Mills were $1,221 million, down 33 percent from $1,824 million in fiscal 2014, and we reported
diluted EPS of $1.97 in fiscal 2015, down 30 percent from $2.83 in fiscal 2014. Fiscal 2015 results include restructuring-related charges, an indefinite-lived
intangible asset impairment charge, tax impacts from the repatriation of historical foreign earnings, losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity
positions and grain inventories, integration costs resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s, and the impact of Venezuela currency devaluation. Fiscal 2014 results
include the impact of Venezuela currency devaluation, a gain on the divestiture of certain grain elevators, losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain
commodity positions and grain inventories, and restructuring charges related to our fiscal 2012 productivity and cost savings plan. Diluted EPS excluding these
items affecting comparability totaled $2.86 in fiscal 2015, up 1 percent from $2.82 in fiscal 2014 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description
of our use of these measures not defined by GAAP).
Net sales declined 2 percent to $17,630 million in fiscal 2015 from $17,910 in fiscal 2014. The components of net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014 
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
 
(1)  pt   
Net price realization and mix
  
 
2   pts  
Foreign currency exchange
  
 
(3)  pts  
Net sales growth
  
 
(2)  pts  
  
 
 
 
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales growth, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from volume.
Cost of sales increased $141 million in fiscal 2015 to $11,681 million. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $90 million net increase in cost of sales related to mark-to-
market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, compared to a net decrease of $49 million in fiscal 2014. In fiscal 2015, we recorded $60
million of restructuring charges in cost of sales. Product mix drove a $17 million increase in cost of sales. We also recorded a $3 million foreign exchange loss in
fiscal 2015 related to Venezuela currency devaluation compared to a $23 million loss in fiscal 2014. Lower volume drove a $68 million decrease in cost of sales in
fiscal 2015. We recorded $13 million of restructuring initiative project-related cash costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2015.
 
22

Table of Contents
Gross margin declined 7 percent in fiscal 2015 versus fiscal 2014. Gross margin as a percent of net sales of 34 percent decreased 190 basis points compared to
fiscal 2014.
SG&A expenses decreased $146 million in fiscal 2015 versus fiscal 2014 primarily due to a 5 percent decrease in advertising and media expense, and savings from
Project Catalyst and our other cost management initiatives. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $5 million charge in SG&A expenses related to Venezuela currency
devaluation compared to a $39 million charge in fiscal 2014. In addition, we recorded $16 million of integration costs in SG&A expenses in fiscal 2015 related to
our acquisition of Annie’s. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales decreased 50 basis points compared to fiscal 2014.
There were no divestitures in fiscal 2015. During fiscal 2014, we recorded a divestiture gain of $66 million related to the sale of certain grain elevators in our U.S.
Retail segment.
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs totaled $544 million in fiscal 2015 compared to $4 million in fiscal 2014.
In fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within
the segment. As a result, we recorded a $260 million impairment charge in fiscal 2015 related to the Green Giant brand intangible asset.
Restructuring charges recorded in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs were $284 million in fiscal 2015 compared to $4 million in fiscal 2014. Total
charges associated with our restructuring initiatives recognized in fiscal 2015 and 2014 consisted of the following:
 
 
  
As Reported
 
In Millions
  
Fiscal 2015
   
Fiscal 2014
 
  
  
Charge  
Cash   
Charge   
Cash 
Total Century (a)
  
$ 181.8   
$12.0    
$
—    
$
—  
Catalyst
  
 148.4   
 45.0    
 
—    
 
—  
International
  
 
13.9   
 
6.5    
 
1.0    
 
6.0  
Other
  
 
(0.6)  
 
0.1    
 
2.6    
 16.4  
Total restructuring charges (a)
  
 343.5   
 63.6    
 
3.6    
 22.4  
Project-related costs recorded in costs of sales
  
 
13.2   
 
9.7    
 
—    
 
—  
Restructuring charges and project-related costs
  
$ 356.7   
$73.3    
$
3.6    
$22.4  
 
(a) Includes $59.6 million of restructuring charges recorded in cost of sales during fiscal 2015.
Please refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for more information regarding our restructuring activities.
Interest, net for fiscal 2015 totaled $315 million, $13 million higher than fiscal 2014, primarily driven by higher average debt balances, partially offset by changes
in the mix of debt.
Our consolidated effective tax rate for fiscal 2015 of 33.3 percent was consistent with fiscal 2014. The 4.5 percentage point impact resulting from the repatriation
of $606 million of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015 was offset by changes in earnings mix by country, certain favorable discrete items, and favorable state
tax rate changes. Our effective tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability was 30.5 percent in fiscal 2015 compared to 32.2 percent in fiscal 2014 (see
the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
 
23

Table of Contents
After-tax earnings from joint ventures for fiscal 2015 decreased to $84 million compared to $90 million in fiscal 2014 primarily driven by unfavorable foreign
currency exchange and an asset impairment charge of $3 million at CPW in South Africa. On a constant-currency basis, after-tax earnings from joint ventures were
flat (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of this measure not defined by GAAP). The change in net sales for each joint
venture is set forth in the following table:
 
 
  
As Reported 
 
Constant Currency Basis 
  
  
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014 
 
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014 
CPW
  
 
(10)%  
 
(2)% 
HDJ
  
 
(4) 
 
 
6  
Joint Ventures
  
 
(9)%  
 
(1)% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are shown in the following table:
 
Fiscal 2015 vs. Fiscal 2014
  
CPW    
HDJ  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
 (1)  pt     
 (5) pts  
Net price realization and mix
  
 (1)  pt     
 11  pts  
Foreign currency exchange
  
 (8)  pts    
 (10) pts  
Net sales growth
  
 (10)  pts    
 (4) pts  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Average diluted shares outstanding decreased by 27 million in fiscal 2015 from fiscal 2014 due to share repurchases.
RESULTS OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS
Our businesses are organized into three operating segments: U.S. Retail; International; and Convenience Stores and Foodservice.
In fiscal 2015, we changed how we assess segment operating performance to exclude the asset and liability remeasurement impact from hyperinflationary
economies. This impact is now included in unallocated corporate items. All periods presented have been changed to conform to this presentation.
The following tables provide the dollar amount and percentage of net sales and operating profit from each segment for fiscal years 2016, 2015, and 2014:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
 
In Millions
   Dollars    
 
 
Percent of
Total
   
  
 
 
Dollars    
 
 
Percent of
Total
   
   
 
Dollars    
 
 
Percent of
Total
   
  
Net Sales
  
  
 
  
 
  
U.S. Retail
  $10,007.1     
60%  
$10,507.0     
60%  
$10,604.9     
59% 
International
   
4,632.2     
28  
 
 
5,128.2     
29   
 
5,385.9     
30  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice
   
1,923.8     
12  
 
 
1,995.1     
11   
 
1,918.8     
11  
Total
  $16,563.1     
100%  
$17,630.3     
100%  
$17,909.6     
100% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Segment Operating Profit
  
  
 
  
 
  
U.S. Retail
  $ 2,179.0     
72%  
$ 2,159.3     
71%  
$ 2,311.5     
73% 
International
   
441.6     
15  
 
 
522.6     
17   
 
535.1     
17  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice
   
378.9     
13  
 
 
353.1     
12   
 
307.3     
10  
Total
  $ 2,999.5     
100%  
$ 3,035.0     
100%  
$ 3,153.9     
100% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
24

Table of Contents
Segment operating profit excludes unallocated corporate items, net gain on divestitures, and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs because these items
affecting operating profit are centrally managed at the corporate level and are excluded from the measure of segment profitability reviewed by our executive
management.
U.S. RETAIL SEGMENT
In fiscal 2015, we realigned certain operating units within our U.S. Retail operating segment. We also changed the name of our Yoplait operating unit to Yogurt
and our Big G operating unit to Cereal. Frozen Foods transitioned into Meals and Baking Products. Small Planet Foods transitioned into Snacks, Cereal, and Meals.
The Yogurt operating unit was unchanged. We revised the amounts previously reported in the net sales and net sales percentage change by operating unit within our
U.S. Retail segment to conform to the new operating unit structure. These realignments had no effect on previously reported consolidated net sales, operating
segments’ net sales, operating profit, segment operating profit, net earnings attributable to General Mills, or EPS. In addition, results from the acquired Annie’s
business are included in the Meals and Snacks operating units.
Our U.S. Retail segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, drug, dollar and
discount chains, and e-commerce grocery providers operating throughout the United States. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat
cereals, refrigerated yogurt, soup, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, grain, fruit and
savory snacks, and a wide variety of organic products including meal kits, granola bars, and cereal.
U.S. Retail net sales were as follows:
 
  
  
Fiscal
2016   
Fiscal 2016 
vs. 2015 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal
2015   
Fiscal 2015 
vs. 2014 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal
2014 
Net sales (in millions)
  
$10,007.1    
 
(5)%    
$10,507.0    
 
(1)%    
$10,604.9  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
  
 
(7) pts    
  
 
(1) pt    
Net price realization and mix
  
  
 
2 pts    
  
 
Flat    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The net impact of acquisitions and divestitures, primarily Green Giant and Annie’s, decreased net sales growth by 2 percentage points in fiscal 2016, reflecting 3
percentage points of decline from volume. The 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting
2 percentage points of decline from volume. In fiscal 2015, the acquisition of Annie’s added 1 percentage point of net sales growth, reflecting 1 percentage point of
growth from volume. The 53 rd week contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales growth in fiscal 2015, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from
volume.
Net sales for our U.S. retail operating units are shown in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
 
2016    
 
2015    
 
2014  
Meals (a)
  
$ 2,393.9    
$ 2,674.3    
$ 2,772.4  
Cereal
  
 
2,312.8    
 
2,330.1    
 
2,410.2  
Snacks (a)
  
 
2,094.3    
 
2,134.4    
 
1,997.8  
Baking Products
  
 
1,903.4    
 
1,969.8    
 
2,096.1  
Yogurt and other
  
 
1,302.7    
 
1,398.4    
 
1,328.4  
Total
  
$10,007.1    
$10,507.0    
$10,604.9  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a) Fiscal 2016 net sales for the Meals and Snacks operating units include an additional month of results from Annie’s.
 
25

Table of Contents
U.S. Retail net sales percentage change by operating unit are shown in the following table:
 
  
  
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
 
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014 
Meals (a)
  
 
(10)%  
 
(4)% 
Yogurt
  
 
(7) 
 
 
5  
Baking Products
  
 
(3) 
 
 
(6) 
Snacks (a)
  
 
(2) 
 
 
7  
Cereal
  
 
(1) 
 
 
(3) 
Total
  
 
(5)%  
 
(1)% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
The impact due to an additional month of results from Annie’s was not material to the Meals and Snacks operating units. The impact to fiscal 2016 net sales
growth for the U.S. Retail segment was not material.
Segment operating profit of $2,179 million in fiscal 2016 increased $20 million, or 1 percent, from fiscal 2015. The increase was primarily driven by high levels of
promotional expense in fiscal 2015, cost savings from Project Catalyst and other cost management initiatives, a decrease in media and advertising expenses, and
lower supply chain costs, partially offset by the net impact of the Green Giant divestiture and Annie’s acquisition.
Segment operating profit of $2,159 million in fiscal 2015 declined $152 million, or 7 percent, from fiscal 2014. The decrease was primarily driven by lower volume
and an increase in supply chain costs, partially offset by a 6 percent reduction in media and advertising expenses.
INTERNATIONAL SEGMENT
Our International segment consists of retail and foodservice businesses outside of the United States. Our product categories include ready-to-eat cereals, shelf stable
and frozen vegetables, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza snacks, refrigerated yogurt, grain and fruit snacks,
and super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts. We also sell super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts directly to consumers through owned retail shops. Our
International segment also includes products manufactured in the United States for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products
we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. Revenues from export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end
customer is located.
International net sales were as follows:
 
  
  
Fiscal 
2016   
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2015   
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2014 
Net sales (in millions)
  
$4,632.2    
 
(10)%      
$5,128.2    
 
(5)%       
$5,385.9  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
  
  
 
3  pts    
  
 
Flat    
Net price realization and mix
  
  
 
Flat    
  
 
6  pts    
Foreign currency exchange
  
  
 
(13) pts    
  
 
(11) pts    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The impact of acquisition and divestitures, primarily Green Giant, decreased net sales growth by 1 percentage point in fiscal 2016. The 53 rd week in fiscal 2015
contributed approximately 1 percentage point of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting 1 percentage point of decline from volume. The 53 rd week contributed
approximately 1 percentage point of net sales growth in fiscal 2015, reflecting 1 percentage point of growth from volume.
 
26

Table of Contents
Net sales for our International segment by geographic region are shown in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
 
2016    
 
2015    
 
2014  
Europe (a)
  
$1,998.0    
$2,126.5    
$2,188.8  
Canada
  
 
929.5    
 1,105.1    
 1,195.3  
Asia/Pacific
  
 
995.7    
 1,023.5    
 
981.8  
Latin America
  
 
709.0    
 
873.1    
 1,020.0  
Total
  
$4,632.2    
$5,128.2    
$5,385.9  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Fiscal 2016 net sales for the Europe region include an additional month of results from Yoplait SAS.
International percentage change in net sales by geographic region are shown in the following table:
 
 
  
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales as Reported
 
 
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales on Constant 
Currency Basis (a)
 
 
  
 
 
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015
   
  
 
 
 
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014
   
  
 
 
 
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015
   
  
 
 
 
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014
   
  
Europe (b)
  
 
(6)%  
 
(3)%  
 
3%  
 
5% 
Canada
  
 
(16) 
 
 
(8) 
 
 
(4)  
 
Flat  
Asia/Pacific
  
 
(3) 
 
 
4  
 
 
1  
 
 
5  
Latin America
  
 
(19) 
 
 
(14) 
 
 
12  
 
 
17  
Total
  
 
(10)%  
 
(5)%  
 
3%  
 
6% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure.
(b)
Fiscal 2016 percentage change in net sales as reported for the Europe region includes 3 percentage points of growth due to an additional month of results
from Yoplait SAS. The impact to fiscal 2016 net sales growth for the International segment was not material.
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2016 declined 15 percent to $442 million from $523 million in fiscal 2015, primarily driven by unfavorable foreign currency
exchange, an increase in SG&A expenses, and the impact of the Green Giant divestiture. International segment operating profit decreased 3 percent on a constant-
currency basis in fiscal 2016 compared to fiscal 2015 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure).
Segment operating profit for fiscal 2015 declined 2 percent to $523 million from $535 million in fiscal 2014, primarily driven by unfavorable foreign currency
exchange and higher input costs, partially offset by favorable net price realization and mix. International segment operating profit increased 9 percent on a constant-
currency basis in fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure).
CONVENIENCE STORES AND FOODSERVICE SEGMENT
In our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment our major product categories are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen meals, unbaked and
fully baked frozen dough products, and baking mixes. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to
distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries. Substantially all of this
segment’s operations are located in the United States.
 
27

Table of Contents
Convenience Stores and Foodservice net sales were as follows:
 
  
 
Fiscal 
2016   
Fiscal 2016
vs. 2015 
Percentage Change   
2015   
Fiscal 2015
vs. 2014 
Percentage Change   
Fiscal 
2014 
Net sales (in millions)
 
$1,923.8    
 
(4)%      
$1,995.1    
 
4%      
$1,918.8  
Contributions from volume growth (a)
 
  
 
(3) pts    
  
 
1 pt     
Net price realization and mix
 
  
 
(1) pt     
  
 
3 pts    
Foreign currency exchange
 
  
 
NM    
  
 
NM    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 53 rd week in fiscal 2015 contributed approximately 2 percentage points of net sales decline in fiscal 2016, reflecting 2 percentage points of decline from
volume. In fiscal 2015, the 53 rd week contributed approximately 2 percentage points of net sales growth, reflecting 2 percentage points of growth from volume.
In fiscal 2016, segment operating profit was $379 million, up 7 percent from $353 million in fiscal 2015 primarily driven by favorable product mix and cost
savings from Project Catalyst and other cost management initiatives. In fiscal 2015, segment operating profit was up 15 percent from $307 million in fiscal 2014
primarily driven by favorable net price realization and mix and higher volume.
UNALLOCATED CORPORATE ITEMS
Unallocated corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, contributions to the General
Mills Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative project-related costs, and other items that are
not part of our measurement of segment operating performance. This includes gains and losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions
until passed back to our operating segments in accordance with our policy as discussed in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
For fiscal 2016, unallocated corporate expense totaled $289 million compared to $414 million last year. In fiscal 2016, we recorded a $63 million net decrease in
expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories compared to a $90 million net increase in expense in the prior
year. In addition, we recorded $78 million of restructuring charges, and $58 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2016,
compared to $60 million of restructuring charges and $13 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2015. We recorded an $8
million foreign exchange loss related to the remeasurement of assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary in fiscal 2015. We also recorded $16 million of
integration costs resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s in fiscal 2015. The decrease in unallocated corporate expense also reflects cost savings from Project
Catalyst and other cost management initiatives.
For fiscal 2015, unallocated corporate expense totaled $414 million compared to $258 million in fiscal 2014. In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $90 million net increase
in expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories compared to a $49 million net decrease in fiscal 2014. In
addition, we recorded $60 million of restructuring charges and $13 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2015. In fiscal
2015, we recorded an $8 million foreign exchange loss related to the remeasurement of assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary compared to $62 million
in fiscal 2014. We also recorded $16 million of integration costs resulting from the acquisition of Annie’s in fiscal 2015.
Venezuela is a highly inflationary economy and as such, we remeasured the value of the assets and liabilities of our former Venezuelan subsidiary based on the
exchange rate at which we expected to remit dividends in U.S. dollars from the SIMADI market. In fiscal 2015, we recorded an $8 million foreign currency
exchange loss related to remeasurement. In fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in
Venezuela. As a result of this transaction, we recorded a loss on the sale of $38 million pre-tax.
 
28

Table of Contents
In fiscal 2015, we changed how we assess segment operating performance to exclude the asset and liability remeasurement impact from hyperinflationary
economies. This impact is now included in unallocated corporate items. All periods presented have been changed to conform to this presentation.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
Our gross margin performance in fiscal 2016 reflects the impact of 2 percent input cost inflation, primarily on commodity inputs. We expect input cost inflation of
2 percent in fiscal 2017. We attempt to minimize the effects of inflation through HMM, planning, and operating practices. Our risk management practices are
discussed in Item 7A of this report.
LIQUIDITY
The primary source of our liquidity is cash flow from operations. Over the most recent three-year period, our operations have generated $7.7 billion in cash. A
substantial portion of this operating cash flow has been returned to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends. We also use cash from operations to fund
our capital expenditures and acquisitions. We typically use a combination of cash, notes payable, and long-term debt to finance significant acquisitions and major
capital expansions.
As of May 29, 2016, we had $645 million of cash and cash equivalents held in foreign jurisdictions, which will be used to fund foreign operations and acquisitions.
There is currently no need to repatriate these funds in order to meet domestic funding obligations or scheduled cash distributions. If we choose to repatriate
historical earnings held in foreign jurisdictions, we intend to do so only in a tax-neutral manner.
Cash Flows from Operations
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
   
2016    
2015    
2014  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  $1,736.8   $1,259.4   $1,861.3  
Depreciation and amortization
   
608.1    
588.3    
585.4  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures
   
(88.4)   
(84.3)   
(89.6) 
Distributions of earnings from joint ventures
   
75.1    
72.6    
90.5  
Stock-based compensation
   
89.8    
106.4    
108.5  
Deferred income taxes
   
120.6    
25.3    
172.5  
Tax benefit on exercised options
   
(94.1)   
(74.6)   
(69.3) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions
   
(47.8)   
(49.5)   
(49.7) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan costs
   
118.1    
91.3    
124.1  
Divestitures (gain)
   (148.2)   
—    
(65.5) 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
   
107.2    
531.1    
(18.8) 
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures
   
258.2    
214.7    
(32.2) 
Other, net
   (105.6)   (137.9)   
(76.2) 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  $2,629.8   $2,542.8   $2,541.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In fiscal 2016, our operations generated $2.6 billion of cash compared to $2.5 billion in fiscal 2015. The $477 million increase in net earnings included a $96
million change in deferred income taxes and a $148 million net gain on divestitures and was also offset by a $424 million decrease in non-cash restructuring
charges. The $43 million change in current assets and liabilities was primarily driven by the timing of accounts payable including the impact of longer terms offset
by the timing of inventory build.
We strive to grow core working capital at or below the rate of growth in our net sales. For fiscal 2016, core working capital decreased 41 percent, primarily due to
an increase in accounts payable, largely driven by longer payables terms and a decrease in inventory, compared to a net sales decline of 6 percent. In fiscal 2015,
core working capital decreased 13 percent, compared to a net sales decline of 2 percent, and in fiscal 2014, core working capital decreased 9 percent, compared to
net sales growth of 1 percent.
 
29

Table of Contents
In fiscal 2015, our operations generated $2.5 billion of cash, flat compared to fiscal 2014. The $247 million change in current assets and liabilities was primarily
driven by the timing of trade and promotion accruals, changes in tax accruals, and changes in derivative positions. This was largely offset by lower net earnings,
which included a $260 million non-cash impairment charge, $271 million of non-cash restructuring charges, and a $147 million change in net deferred income
taxes.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016  
2015  
2014 
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment
  
$(729.3)  
$
(712.4)  
$(663.5) 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
  
 
(84.0)  
 
(822.3)  
 
—  
Investments in affiliates, net
  
 
63.9   
 
(102.4)  
 
(54.9) 
Proceeds from disposal of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
4.4   
 
11.0   
 
6.6  
Proceeds from divestitures
  
 828.5   
 
—   
 121.6  
Exchangeable note
  
 
21.1   
 
27.9   
 
29.3  
Other, net
  
 
(11.2)  
 
(4.0)  
 
(0.9) 
Net cash provided (used) by investing activities
  
$
93.4   
$(1,602.2)  
$(561.8) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In fiscal 2016, we generated $93 million of cash through investing activities compared to a use of $1.6 billion in fiscal 2015. We invested $729 million in land,
buildings, and equipment in fiscal 2016, $17 million more than last year. In fiscal 2016, we received proceeds of $828 million from the divestitures of certain
businesses, primarily Green Giant. In fiscal 2015, we acquired Annie’s for an aggregate purchase price of $809 million, net of $12 million of cash acquired.
In fiscal 2015, cash used by investing activities increased by $1.0 billion from fiscal 2014. We invested $712 million in land, buildings, and equipment in fiscal
2015, $49 million more than in fiscal 2014. In fiscal 2015, we acquired Annie’s. We made $102 million of investments in affiliates, primarily CPW, in fiscal 2015.
In fiscal 2014, we sold certain grain elevators for $124 million in cash.
We expect capital expenditures to be approximately $734 million in fiscal 2017. These expenditures will fund initiatives that are expected to fuel International
growth, support innovative products, and continue HMM initiatives throughout the supply chain.
 
30

Table of Contents
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016  
2015  
2014 
Change in notes payable
  
$
(323.8)  
$
(509.8)  
$
572.9  
Issuance of long-term debt
  
 
542.5   
 2,253.2   
 1,673.0  
Payment of long-term debt
  
 (1,000.4)  
 (1,145.8)  
 (1,444.8) 
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options
  
 
171.9   
 
163.7   
 
108.1  
Tax benefit on exercised options
  
 
94.1   
 
74.6   
 
69.3  
Purchases of common stock for treasury
  
 
(606.7)  
 (1,161.9)  
 (1,745.3) 
Dividends paid
  
 (1,071.7)  
 (1,017.7)  
 
(983.3) 
Addition of noncontrolling interest
  
 
—   
 
—   
 
17.6  
Distributions to noncontrolling and redeemable interest holders
  
 
(84.3)  
 
(25.0)  
 
(77.4) 
Other, net
  
 
(7.2)  
 
(16.1)  
 
(14.2) 
Net cash used by financing activities
  
$(2,285.6)  
$(1,384.8)  
$(1,824.1) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash used by financing activities increased by $901 million in fiscal 2016. We had $1.4 billion less net debt issuances in fiscal 2016 than the prior year. For
more information on our debt issuances and payments, please refer to Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
During fiscal 2016, we received $172 million in proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options compared to $164 million in fiscal 2015, an increase of
$8 million. During fiscal 2014, we received $108 million in proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options.
In May 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 100 million shares of our common stock. Purchases under the authorization can be made in
the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, and
accelerated repurchase programs. The authorization has no specified termination date.
During fiscal 2016, we repurchased 11 million shares of our common stock for $607 million. During fiscal 2015, we repurchased 22 million shares of our common
stock for $1,162 million. During fiscal 2014, we repurchased 36 million shares of our common stock for $1,745 million.
Dividends paid in fiscal 2016 totaled $1,072 million, or $1.78 per share, a 7 percent per share increase from fiscal 2015. Dividends paid in fiscal 2015 totaled
$1,018 million, or $1.67 per share, an 8 percent per share increase from fiscal 2014 dividends of $1.55 per share.
Selected Cash Flows from Joint Ventures
Selected cash flows from our joint ventures are set forth in the following table:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Inflow (Outflow), in Millions
  
2016   
2015  
2014 
Repayments from (advances to) joint ventures, net
  
$63.9    
$(102.4)  
$(54.9) 
Dividends received
  
 75.1    
 
72.6   
 90.5  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31

Table of Contents
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Total capital consisted of the following:
 
In Millions
  
May 29, 
2016
   
May 31, 
2015
 
Notes payable
  
$
269.8    
$
615.8  
Current portion of long-term debt
  
 
1,103.4    
 
1,000.4  
Long-term debt
  
 
7,057.7    
 
7,575.3  
Total debt
  
 
8,430.9    
 
9,191.5  
Redeemable interest
  
 
845.6    
 
778.9  
Noncontrolling interests
  
 
376.9    
 
396.0  
Stockholders’ equity
  
 
4,930.2    
 
4,996.7  
Total capital
  
$14,583.6    
$15,363.1  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The following table details the fee-paid committed and uncommitted credit lines we had available as of May 29, 2016:
 
In Billions
  
Facility 
Amount   
Borrowed
Amount 
Credit facility expiring:
  
  
May 2021
  
$
2.7    
$
—  
June 2019
  
 
0.2    
 
0.1  
Total committed credit facilities
  
 
2.9    
 
0.1  
Uncommitted credit facilities
  
 
0.4    
 
0.1  
Total committed and uncommitted credit facilities
  
$
3.3    
$
0.2  
 
In May 2016, we entered into a $2.7 billion fee-paid committed credit facility that is scheduled to expire in May 2021. Concurrent with the execution of this credit
facility, we terminated our $1.7 billion and $1.0 billion credit facilities.
In June 2014, our subsidiary, Yoplait S.A.S. entered into a €200.0 million fee-paid committed credit facility that is scheduled to expire in June 2019.
To ensure availability of funds, we maintain bank credit lines sufficient to cover our outstanding notes payable. Commercial paper is a continuing source of short-
term financing. We have commercial paper programs available to us in the United States and Europe. We also have uncommitted and asset-backed credit lines that
support our foreign operations. The credit facilities contain several covenants, including a requirement to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5
times.
Certain of our long-term debt agreements, our credit facilities, and our noncontrolling interests contain restrictive covenants. As of May 29, 2016, we were in
compliance with all of these covenants.
We have $1,103 million of long-term debt maturing in the next 12 months that is classified as current, including $1,000 million of 5.7 percent fixed rate notes due
February 2017. We believe that cash flows from operations, together with available short- and long-term debt financing, will be adequate to meet our liquidity and
capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
As of May 29, 2016, our total debt, including the impact of derivative instruments designated as hedges, was 78 percent in fixed-rate and 22 percent in floating-rate
instruments, compared to 72 percent in fixed-rate and 28 percent in floating-rate instruments on May 31, 2015.
 
32

Table of Contents
Return on average total capital was 12.9 percent in fiscal 2016 compared to 9.1 percent in fiscal 2015. Improvement in return on adjusted average total capital is
one of our key performance measures (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our discussion of this measure, which is not defined by GAAP). Adjusted
return on average total capital increased 10 basis points from 11.2 percent in fiscal 2015 to 11.3 percent in fiscal 2016 as fiscal 2016 earnings increased. On a
constant-currency basis, adjusted return on average total capital increased 40 basis points.
We also believe that our fixed charge coverage ratio and the ratio of operating cash flow to debt are important measures of our financial strength. Our fixed charge
coverage ratio in fiscal 2016 was 7.40 compared to 5.54 in fiscal 2015. The measure increased from fiscal 2015 as earnings before income taxes and after-tax
earnings from joint ventures increased by $642 million in fiscal 2016. Our operating cash flow to debt ratio increased 3.5 percentage points to 31.2 percent in fiscal
2016, driven by a decrease in total debt.
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS and a 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl. Sodiaal holds the remaining
interests in each of these entities. We consolidate these entities into our consolidated financial statements. We record Sodiaal’s 50 percent interest in Yoplait
Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl as noncontrolling interests, and its 49 percent interest in Yoplait SAS as a redeemable interest on our Consolidated
Balance Sheets. These euro- and Canadian dollar-denominated interests are reported in U.S. dollars on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Sodiaal has the ability to
put all or a portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per year, up to three times before December 2024. As of May 29, 2016, the redemption value
of the redeemable interest was $846 million which approximates its fair value.
The third-party holder of the General Mills Cereals, LLC (GMC) Class A Interests receives quarterly preferred distributions from available net income based on the
application of a floating preferred return rate to the holder’s capital account balance established in the most recent mark-to-market valuation (currently $252
million). On June 1, 2015, the floating preferred return rate on GMC’s Class A Interests was reset to the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 125 basis points. The
preferred return rate is adjusted every three years through a negotiated agreement with the Class A Interest holder or through a remarketing auction.
We have an option to purchase the Class A Interests for consideration equal to the then current capital account value, plus any unpaid preferred return and the
prescribed make-whole amount. If we purchase these interests, any change in the third-party holder’s capital account from its original value will be charged directly
to retained earnings and will increase or decrease the net earnings used to calculate EPS in that period.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS AND CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
As of May 29, 2016, we have issued guarantees and comfort letters of $383 million for the debt and other obligations of consolidated subsidiaries, and guarantees
and comfort letters of $239 million for the debt and other obligations of non-consolidated affiliates, mainly CPW. In addition, off-balance sheet arrangements are
generally limited to the future payments under non-cancelable operating leases, which totaled $398 million as of May 29, 2016.
As of May 29, 2016, we had invested in five variable interest entities (VIEs). None of our VIEs are material to our results of operations, financial condition, or
liquidity as of and for the fiscal year ended May 29, 2016.
Our defined benefit plans in the United States are subject to the requirements of the Pension Protection Act (PPA). In the future, the PPA may require us to make
additional contributions to our domestic plans. We do not expect to be required to make any contributions in fiscal 2017.
 
33

Table of Contents
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations, including payments due by period:
 
 
  
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
Total
   
2017    2018 -19   2020 -21   
2022 and
Thereafter 
Long-term debt (a)
  $ 8,190.2    $1,103.0    $1,754.2    $1,611.6    
 $3,721.4  
Accrued interest
   
90.4     
90.4     
—     
—    
 
—  
Operating leases (b)
   
397.6     
107.9     
150.7     
89.2    
 
49.8  
Capital leases
   
2.7     
0.9     
1.3     
0.4    
 
0.1  
Purchase obligations (c)
   
3,082.1     1,955.9     
603.7     
497.4    
 
25.1  
Total contractual obligations
   11,763.0     3,258.1     2,509.9     2,198.6    
 
3,796.4  
Other long-term obligations (d)
   
1,957.0     
—     
—     
—    
 
—  
Total long-term obligations
  $13,720.0    $3,258.1    $2,509.9    $2,198.6    
 $3,796.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Amounts represent the expected cash payments of our long-term debt and do not include $2 million for capital leases or $31 million for net unamortized debt
issuance costs, premiums and discounts, and fair value adjustments.
(b)
Operating leases represents the minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable operating leases.
(c)
The majority of the purchase obligations represent commitments for raw material and packaging to be utilized in the normal course of business and for
consumer marketing spending commitments that support our brands. For purposes of this table, arrangements are considered purchase obligations if a
contract specifies all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased, a pricing structure, and approximate timing of the transaction.
Most arrangements are cancelable without a significant penalty and with short notice (usually 30 days). Any amounts reflected on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets as accounts payable and accrued liabilities are excluded from the table above.
(d)
The fair value of our foreign exchange, equity, commodity, and grain derivative contracts with a payable position to the counterparty was $44 million as of
May 29, 2016, based on fair market values as of that date. Future changes in market values will impact the amount of cash ultimately paid or received to
settle those instruments in the future. Other long-term obligations mainly consist of liabilities for accrued compensation and benefits, including the
underfunded status of certain of our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans, and miscellaneous liabilities.
We expect to pay $22 million of benefits from our unfunded postemployment benefit plans and $14 million of deferred compensation in fiscal 2017. We are
unable to reliably estimate the amount of these payments beyond fiscal 2017. As of May 29, 2016, our total liability for uncertain tax positions and accrued
interest and penalties was $209 million.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Our significant
accounting estimates are those that have a meaningful impact on the reporting of our financial condition and results of operations. These estimates include our
accounting for promotional expenditures, valuation of long-lived assets, intangible assets, redeemable interest, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and
defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans.
Promotional Expenditures
Our promotional activities are conducted through our customers and directly or indirectly with end consumers. These activities include: payments to customers to
perform merchandising activities on our behalf, such as advertising or in-store displays; discounts to our list prices to lower retail shelf prices; payments to gain
distribution of new products; coupons, contests, and other incentives; and media and advertising expenditures. The recognition of these costs requires estimation of
customer participation and performance levels. These estimates are based on the forecasted customer sales, the timing and forecasted costs of promotional
activities, and other factors. Differences between estimated expenses and actual costs are recognized as a change in management estimate in a subsequent period.
Our accrued trade, coupon, and consumer marketing liabilities were $564 million as of May 29, 2016, and $565 million as of May 31, 2015. Because our total
promotional expenditures (including amounts classified as a reduction of revenues) are significant, if our estimates are inaccurate we would have to make
adjustments in subsequent periods that could have a significant effect on our results of operations.
 
34

Table of Contents
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We estimate the useful lives of long-lived assets and make estimates concerning undiscounted cash flows to review for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) may not be recoverable. Fair value is measured using discounted cash flows or
independent appraisals, as appropriate.
Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not subject to amortization and are tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Our estimates of fair value for goodwill impairment testing are determined based on a discounted cash
flow model. We use inputs from our long-range planning process to determine growth rates for sales and profits. We also make estimates of discount rates,
perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other factors.
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, mainly brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life
requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of
the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution
channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite
lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, over their useful lives, generally ranging from 4 to 30 years. Our estimate of the fair value of our brand assets is based
on a discounted cash flow model using inputs which include projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not
own the brands, and a discount rate.
As of May 29, 2016, we had $12.9 billion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. While we currently believe that the fair value of each intangible
exceeds its carrying value and that those intangibles so classified will contribute indefinitely to our cash flows, materially different assumptions regarding future
performance of our businesses or a different weighted-average cost of capital could result in material impairment losses and amortization expense. We performed
our fiscal 2016 assessment of our intangible assets as of August 31, 2015. As of our annual assessment date, there was no impairment of any of our intangible
assets as their related fair values were substantially in excess of the carrying values, except for the Mountain High and Uncle Toby’s brands. The excess fair value
above the carrying value of these brand assets were as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Carrying
Value    
Excess 
Fair 
Value
Above 
Carrying
Value  
Mountain High
  
$
35.4    
 
20% 
Uncle Toby’s
  
$
52.2    
 
11% 
 
Our Mountain High and Uncle Toby’s brands have experienced declining business performance, and we will continue to monitor these businesses.
Our strategies for fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2018 will focus our growth investments on our brands and platforms with the strongest profitable growth potential. As a
result, certain parts of our U.S. Retail segment could experience reduced future sales projections. We performed a sensitivity analysis for certain brand intangible
assets and determined that, while not impaired as of May 29, 2016, the Progresso and Food Should Taste Good brands had risk of decreasing coverage. We will
continue to monitor these businesses.
Redeemable Interest
In fiscal 2016, we adjusted the redemption value of Sodiaal’s redeemable interest in Yoplait SAS based on a discounted cash flow model. The significant
assumptions used to estimate the redemption value include projected revenue growth and profitability from our long-range plan, capital spending, depreciation and
taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate. As of May 29, 2016, the redemption value of the redeemable interest was $846 million.
 
35

Table of Contents
Stock-based Compensation
The valuation of stock options is a significant accounting estimate that requires us to use judgments and assumptions that are likely to have a material impact on our
financial statements. Annually, we make predictive assumptions regarding future stock price volatility, employee exercise behavior, dividend yield, and the
forfeiture rate. For more information on these assumptions, please refer to Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The estimated fair values of stock options granted and the assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2016
   
2015
   
2014
 
Estimated fair values of stock options granted
   
$7.24     
$7.22     
$6.03  
Assumptions:
  
  
  
Risk-free interest rate
   
2.4%     
2.6%     
2.6%  
Expected term
   8.5 years     8.5 years     9.0 years  
Expected volatility
   
17.6%     
17.5%     
17.4%  
Dividend yield
   
3.2%     
3.1%     
3.1%  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The risk-free interest rate for periods during the expected term of the options is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
An increase in the expected term by 1 year, leaving all other assumptions constant, would increase the grant date fair value by less than 1 percent. If all other
assumptions are held constant, a one percentage point increase in our fiscal 2016 volatility assumption would increase the grant date fair value of our fiscal 2016
option awards by 7 percent.
To the extent that actual outcomes differ from our assumptions, we are not required to true up grant-date fair value-based expense to final intrinsic values.
However, these differences can impact the classification of cash tax benefits realized upon exercise of stock options, as explained in the following two paragraphs.
Furthermore, historical data has a significant bearing on our forward-looking assumptions. Significant variances between actual and predicted experience could
lead to prospective revisions in our assumptions, which could then significantly impact the year-over-year comparability of stock-based compensation expense.
Any corporate income tax benefit realized upon exercise or vesting of an award in excess of that previously recognized in earnings (referred to as a windfall tax
benefit) is presented in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as a financing cash flow. The actual impact on future years’ financing cash flows will depend,
in part, on the volume of employee stock option exercises during a particular year and the relationship between the exercise-date market value of the underlying
stock and the original grant-date fair value previously determined for financial reporting purposes.
Realized windfall tax benefits are credited to additional paid-in capital within the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Realized shortfall tax benefits (amounts which are
less than that previously recognized in earnings) are first offset against the cumulative balance of windfall tax benefits, if any, and then charged directly to income
tax expense, potentially resulting in volatility in our consolidated effective income tax rate. We calculated a cumulative amount of windfall tax benefits for the
purpose of accounting for future shortfall tax benefits and currently have sufficient cumulative windfall tax benefits to absorb projected arising shortfalls, such that
we do not currently expect future earnings to be affected by this provision. However, as employee stock option exercise behavior is not within our control, it is
possible that significantly different reported results could occur if different assumptions or conditions were to prevail.
 
36

Table of Contents
Income Taxes
We apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. Accordingly, we recognize the amount of tax benefit that
has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. Future changes in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of
uncertain tax positions will affect earnings in the quarter of such change. For more information on income taxes, please refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Defined Benefit Pension, Other Postretirement Benefit, and Postemployment Benefit Plans
We have defined benefit pension plans covering many employees in the United States, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. We also sponsor plans that
provide health care benefits to many of our retirees in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. Under certain circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits to
former and inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and members of our Board of Directors, including severance and certain other benefits
payable upon death. Please refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for a description of our defined benefit pension, other
postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans.
We recognize benefits provided during retirement or following employment over the plan participants’ active working lives. Accordingly, we make various
assumptions to predict and measure costs and obligations many years prior to the settlement of our obligations. Assumptions that require significant management
judgment and have a material impact on the measurement of our net periodic benefit expense or income and accumulated benefit obligations include the long-term
rates of return on plan assets, the interest rates used to discount the obligations for our benefit plans, and health care cost trend rates.
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets
Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by our asset allocation, our historical long-term investment performance, our estimate of future long-term
returns by asset class (using input from our actuaries, investment services, and investment managers), and long-term inflation assumptions. We review this
assumption annually for each plan; however, our annual investment performance for one particular year does not, by itself, significantly influence our evaluation.
Our historical investment returns (compound annual growth rates) for our United States defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plan assets were
0.7 percent, 7.8 percent, 6.6 percent, 7.4 percent, and 8.6 percent for the 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 year periods ended May 29, 2016.
On a weighted-average basis, the expected rate of return for all defined benefit plans was 8.53 percent for fiscal 2016, 8.53 percent for fiscal 2015, and 8.53 percent
for fiscal 2014. During fiscal 2016, we lowered our weighted-average expected rate of return on plan assets for our principal defined benefit pension and other
postretirement plans in the United States to 8.25 percent due to asset changes that decreased investment risk in the portfolio.
Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on assets by 100 basis points would increase our net pension and postretirement expense by $64 million for fiscal
2017. A market-related valuation basis is used to reduce year-to-year expense volatility. The market-related valuation recognizes certain investment gains or losses
over a five-year period from the year in which they occur. Investment gains or losses for this purpose are the difference between the expected return calculated
using the market-related value of assets and the actual return based on the market-related value of assets. Our outside actuaries perform these calculations as part of
our determination of annual expense or income.
Discount Rates
Our discount rate assumptions are determined annually as of the last day of our fiscal year for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and
postemployment benefit plan obligations. We work with our outside actuaries to determine the timing and amount of expected future cash outflows to plan
participants and, using the Aa Above Median corporate bond yield, to develop a forward interest rate curve, including a margin to that index based on our credit
risk. This forward interest rate curve is applied to our expected future cash outflows to determine our discount rate assumptions.
 
37

Table of Contents
Our weighted-average discount rates were as follows:
 
  
  
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans  
 
Other 
Postretirement
Benefit Plans  
 
Postemployment
Benefit Plans  
Obligations as of May 29, 2016, and fiscal 2017 expense
  
 
4.19%  
 
3.97%  
 
2.94% 
Obligations as of May 31, 2015, and fiscal 2016 expense
  
 
4.38%  
 
4.20%  
 
3.55% 
Fiscal 2015 expense
  
 
4.54%  
 
4.51%  
 
3.82% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lowering the discount rates by 100 basis points would increase our net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan
expense for fiscal 2017 by approximately $96 million. All obligation-related experience gains and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over the
average remaining service period of active plan participants.
Health Care Cost Trend Rates
We review our health care cost trend rates annually. Our review is based on data we collect about our health care claims experience and information provided by
our actuaries. This information includes recent plan experience, plan design, overall industry experience and projections, and assumptions used by other similar
organizations. Our initial health care cost trend rate is adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with this review, recent experiences, and short-term expectations.
Our initial health care cost trend rate assumption is 7.5 percent for retirees age 65 and over and 7.3 percent for retirees under age 65 at the end of fiscal 2016. Rates
are graded down annually until the ultimate trend rate of 5.0 percent is reached in 2024 for all retirees. The trend rates are applicable for calculations only if the
retirees’ benefits increase as a result of health care inflation. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view
on the rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate health care cost premium. Assumed trend rates for health care costs have an important effect on the amounts
reported for the other postretirement benefit plans.
A one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:
 
In Millions
  
One
Percentage
Point
Increase    
One
Percentage
Point
Decrease  
Effect on the aggregate of the service and interest cost components in fiscal 2017
  
 
$  3.1    
 
$  (2.7)  
Effect on the other postretirement accumulated benefit obligation as of May 29, 2016
  
 
71.2    
 
(63.8) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Any arising health care claims cost-related experience gain or loss is recognized in the calculation of expected future claims. Once recognized, experience gains
and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over 10 years, resulting in at least the minimum amortization required being recorded.
Financial Statement Impact
In fiscal 2016, we recorded net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan expense of $163 million compared to $153
million of expense in fiscal 2015 and $140 million of expense in fiscal 2014. As of May 29, 2016, we had cumulative unrecognized actuarial net losses of $1.9
billion on our defined benefit pension plans and $72 million on our postretirement and postemployment benefit plans, mainly as the result of liability increases
from lower interest rates, partially offset by recent increases in the values of plan assets. These unrecognized actuarial net losses will result in increases in our
future pension and postretirement benefit expenses because they currently exceed the corridors defined by GAAP.
Assumed mortality rates of plan participants are a critical estimate in measuring the expected payments a participant will receive over their lifetime and the amount
of expense we recognize. On October 27, 2014, the Society of Actuaries published RP-2014 Mortality Tables and Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2014, which
both reflect
 
38

Table of Contents
improved longevity. In fiscal 2015, we adopted the change to the mortality assumptions to remeasure our defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement
benefit plans obligations, which increased the total of these obligations by $437 million in fiscal 2015. In addition, these assumptions increased the fiscal 2016
expense associated with these plans by $72 million.
Actual future net defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plan income or expense will depend on investment
performance, changes in future discount rates, changes in health care cost trend rates, and other factors related to the populations participating in these plans.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In March 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued new accounting requirements for the accounting and presentation of stock-based
payments. This will result in realized windfall and shortfall tax benefits upon exercise or vesting of stock-based awards being recorded in our Consolidated
Statements of Earnings in addition to other presentation changes. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after
December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2018. Early adoption is permitted. We are in the
process of analyzing the impact on our results of operations and financial position.
In February 2016, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for accounting, presentation and classification of leases. This will result in most leases being
capitalized as a right of use asset with a related liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual
reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2020. We are in the
process of analyzing the impact on our results of operations and financial position.
In May 2015, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for the presentation of certain investments using the net asset value, providing a practical expedient to
exclude such investments from categorization within the fair value hierarchy and separate disclosure. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual
reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2017. We do not
expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
In April 2015, the FASB issued new accounting requirements which permits reporting entities with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a month-end to
apply a practical expedient that permits the entity to measure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the entity’s fiscal
year-end and apply such practical expedient consistently to all plans. The requirements of the new standard are effective for annual reporting periods beginning
after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2017. We do not expect this guidance to have a
material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
In May 2014, the FASB issued new accounting requirements for the recognition of revenue from contracts with customers. The requirements of the new standard
and its subsequent amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those annual periods,
which for us is the first quarter of fiscal 2019. We do not expect this guidance to have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
 
39

Table of Contents
NON-GAAP MEASURES
We have included in this report measures of financial performance that are not defined by GAAP. We believe that these measures provide useful information to
investors, and include these measures in other communications to investors.
For each of these non-GAAP financial measures, we are providing below a reconciliation of the differences between the non-GAAP measure and the most directly
comparable GAAP measure, an explanation of why our management or the Board of Directors believes the non-GAAP measure provides useful information to
investors and any additional purposes for which our management or Board of Directors uses the non-GAAP measure. These non-GAAP measures should be viewed
in addition to, and not in lieu of, the comparable GAAP measure.
Constant-currency Net Sales Growth Rates
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our performance for incentive
compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance in our
consolidated net sales by excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on the year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign
currency exchange markets.
Net sales growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
  
  2016    2015  
Percentage change in total net sales
   (6)%       (2)%    
Impact of foreign currency exchange
   (4) pts     (3) pts  
Percentage change in total net sales on a constant-currency basis
   (2)%       
1%    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
40

Table of Contents
Diluted EPS Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability and Related Constant-currency Growth Rate
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our performance for incentive
compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the profitability measure we use to evaluate earnings
performance on a comparable year-over-year basis. The adjustments are either items resulting from infrequently occurring events or items that, in management’s
judgment, significantly affect the year-over-year assessment of operating results.
The reconciliation of our GAAP measure, diluted EPS, to diluted EPS excluding certain items affecting comparability and the related constant-currency growth rate
follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Per Share Data
  
2016   
2015    Change 
 
2014   
2013   
2012  
Diluted earnings per share, as reported
  $ 2.77   
$1.97     
41%  
$ 2.83   
$ 2.79   
$2.35  
Mark-to-market effects (a)
   (0.07)  
 0.09    
 
 (0.05)  
 
—   
 0.10  
Divestitures gain, net (b)
   (0.10)  
 
—    
 
 (0.06)  
 
—   
 
—  
Tax items (c)
   
—   
 0.13    
 
 
—   
 (0.13)  
 
—  
Acquisition integration costs (d)
   
—   
 0.02    
 
 
—   
 0.01   
 0.01  
Venezuela currency devaluation (e)
   
—   
 0.01    
 
 0.09   
 0.03   
 
—  
Restructuring costs (f)
   0.26   
 0.35    
 
 0.01   
 0.02   
 0.10  
Project-related costs (f)
   0.06   
 0.01    
 
 
—   
 
—   
 
—  
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (g)
   
—   
 0.28    
 
 
—   
 
—   
 
—  
Diluted earnings per share, excluding certain items affecting comparability
  $ 2.92   
$2.86     
2%  
$ 2.82   
$ 2.72   
$2.56  
Foreign currency exchange impact
    
  
  
    
(3)  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Diluted earnings per share growth, excluding certain items affecting comparability, on a
constant-currency basis
    
  
  
    
5%  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
The fiscal 2015 tax item is related to the one-time repatriation of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015. The fiscal 2013 tax items consist of a reduction to
income taxes related to the restructuring of our GMC subsidiary and an increase to income taxes related to the liquidation of a corporate investment.
Additionally, fiscal 2013 includes changes in deferred taxes associated with the Medicare Part D subsidies related to the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010.
(d)
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015, Yoki in fiscal 2013, and Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC in fiscal 2012.
(e)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(f)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(g)
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
See our reconciliation below of the effective income tax rate as reported to the effective income tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability for the tax
impact of each item affecting comparability.
Total Segment Operating Profit and Related Constant-currency Growth Rate
This measure is used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Directors’ measurement of our performance for incentive
compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the profitability measure we use to evaluate segment
performance. A reconciliation of total segment operating profit to operating profit, the relevant GAAP measure, is included in Note 16 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
 
41

Table of Contents
Total segment operating profit growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
  
  
2016  
 
2015 
Percentage change in total segment operating profit as reported
  
 
(1)  %  
 
(4)  % 
Impact of foreign currency exchange
  
 (2) pts  
 
 
(2) pts 
Percentage change in total segment operating profit on a constant-currency basis
  
 
1   % 
 
 
(2)  % 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constant-currency After-tax Earnings from Joint Ventures Growth Rates
We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance of our joint ventures by
excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.
After-tax earnings from joint ventures growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
  
  2016    2015  
Percentage change in after-tax earnings from joint ventures as reported
   5  %     (6) %  
Impact of foreign currency exchange
   (7)pts     (6)pts  
Percentage change in after-tax earnings from joint ventures on a constant-currency basis
   12  %     
Flat  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Net Sales Growth Rates for Our International Segment on Constant-currency Basis
We believe this measure of our International segment and region net sales provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to the
underlying performance by excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign
currency exchange markets.
 
 
  
Fiscal 2016
 
  
  
Percentage 
Change in Net
Sales
as Reported  
 
Impact of
Foreign 
Currency
Exchange 
 
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales on Constant-
Currency Basis
 
Europe
  
 
(6)%  
 
(9)pts  
 
3 % 
Canada
  
 
(16) 
 
 
(12) 
 
 
(4) 
Asia/Pacific
  
 
(3) 
 
 
(4) 
 
 
1  
Latin America
  
 
(19) 
 
 
(31) 
 
 
12  
Total International
  
 
(10)%  
 
(13)pts  
 
3 % 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fiscal 2015
 
  
  
Percentage 
Change in Net
Sales
as Reported  
 
Impact of
Foreign 
Currency
Exchange 
 
Percentage Change in 
Net Sales on Constant-
Currency Basis
 
Europe
  
 
(3)%  
 
(8)pts  
 
5% 
Canada
  
 
(8) 
 
 
(8) 
 
 
Flat  
Asia/Pacific
  
 
4  
 
 
(1) 
 
 
5  
Latin America
  
 
(14) 
 
 
(31) 
 
 
17  
Total International
  
 
(5)%  
 
(11)pts  
 
6% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42

Table of Contents
Constant-currency International Segment Operating Profit Growth Rates
We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it provides transparency to underlying performance of the International segment by
excluding the effect that foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations have on year-to-year comparability given volatility in foreign currency exchange markets.
International segment operating profit growth rates on a constant-currency basis are calculated as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
 
  
2016   2015  
Percentage change in International segment operating profit as reported
  
(15)%    (2)%    
Impact of foreign currency exchange
  
(12)pts   (11)pts  
Percentage change in International segment operating profit on a constant-currency basis
  
(3)%    
9 %   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
43

Table of Contents
 
Adjusted Return on Average Total Capital
Change in adjusted return on average total capital is a measure used in reporting to our executive management and as a component of the Board of Director’s
measurement of our performance for incentive compensation purposes. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is
important for assessing the utilization of capital and it eliminates certain items that affect year-to-year comparability. The calculation of adjusted return on average
total capital and return on average total capital, its GAAP equivalent follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016
   
2015
 
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
 
2012
   
2011
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests
  $ 1,736.8             $ 1,259.4   
$ 1,861.3   
$ 1,892.5   
$ 1,589.1       
Interest, net, after-tax
   
193.1              
199.8   
 
190.9   
 
201.2   
 
238.9       
Earnings before interest, after-tax
   
1,929.9              
1,459.2   
 
2,052.2   
 
2,093.7   
 
1,828.0       
Adjustments, after-tax (a):
  
  
 
 
 
  
Mark-to-market effects
   
(39.6)              
56.5   
 
(30.5)  
 
(2.8)  
 
65.6       
Divestitures gain, net
   
(66.0)              
—   
 
(36.0)  
 
—   
 
—       
Tax items
   
—              
78.6   
 
—   
 
(85.4)  
 
—       
Acquisition integration costs
   
—              
10.4   
 
—   
 
8.8   
 
9.7       
Venezuela currency devaluation
   
—              
8.0   
 
57.8   
 
20.8   
 
—       
Restructuring costs
   
160.8              
217.7   
 
3.6   
 
15.9   
 
64.3       
Project-related costs
   
36.8              
8.3   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—       
Indefinite-lived intangible impairment
   
—              
176.9   
 
—   
 
—   
 
—       
Adjusted earnings before interest, after-tax for adjusted return on
capital calculation
  $ 2,021.9             $ 2,015.6   
$ 2,047.1   
$ 2,051.0   
$ 1,967.6       
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Current portion of long-term debt
  $ 1,103.4             $ 1,000.4   
$ 1,250.6   
$ 1,443.3   
$
741.2       $ 1,031.3  
Notes payable
   
269.8              
615.8   
 
1,111.7   
 
599.7   
 
526.5        
311.3  
Long-term debt
   
7,057.7              
7,575.3   
 
6,396.6   
 
5,901.8   
 
6,139.5        
5,524.1  
Total debt
   
8,430.9              
9,191.5   
 
8,758.9   
 
7,944.8   
 
7,407.2        
6,866.7  
Redeemable interest
   
845.6              
778.9   
 
984.1   
 
967.5   
 
847.8        
—  
Noncontrolling interests
   
376.9              
396.0   
 
470.6   
 
456.3   
 
461.0        
246.7  
Stockholders’ equity
   
4,930.2              
4,996.7   
 
6,534.8   
 
6,672.2   
 
6,421.7        
6,365.5  
Total capital
   14,583.6              15,363.1   
 16,748.4   
 16,040.8   
 15,137.7        13,478.9  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
   
2,612.2              
2,310.7   
 
1,340.3   
 
1,585.3   
 
1,743.7        
1,010.8  
After-tax earnings adjustments (b)
   
439.1              
347.1   
 
(209.3)  
 
(204.2)  
 
(161.5)       
(301.1) 
Adjusted total capital
  $17,634.9             $18,020.9   
$17,879.4   
$17,421.9   
$16,719.9       $14,188.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Average total capital (c)
  $14,973.4             $16,055.8   
$16,394.6   
$15,589.2   
$14,308.3       
Return on average total capital (c)
   
12.9%          
9.1%  
 
12.5%  
 
13.4%  
 
12.8%    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Adjusted average total capital (c)
  $17,827.9             $17,950.1   
$17,650.6   
$17,070.8   
$15,454.3       
Adjusted return on average total capital (c)
   
11.3%          
11.2%  
 
11.6%  
 
12.0%  
 
12.7%    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Change in adjusted return on average total capital
   
10 bps     
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency exchange impact
   
(30)bps     
 
 
 
  
Change in adjusted return on average total capital on a constant-
currency basis
   
40 bps     
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
(a)
See our reconciliation below of the effective income tax rate as reported to the effective income tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability for
the tax impact of each item affecting comparability.
(b)
Sum of current year and previous year after-tax adjustments.
(c)
See “Glossary” in Item 8 of this report for definition.
 
44

Table of Contents
Effective Income Tax Rate Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability
We believe this measure provides useful information to investors because it is important for assessing the effective tax rate excluding certain items affecting
comparability and presents the income tax effects of certain items affecting comparability.
Effective income tax rates excluding certain items affecting comparability are calculated as follows:
 
 
 
Fiscal Year Ended
 
 
 
May 29, 2016
 
 
May 31, 2015
 
 
May 25, 2014
 
 
May 26, 2013
 
 
May 27, 2012
 
In Millions
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
 
Pretax 
Earnings 
(a)
  
Income 
Taxes  
As reported
 $ 2,403.6   $ 755.2  
 $ 1,761.9   $ 586.8   $ 2,655.0   $ 883.3   $ 2,534.9   $ 741.2   $ 2,210.5   $ 709.6  
Mark-to-market effects (b)
  
(62.8)   
(23.2)   
89.7    
33.2    
(48.5)   
(18.0)   
(4.4)   
(1.6)   
104.2    
38.6  
Divestitures (gain) (c)
  
(148.2)   
(82.2)   
—    
—    
(65.5)   
(29.5)   
—    
—    
—    
—  
Tax items (d)
  
—    
—  
  
—    
(78.6)   
—    
—    
—    
85.4    
—    
—  
Acquisition integration costs (e)  
—    
—  
  
16.0    
5.6    
—    
—    
12.3    
3.5    
11.2    
1.5  
Venezuela currency devaluation
(b)
  
—    
—  
  
8.0    
—    
62.2    
4.4    
25.2    
4.4    
—    
—  
Restructuring costs (f)
  
229.8    
69.0  
  
343.5    
125.8    
3.6    
—    
18.6    
2.7    
100.6    
36.3  
Project-related costs (f)
  
57.5    
20.7  
  
13.2    
4.9    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—  
Intangible asset impairment (f)   
—    
—  
  
260.0    
83.1    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—  
As adjusted
 $ 2,479.9   $ 739.5  
 $ 2,492.3   $ 760.8   $ 2,606.8   $ 840.2   $ 2,586.6   $ 835.6   $ 2,426.5   $ 786.0  
 
Effective tax rate:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As reported
 
  
31.4%  
  
33.3%  
  
33.3%  
  
29.2%  
  
32.1% 
As adjusted
   
   
29.8%    
   
30.5%    
   
32.2%    
   
32.3%    
   
32.4% 
Sum of adjustments to income taxes    
  $
(15.7)    
  $ 174.0     
  $
(43.1)    
  $
94.4     
  $
76.4  
Average number of common
shares - diluted EPS
   
   
611.9  
   
   
618.8     
   
645.7     
   
665.6     
   
666.7  
Impact of income tax adjustments on
diluted EPS excluding certain
items affecting comparability
 
 $
0.03  
 
 $
(0.28)  
 $
0.07   
 $
(0.14)  
 $
(0.11) 
 
(a)
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures.
(b)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(d)
The fiscal 2015 tax item is related to the one-time repatriation of historical foreign earnings in fiscal 2015. The fiscal 2013 tax items consist of a reduction to
income taxes related to the restructuring of our GMC subsidiary and an increase to income taxes related to the liquidation of a corporate investment.
Additionally, fiscal 2013 includes changes in deferred taxes associated with the Medicare Part D subsidies related to the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010.
(e)
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015, Yoki in fiscal 2013, and Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC in fiscal 2012.
(f)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
 
45

Table of Contents
Free Cash Flow Conversion rate and Total Cash Returned to Shareholders as a Percentage of Free Cash Flow
We believe these measures provide useful information to investors because they are important for assessing our efficiency in converting earnings to cash and
returning cash to shareholders. The calculation of free cash flow conversion rate and net cash provided by operating activities conversion rate, its equivalent GAAP
measure follows:
 
In Millions
  
Fiscal 
2016  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests, as reported
  
$1,736.8  
Mark-to-market effects, net of tax (a)
  
 
(39.6)  
Divestitures (gain), net of tax (b)
  
 
(66.0)  
Restructuring costs, net of tax (c)
  
 
160.8  
Project-related costs, net of tax (c)
  
 
36.8  
Adjusted net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
 1,828.8  
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  
 2,629.8  
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 (729.3)  
Free cash flow
  
$1,900.5  
 
Net cash provided by operating activities conversion rate
  
 151%  
 
Free cash flow conversion rate
  
 104%  
 
The calculation of total cash returned to shareholders as a percentage of free cash flow follows:
 
Dividends paid
  
$1,071.7  
Purchases of common stock for treasury
  
 
606.7  
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options
  
 (171.9)  
Total cash returned to shareholders
  
$1,506.5  
 
Total cash returned to shareholders as a percentage of free cash flow
  
 
79%  
  
 
 
 
(a)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
See our reconciliation above of the effective income tax rate as reported to the effective income tax rate excluding certain items affecting comparability for the tax
impact of each item affecting comparability.
 
46

Table of Contents
Adjusted Operating Profit as a Percent of Net Sales Excluding Certain Items Affecting Comparability
We believe this measure provides useful information to investors because it is important for assessing our operating profit margin on a comparable basis. Adjusted
operating profit excludes certain items affecting comparability.
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Percent of Net Sales
  
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
 
2012
 
Operating profit as reported
  $2,707.4    16.3%  $2,077.3     11.8%  $2,957.4    16.5 %  $2,851.8    16.0%  $2,562.4     15.4%  
Mark-to-market effects (a)
   
(62.8)   (0.4)%   
89.7     0.5%   
(48.5)   (0.3)%   
(4.4)   —  %   
104.2     0.6%  
Divestitures (gain), (b)
   (148.2)   (0.9)%   
—       —  %   
(65.5)   (0.4)%   
—      —  %   
—       —  %  
Acquisition integration costs (c)
   
—      —  %   
16.0     0.1%   
—      —  %   
12.3    0.1%   
11.2     0.1%  
Venezuela currency devaluation (d)
   
—      —  %   
8.0     —  %   
62.2    
0.4%   
25.2    0.1%   
—       —  %  
Restructuring costs (e)
   
229.8    1.4%   
343.5     1.9%   
3.6    —  %   
18.6    0.1%   
100.6     0.6%  
Project-related costs (e)
   
57.5    0.4%   
13.2     0.1%   
—      —  %   
—      —  %   
—       —  %  
Intangible asset impairment (f)
   
—      —  %   
260.0     1.5%   
—      —  %   
—      —  %   
—       —  %  
Adjusted operating profit
  $2,783.7    16.8%  $2,807.7     15.9%  $2,909.2    16.2%  $2,903.5    16.3%  $2,778.4     16.7%  
 
(a)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(c)
Integration costs resulting from the acquisitions of Annie’s in fiscal 2015, Yoki in fiscal 2013, and Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC in fiscal 2012.
(d)
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(e)
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(f)
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT RELEVANT TO FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF “SAFE HARBOR” PROVISIONS
OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995
This report contains or incorporates by reference forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that are
based on our current expectations and assumptions. We also may make written or oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in our filings
with the SEC and in our reports to shareholders.
The words or phrases “will likely result,” “are expected to,” “will continue,” “is anticipated,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” or similar expressions identify
“forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements are subject to certain risks and
uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results and those currently anticipated or projected. We wish to caution you not to
place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements.
In connection with the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we are identifying important factors that could affect our
financial performance and could cause our actual results in future periods to differ materially from any current opinions or statements.
Our future results could be affected by a variety of factors, such as: competitive dynamics in the consumer foods industry and the markets for our products,
including new product introductions, advertising activities, pricing actions, and promotional activities of our competitors; economic conditions, including changes
in inflation rates, interest rates, tax rates, or the availability of capital; product development and innovation; consumer acceptance of new products and product
improvements; consumer reaction to pricing actions and changes in promotion levels; acquisitions or dispositions of businesses or assets; changes in capital
structure; changes in the legal and regulatory environment, including labeling and advertising regulations and litigation; impairments in the carrying value of
goodwill, other intangible assets, or other long-lived assets, or changes in the useful lives of other intangible assets; changes in accounting standards and the impact
of significant accounting estimates; product quality and safety issues, including recalls and product liability; changes in consumer demand for our products;
effectiveness of advertising, marketing, and promotional programs; changes in consumer behavior, trends, and preferences, including weight loss trends; consumer
perception of health-related issues, including obesity; consolidation in the retail
 
47

Table of Contents
environment; changes in purchasing and inventory levels of significant customers; fluctuations in the cost and availability of supply chain resources, including raw
materials, packaging, and energy; disruptions or inefficiencies in the supply chain; effectiveness of restructuring and cost savings initiatives; volatility in the market
value of derivatives used to manage price risk for certain commodities; benefit plan expenses due to changes in plan asset values and discount rates used to
determine plan liabilities; failure or breach of our information technology systems; foreign economic conditions, including currency rate fluctuations; and political
unrest in foreign markets and economic uncertainty due to terrorism or war.
You should also consider the risk factors that we identify in Item 1A of this report, which could also affect our future results.
We undertake no obligation to publicly revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of those statements or to reflect the
occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
Item 7A Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are exposed to market risk stemming from changes in interest and foreign exchange rates and commodity and equity prices. Changes in these factors could
cause fluctuations in our earnings and cash flows. In the normal course of business, we actively manage our exposure to these market risks by entering into various
hedging transactions, authorized under established policies that place clear controls on these activities. The counterparties in these transactions are generally highly
rated institutions. We establish credit limits for each counterparty. Our hedging transactions include but are not limited to a variety of derivative financial
instruments. For information on interest rate, foreign exchange, commodity price, and equity instrument risk, please see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 of this report.
VALUE AT RISK
The estimates in the table below are intended to measure the maximum potential fair value we could lose in one day from adverse changes in market interest rates,
foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, and equity prices under normal market conditions. A Monte Carlo value-at-risk (VAR) methodology was used to
quantify the market risk for our exposures. The models assumed normal market conditions and used a 95 percent confidence level.
The VAR calculation used historical interest and foreign exchange rates, and commodity and equity prices from the past year to estimate the potential volatility and
correlation of these rates in the future. The market data were drawn from the RiskMetrics™ data set. The calculations are not intended to represent actual losses in
fair value that we expect to incur. Further, since the hedging instrument (the derivative) inversely correlates with the underlying exposure, we would expect that
any loss or gain in the fair value of our derivatives would be generally offset by an increase or decrease in the fair value of the underlying exposure. The positions
included in the calculations were: debt; investments; interest rate swaps; foreign exchange forwards; commodity swaps, futures and options; and equity
instruments. The calculations do not include the underlying foreign exchange and commodities or equity-related positions that are offset by these market-risk-
sensitive instruments.
 
48

Table of Contents
The table below presents the estimated maximum potential VAR arising from a one-day loss in fair value for our interest rate, foreign currency, commodity, and
equity market-risk-sensitive instruments outstanding as of May 29, 2016, and May 31, 2015, and the average fair value impact during the year ended May 29, 2016.
 
 
  
Fair Value Impact
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
Average
during
fiscal 2016   
May 31,
2015  
Interest rate instruments
  
$
33.3    
$
30.7    
$
25.1  
Foreign currency instruments
  
 
27.6    
 
24.4    
 
17.9  
Commodity instruments
  
 
3.3    
 
3.7    
 
3.7  
Equity instruments
  
 
1.7    
 
1.6    
 
1.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
49

Table of Contents
ITEM 8
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
REPORT OF MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
The management of General Mills, Inc. is responsible for the fairness and accuracy of the consolidated financial statements. The statements have been prepared in
accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the United States, using management’s best estimates and judgments where appropriate. The
financial information throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K is consistent with our consolidated financial statements.
Management has established a system of internal controls that provides reasonable assurance that assets are adequately safeguarded and transactions are recorded
accurately in all material respects, in accordance with management’s authorization. We maintain a strong audit program that independently evaluates the adequacy
and effectiveness of internal controls. Our internal controls provide for appropriate separation of duties and responsibilities, and there are documented policies
regarding use of our assets and proper financial reporting. These formally stated and regularly communicated policies demand highly ethical conduct from all
employees.
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors meets regularly with management, internal auditors, and our independent registered public accounting firm to
review internal control, auditing, and financial reporting matters. The independent registered public accounting firm, internal auditors, and employees have full and
free access to the Audit Committee at any time.
The Audit Committee reviewed and approved the Company’s annual financial statements. The Audit Committee recommended, and the Board of Directors
approved, that the consolidated financial statements be included in the Annual Report. The Audit Committee also appointed KPMG LLP to serve as the Company’s
independent registered public accounting firm for fiscal 2017.
 
/s/ K. J. Powell
 
 /s/ D. L. Mulligan
K. J. Powell
 
 D. L. Mulligan
Chairman of the Board
 
 Executive Vice President
and Chief Executive Officer
 
 and Chief Financial Officer
June 30, 2016
 
50

Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
General Mills, Inc.:
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of General Mills, Inc. and subsidiaries as of May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015, and the related
consolidated statements of earnings, comprehensive income, total equity and redeemable interest, and cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period
ended May 29, 2016. In connection with our audits of the consolidated financial statements, we have audited the accompanying financial statement schedule. We
also have audited General Mills, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of May 29, 2016, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated
Framework (2013)  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). General Mills, Inc.’s management is responsible
for these consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Item 9A Management’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule and an opinion on the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding
of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions
and dispositions of the assets of the Company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
51

Table of Contents
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of General Mills, Inc. and
subsidiaries as of May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended
May 29, 2016, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also in our opinion, the accompanying financial statement schedule, when
considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. Also
in our opinion, General Mills, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of May 29, 2016, based on criteria
established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013)  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Minneapolis, Minnesota
June 30, 2016
 
52

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Earnings
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions, Except per Share Data)
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2016
  
2015
   
2014
 
Net sales
  
$16,563.1   
$17,630.3    
$17,909.6  
Cost of sales
  
 10,733.6   
 11,681.1    
 11,539.8  
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
  
 
3,118.9   
 
3,328.0    
 
3,474.3  
Divestitures (gain)
  
 
(148.2)  
 
—    
 
(65.5) 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 
151.4   
 
543.9    
 
3.6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Operating profit
  
 
2,707.4   
 
2,077.3    
 
2,957.4  
Interest, net
  
 
303.8   
 
315.4    
 
302.4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
 
2,403.6   
 
1,761.9    
 
2,655.0  
Income taxes
  
 
755.2   
 
586.8    
 
883.3  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
 
88.4   
 
84.3    
 
89.6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
 
1,736.8   
 
1,259.4    
 
1,861.3  
Net earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
 
39.4   
 
38.1    
 
36.9  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
  
$ 1,697.4   
$ 1,221.3    
$ 1,824.4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Earnings per share - basic
  
$
2.83   
$
2.02    
$
2.90  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Earnings per share - diluted
  
$
2.77   
$
1.97    
$
2.83  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Dividends per share
  
$
1.78   
$
1.67    
$
1.55  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
53

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions)
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2016   
2015
  
2014  
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  $1,736.8   $ 1,259.4   $1,861.3  
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
  
 
 
Foreign currency translation
   (108.7)   
(957.9)   
(11.3) 
Net actuarial income (loss)
   (325.9)   
(358.4)   
206.0  
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
Securities
   
0.1    
0.8    
0.3  
Hedge derivatives
   
16.0    
4.1    
5.0  
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
Hedge derivatives
   
(9.5)   
4.9    
(4.6) 
Amortization of losses and prior service costs
   
128.6    
105.1    
107.6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
   (299.4)   (1,201.4)   
303.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total comprehensive income
   1,437.4    
58.0    2,164.3  
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
   
41.5    
(192.9)   
94.9  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comprehensive income attributable to General Mills
  $1,395.9   $
250.9   $2,069.4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
54

Table of Contents
Consolidated Balance Sheets
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions, Except Par Value)
 
 
  
May 29, 
2016
  
May 31, 
2015
 
  
 
ASSETS
  
 
Current assets:
  
 
Cash and cash equivalents
  
$
763.7   
$
334.2  
Receivables
  
 
1,360.8   
 
1,386.7  
Inventories
  
 
1,413.7   
 
1,540.9  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
 
399.0   
 
423.8  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total current assets
  
 
3,937.2   
 
3,685.6  
Land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
3,743.6   
 
3,783.3  
Goodwill
  
 
8,741.2   
 
8,874.9  
Other intangible assets
  
 
4,538.6   
 
4,677.0  
Other assets
  
 
751.7   
 
811.2  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total assets
  
$21,712.3   
$21,832.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
  
 
Current liabilities:
  
 
Accounts payable
  
$ 2,046.5   
$ 1,684.0  
Current portion of long-term debt
  
 
1,103.4   
 
1,000.4  
Notes payable
  
 
269.8   
 
615.8  
Other current liabilities
  
 
1,595.0   
 
1,589.9  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total current liabilities
  
 
5,014.7   
 
4,890.1  
Long-term debt
  
 
7,057.7   
 
7,575.3  
Deferred income taxes
  
 
1,399.6   
 
1,450.2  
Other liabilities
  
 
2,087.6   
 
1,744.8  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total liabilities
  
 15,559.6   
 15,660.4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Redeemable interest
  
 
845.6   
 
778.9  
Stockholders’ equity:
  
 
Common stock, 754.6 shares issued, $0.10 par value
  
 
75.5   
 
75.5  
Additional paid-in capital
  
 
1,177.0   
 
1,296.7  
Retained earnings
  
 12,616.5   
 11,990.8  
Common stock in treasury, at cost, shares of 157.8 and 155.9
  
 (6,326.6)  
 (6,055.6) 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
  
 (2,612.2)  
 (2,310.7) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total stockholders’ equity
  
 
4,930.2   
 
4,996.7  
Noncontrolling interests
  
 
376.9   
 
396.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total equity
  
 
5,307.1   
 
5,392.7  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total liabilities and equity
  
$21,712.3   
$21,832.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
55

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Total Equity, and Redeemable Interest
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions, Except per Share Data)
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
$.10 Par Value Common Stock
(One Billion Shares Authorized)
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
Issued
  
Treasury
   
   
   
   
   
 
  
 Shares  
Par 
Amount  
Additional
Paid-In 
Capital   Shares  
Amount   
Retained 
Earnings   
Accumulated
Other 
Comprehensive
Loss
  
Non-
controlling
Interests   
Total
Equity   
Redeemable
Interest
 
Balance as of May 26, 2013
  754.6   $
75.5   $
1,166.6    (113.8)  $(3,687.2)  $ 10,702.6   $
(1,585.3)  $
456.3   $ 7,128.5   $
967.5  
Total comprehensive income
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,824.4    
245.0    
24.9    
2,094.3    
70.0  
Cash dividends declared ($1.17 per share)
 
 
 
 
 
  
(739.8)  
 
  
(739.8)  
Shares purchased
 
 
  
30.0    (35.6)   (1,775.3)  
 
 
  (1,745.3)  
Stock compensation plans (includes income
tax benefits of $69.3)
 
 
  
13.8    
7.1    
243.1   
 
 
  
256.9   
Unearned compensation related to restricted
stock unit awards
 
 
  
(91.3)  
 
 
 
 
  
(91.3)  
Earned compensation
 
 
  
108.5   
 
 
 
 
  
108.5   
Decrease in redemption value of redeemable
interest
 
 
  
4.2   
 
 
 
 
  
4.2    
(4.2) 
Addition of noncontrolling interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
17.6    
17.6   
Distributions to redeemable and
noncontrolling interest holders
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
(28.2)   
(28.2)   
(49.2) 
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  754.6    
75.5    
1,231.8    (142.3)   (5,219.4)   11,787.2    
(1,340.3)   
470.6    
7,005.4    
984.1  
Total comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,221.3    
(970.4)   
(70.0)   
180.9    
(122.9) 
Cash dividends declared ($1.67 per share)
 
 
 
 
 
  
(1,017.7)  
 
  (1,017.7)  
Shares purchased
 
 
 
  (22.3)   (1,161.9)  
 
 
  (1,161.9)  
Stock compensation plans (includes income
tax benefits of $74.6)
 
 
  
(38.1)   
8.7    
325.7   
 
 
  
287.6   
Unearned compensation related to stock unit
awards
 
 
  
(80.8)  
 
 
 
 
  
(80.8)  
Earned compensation
 
 
  
111.1   
 
 
 
 
  
111.1   
Decrease in redemption value of redeemable
interest
 
 
  
83.2   
 
 
 
 
  
83.2    
(83.2) 
Addition of noncontrolling interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20.7    
20.7   
Acquisition of interest in subsidiary
 
 
  
(10.5)  
 
 
 
  
0.6    
(9.9)  
Distributions to redeemable and
noncontrolling interest holders
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
(25.9)   
(25.9)   
0.9  
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  754.6    
75.5    
1,296.7    (155.9)   (6,055.6)   11,990.8    
(2,310.7)   
396.0    
5,392.7    
778.9  
Total comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
 
 
 
  
1,697.4    
(301.5)   
11.2    
1,407.1    
30.3  
Cash dividends declared (1.78 per share)
 
 
 
 
 
  
(1,071.7)  
 
  (1,071.7)  
Shares purchased
 
 
 
  (10.7)   
(606.7)  
 
 
  
(606.7)  
Stock compensation plans (includes income
tax benefits of $94.1)
 
 
  
(46.3)   
8.8    
335.7   
 
 
  
289.4   
Unearned compensation related to stock unit
awards
 
 
  
(63.3)  
 
 
 
 
  
(63.3)  
Earned compensation
 
 
  
84.8   
 
 
 
 
  
84.8   
Increase in redemption value of redeemable
interest
 
 
  
(91.5)  
 
 
 
 
  
(91.5)   
91.5  
Acquisition of interest in subsidiary
 
 
  
(3.4)  
 
 
 
  
(1.1)   
(4.5)  
Distributions to redeemable and
noncontrolling interest holders
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
(29.2)   
(29.2)   
(55.1) 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  754.6    
$75.5    
$1,177.0    (157.8)  $(6,326.6)   $12,616.5   $
(2,612.2)   
$376.9    $5,307.1    
$845.6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
56

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
(In Millions)
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2016
  
2015
  
2014
 
Cash Flows - Operating Activities
  
 
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests
  
$ 1,736.8   
$ 1,259.4   
$ 1,861.3  
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
  
 
 
Depreciation and amortization
  
 
608.1   
 
588.3   
 
585.4  
After-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
 
(88.4)  
 
(84.3)  
 
(89.6) 
Distributions of earnings from joint ventures
  
 
75.1   
 
72.6   
 
90.5  
Stock-based compensation
  
 
89.8   
 
106.4   
 
108.5  
Deferred income taxes
  
 
120.6   
 
25.3   
 
172.5  
Tax benefit on exercised options
  
 
(94.1)  
 
(74.6)  
 
(69.3) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions
  
 
(47.8)  
 
(49.5)  
 
(49.7) 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plan costs
  
 
118.1   
 
91.3   
 
124.1  
Divestitures (gain), net
  
 
(148.2)  
 
—   
 
(65.5) 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 
107.2   
 
531.1   
 
(18.8) 
Changes in current assets and liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures
  
 
258.2   
 
214.7   
 
(32.2) 
Other, net
  
 
(105.6)  
 
(137.9)  
 
(76.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  
 2,629.8   
 2,542.8   
 2,541.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows - Investing Activities
  
 
 
Purchases of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
(729.3)  
 
(712.4)  
 
(663.5) 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
  
 
(84.0)  
 
(822.3)  
 
—  
Investments in affiliates, net
  
 
63.9   
 
(102.4)  
 
(54.9) 
Proceeds from disposal of land, buildings, and equipment
  
 
4.4   
 
11.0   
 
6.6  
Proceeds from divestitures
  
 
828.5   
 
—   
 
121.6  
Exchangeable note
  
 
21.1   
 
27.9   
 
29.3  
Other, net
  
 
(11.2)  
 
(4.0)  
 
(0.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash provided (used) by investing activities
  
 
93.4   
 (1,602.2)  
 
(561.8) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows - Financing Activities
  
 
 
Change in notes payable
  
 
(323.8)  
 
(509.8)  
 
572.9  
Issuance of long-term debt
  
 
542.5   
 2,253.2   
 1,673.0  
Payment of long-term debt
  
 (1,000.4)  
 (1,145.8)  
 (1,444.8) 
Proceeds from common stock issued on exercised options
  
 
171.9   
 
163.7   
 
108.1  
Tax benefit on exercised options
  
 
94.1   
 
74.6   
 
69.3  
Purchases of common stock for treasury
  
 
(606.7)  
 (1,161.9)  
 (1,745.3) 
Dividends paid
  
 (1,071.7)  
 (1,017.7)  
 
(983.3) 
Addition of noncontrolling interest
  
 
—   
 
—   
 
17.6  
Distributions to noncontrolling and redeemable interest holders
  
 
(84.3)  
 
(25.0)  
 
(77.4) 
Other, net
  
 
(7.2)  
 
(16.1)  
 
(14.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash used by financing activities
  
 (2,285.6)  
 (1,384.8)  
 (1,824.1) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
  
 
(8.1)  
 
(88.9)  
 
(29.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
  
 
429.5   
 
(533.1)  
 
125.9  
Cash and cash equivalents - beginning of year
  
 
334.2   
 
867.3   
 
741.4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents - end of year
  
$
763.7   
$
334.2   
$
867.3  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flow from Changes in Current Assets and Liabilities, excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures:
  
 
 
Receivables
  
$
(6.9)  
$
6.8   
$
(41.0) 

Inventories
  
 
(146.1)  
 
(24.2)  
 
(88.3) 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
 
(0.1)  
 
(50.5)  
 
10.5  
Accounts payable
  
 
318.7   
 
145.8   
 
191.5  
Other current liabilities
  
 
92.6   
 
136.8   
 
(104.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changes in current assets and liabilities
  
$
258.2   
$
214.7   
$
(32.2) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
 
57

Table of Contents
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
GENERAL MILLS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTE 1. BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND RECLASSIFICATIONS
Basis of Presentation
Our Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of General Mills, Inc. and all subsidiaries in which we have a controlling financial interest.
Intercompany transactions and accounts, including any noncontrolling and redeemable interests’ share of those transactions, are eliminated in consolidation.
Our fiscal year ends on the last Sunday in May. Fiscal years 2016 and 2014 consisted of 52 weeks, while fiscal year 2015 consisted of 53 weeks.
Change in Reporting Period
As part of a long-term plan to conform the fiscal year ends of all our operations, in fiscal 2016 we changed the reporting period of Yoplait SAS and Yoplait
Marques SNC within our International segment and Annie’s, Inc. (Annie’s) within our U.S. Retail segment from an April fiscal year-end to a May fiscal year-end
to match our fiscal calendar. Accordingly, in fiscal 2016, our results included 13 months of results from the affected operations. The impact of these changes was
not material to our consolidated results of operations. Our General Mills Brasil Alimentos Ltda (Yoki) and India businesses remain on an April fiscal year end.
Certain reclassifications to our previously reported financial information have been made to conform to the current period presentation.
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Inventories
All inventories in the United States other than grain are valued at the lower of cost, using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method, or market. Grain inventories and all
related cash contracts and derivatives are valued at market with all net changes in value recorded in earnings currently.
Inventories outside of the United States are generally valued at the lower of cost, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, or market.
Shipping costs associated with the distribution of finished product to our customers are recorded as cost of sales, and are recognized when the related finished
product is shipped to and accepted by the customer.
Land, Buildings, Equipment, and Depreciation
Land is recorded at historical cost. Buildings and equipment, including capitalized interest and internal engineering costs, are recorded at cost and depreciated over
estimated useful lives, primarily using the straight-line method. Ordinary maintenance and repairs are charged to cost of sales. Buildings are usually depreciated
over 40 years, and equipment, furniture, and software are usually depreciated over 3 to 10 years. Fully depreciated assets are retained in buildings and equipment
until disposal. When an item is sold or retired, the accounts are relieved of its cost and related accumulated depreciation and the resulting gains and losses, if any,
are recognized in earnings. As of May 29, 2016, assets held for sale were insignificant.
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) may not
be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows from the operation and disposition of the asset group are
less than the carrying amount of the asset group. Asset groups have identifiable cash flows and are largely independent of other asset groups. Measurement of an
impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset group over its fair value. Fair value is measured using a discounted cash flow
model or independent appraisals, as appropriate.
 
58

Table of Contents
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not subject to amortization and is tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have
occurred. In fiscal 2016, we changed the date of our annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessment from the first day of the third
quarter to the first day of the second quarter to more closely align with the timing of our annual long-range planning process. Impairment testing is performed for
each of our reporting units. We compare the carrying value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, to the fair value of the unit. Carrying value is based on the assets
and liabilities associated with the operations of that reporting unit, which often requires allocation of shared or corporate items among reporting units. If the
carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we revalue all assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, excluding goodwill, to determine if the fair value
of the net assets is greater than the net assets including goodwill. If the fair value of the net assets is less than the carrying amount of net assets including goodwill,
impairment has occurred. Our estimates of fair value are determined based on a discounted cash flow model. Growth rates for sales and profits are determined
using inputs from our long-range planning process. We also make estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions, market comparables, and other
factors.
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, mainly brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life
requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of
the industry, known technological advances, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution
channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite
lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, over their useful lives, generally ranging from 4 to 30 years.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets, mainly intangible assets primarily associated with the Pillsbury , Totino’s , Progresso , Yoplait , Old El Paso , Yoki , Häagen-
Dazs , and Annie’s brands, are also tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be
recoverable. Our estimate of the fair value of the brands is based on a discounted cash flow model using inputs which included projected revenues from our long-
range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a discount rate.
Our finite-lived intangible assets, primarily acquired franchise agreements and customer relationships, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future
cash flows from the operation and disposition of the asset are less than the carrying amount of the asset. Assets generally have identifiable cash flows and are
largely independent of other assets. Measurement of an impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its fair value. Fair
value is measured using a discounted cash flow model or other similar valuation model, as appropriate.
Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures
Our investments in companies over which we have the ability to exercise significant influence are stated at cost plus our share of undistributed earnings or losses.
We receive royalty income from certain joint ventures, incur various expenses (primarily research and development), and record the tax impact of certain joint
venture operations that are structured as partnerships. In addition, we make advances to our joint ventures in the form of loans or capital investments. We also sell
certain raw materials, semi-finished goods, and finished goods to the joint ventures, generally at market prices.
In addition, we assess our investments in our joint ventures if we have reason to believe an impairment may have occurred including, but not limited to, as a results
of ongoing operating losses, projected decreases in earnings, increases in the weighted average cost of capital, or significant business disruptions. The significant
assumptions used to estimate fair value include revenue growth and profitability, royalty rates, capital spending, depreciation and taxes, foreign currency exchange
rates, and a discount rate. By their nature, these projections and assumptions are uncertain. If we were to determine the current fair value of our investment was less
than the carrying value of the investment, then we would assess if the shortfall was of a temporary or permanent nature and write down the investment to its fair
value if we concluded the impairment is other than temporary.
 
59

Table of Contents
Redeemable Interest
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS, a consolidated entity. Sodiaal International (Sodiaal) holds the remaining 49 percent interest in Yoplait
SAS. Sodiaal has the ability to put all or a portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per year, up to three times before December 2024. This put
option requires us to classify Sodiaal’s interest as a redeemable interest outside of equity on our Consolidated Balance Sheets for as long as the put is exercisable by
Sodiaal. When the put is no longer exercisable, the redeemable interest will be reclassified to noncontrolling interests on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We
adjust the value of the redeemable interest through additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets quarterly to the redeemable interest’s redemption
value, which approximates its fair value. During the second quarter of fiscal 2016, we adjusted the redeemable interest’s redemption value based on a discounted
cash flow model. The significant assumptions used to estimate the redemption value include projected revenue growth and profitability from our long-range plan,
capital spending, depreciation, taxes, foreign currency exchange rates, and a discount rate.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize sales revenue when the shipment is accepted by our customer. Sales include shipping and handling charges billed to the customer and are reported
net of consumer coupon redemption, trade promotion and other costs, including estimated allowances for returns, unsalable product, and prompt pay discounts.
Sales, use, value-added, and other excise taxes are not recognized in revenue. Coupons are recorded when distributed, based on estimated redemption rates. Trade
promotions are recorded based on estimated participation and performance levels for offered programs at the time of sale. We generally do not allow a right of
return. However, on a limited case-by-case basis with prior approval, we may allow customers to return product. In limited circumstances, product returned in
saleable condition is resold to other customers or outlets. Receivables from customers generally do not bear interest. Terms and collection patterns vary around the
world and by channel. The allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of probable non-payments and credit losses in our existing receivables, as
determined based on a review of past due balances and other specific account data. Account balances are written off against the allowance when we deem the
amount is uncollectible.
Environmental
Environmental costs relating to existing conditions caused by past operations that do not contribute to current or future revenues are expensed. Liabilities for
anticipated remediation costs are recorded on an undiscounted basis when they are probable and reasonably estimable, generally no later than the completion of
feasibility studies or our commitment to a plan of action.
Advertising Production Costs
We expense the production costs of advertising the first time that the advertising takes place.
Research and Development
All expenditures for research and development (R&D) are charged against earnings in the period incurred. R&D includes expenditures for new product and
manufacturing process innovation, and the annual expenditures are comprised primarily of internal salaries, wages, consulting, and supplies attributable to R&D
activities. Other costs include depreciation and maintenance of research facilities, including assets at facilities that are engaged in pilot plant activities.
Foreign Currency Translation
For all significant foreign operations, the functional currency is the local currency. Assets and liabilities of these operations are translated at the period-end
exchange rates. Income statement accounts are translated using the average exchange rates prevailing during the period. Translation adjustments are reflected
within accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCI) in stockholders’ equity. Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are included in net earnings for
the period, except for gains and losses on investments in subsidiaries for which settlement is not planned for the foreseeable future and foreign exchange gains and
losses on instruments designated as net investment hedges. These gains and losses are recorded in AOCI.
 
60

Table of Contents
Derivative Instruments
All derivatives are recognized on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value based on quoted market prices or our estimate of their fair value, and are recorded
in either current or noncurrent assets or liabilities based on their maturity. Changes in the fair values of derivatives are recorded in net earnings or other
comprehensive income, based on whether the instrument is designated and effective as a hedge transaction and, if so, the type of hedge transaction. Gains or losses
on derivative instruments reported in AOCI are reclassified to earnings in the period the hedged item affects earnings. If the underlying hedged transaction ceases
to exist, any associated amounts reported in AOCI are reclassified to earnings at that time. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings in the current period.
Stock-based Compensation
We generally measure compensation expense for grants of restricted stock units using the value of a share of our stock on the date of grant. We estimate the value
of stock option grants using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Stock-based compensation is recognized straight line over the vesting period. Our stock-based
compensation expense is recorded in selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses and cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings and
allocated to each reportable segment in our segment results.
Certain equity-based compensation plans contain provisions that accelerate vesting of awards upon retirement, termination, or death of eligible employees and
directors. We consider a stock-based award to be vested when the employee’s retention of the award is no longer contingent on providing subsequent service.
Accordingly, the related compensation cost is generally recognized immediately for awards granted to retirement-eligible individuals or over the period from the
grant date to the date retirement eligibility is achieved, if less than the stated vesting period.
We report the benefits of tax deductions in excess of recognized compensation cost as a financing cash flow, thereby reducing net operating cash flows and
increasing net financing cash flows.
Defined Benefit Pension, Other Postretirement Benefit, and Postemployment Benefit Plans
We sponsor several domestic and foreign defined benefit plans to provide pension, health care, and other welfare benefits to retired employees. Under certain
circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits to former or inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico and members of our Board of
Directors, including severance and certain other benefits payable upon death. We recognize an obligation for any of these benefits that vest or accumulate with
service. Postemployment benefits that do not vest or accumulate with service (such as severance based solely on annual pay rather than years of service) are
charged to expense when incurred. Our postemployment benefit plans are unfunded.
We recognize the underfunded or overfunded status of a defined benefit pension plan as an asset or liability and recognize changes in the funded status in the year
in which the changes occur through AOCI.
Use of Estimates
Preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates
and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the
reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates include our accounting for promotional expenditures, valuation of long-
lived assets, intangible assets, redeemable interest, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit and
postemployment benefit plans. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
Other New Accounting Standards
In the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we adopted new accounting requirements on the financial statement presentation of unrecognized tax benefits when a net
operating loss, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists. The adoption of this guidance did not have an impact on our results of operations or financial
position.
In the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we adopted new accounting requirements for share-based payment awards issued based upon specific performance targets. The
adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
 
61

Table of Contents
In the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we adopted new accounting requirements for the classification of debt issuance costs presented in the balance sheet as a direct
reduction from the carrying amount of the debt liability. This presentation change has been implemented retroactively. The adoption of this guidance did not have a
material impact on our financial position.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we adopted new accounting requirements for the presentation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, requiring noncurrent
classification for all deferred tax assets and liabilities on the statement of financial position. This presentation change has been implemented retroactively. The
adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our financial position.
NOTE 3. ACQUISITION AND DIVESTITURES
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in Venezuela. As a result of
this transaction, we recorded a pre-tax loss of $37.6 million. In addition, we sold our General Mills Argentina S.A. foodservice business in Argentina to a third
party and recorded a pre-tax loss of $14.8 million.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our North American Green Giant product lines for $822.7 million in cash, and we recorded a pre-tax gain of
$199.1 million. We received net cash proceeds of $788.0 million after transaction related costs. After the divestiture, we retained a brand intangible asset on our
Consolidated Balance Sheets of $30.1 million related to our continued use of the Green Giant brand in certain markets outside of North America.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we acquired Annie’s, a publicly traded food company headquartered in Berkeley, California, for an aggregate purchase
price of $821.2 million, which we funded by issuing debt. We consolidated Annie’s into our Consolidated Balance Sheets and recorded goodwill of $589.8 million,
an indefinite lived intangible asset for the Annie’s brand of $244.5 million, and a finite lived customer relationship asset of $23.9 million. The pro forma effects of
this acquisition were not material.
NOTE 4. RESTRUCTURING, IMPAIRMENT, AND OTHER EXIT COSTS
INTANGIBLE ASSET IMPAIRMENT
In fiscal 2015, we recorded a $260.0 million charge related to the impairment of our Green Giant brand intangible asset in restructuring, impairment, and other exit
costs. See Note 6 for additional information.
RESTRUCTURING INITIATIVES
We view our restructuring activities as actions that help us meet our long-term growth targets. Activities we undertake must meet internal rate of return and net
present value targets. Each restructuring action normally takes one to two years to complete. At completion (or as each major stage is completed in the case of
multi-year programs), the project begins to deliver cash savings and/or reduced depreciation. These activities result in various restructuring costs, including asset
write-offs, exit charges including severance, contract termination fees, and decommissioning and other costs. Accelerated depreciation associated with restructured
assets, as used in the context of our disclosures regarding restructuring activity, refers to the increase in depreciation expense caused by shortening the useful life or
updating the salvage value of depreciable fixed assets to coincide with the end of production under an approved restructuring plan. Any impairment of the asset is
recognized immediately in the period the plan is approved.
 
62

Table of Contents
We are currently pursuing several multi-year restructuring initiatives designed to increase our efficiency and focus our business behind our key growth strategies.
Charges recorded in fiscal 2016 and 2015 related to these initiatives were as follows:
 
 
 
Fiscal 2016
  
Fiscal 2015
 
In Millions
 Severance  
Asset 
Write-offs  
Pension
Related  
Accelerated 
Depreciation  Other  
Total   Severance  
Asset 
Write-offs  
Pension
Related  
Accelerated 
Depreciation  Other  
Total  
Project Compass
 $
45.4   $
—   $
1.4   $
—   $
7.9   $ 54.7   $
—   $
—   $
—   $
—   $
—   $
—  
Project Catalyst
  
(8.7)   
1.2    
—    
—    
—    
(7.5)   
121.5    
12.3    
6.6    
—    
8.0    148.4  
Project Century
  
30.9    
30.7    
19.1    
76.5    25.4    182.6    
44.3    
42.3    
31.2    
53.1    10.9    181.8  
Combination of certain operational
facilities
  
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
13.0    
0.7    
—    
—    
0.2    
13.9  
Charges associated with
restructuring actions previously
announced
  
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
(0.6)   
—    
—    
—    
—    
(0.6) 
Total
 $
67.6   $
31.9   $
20.5   $
76.5   $ 33.3   $229.8   $
178.2   $
55.3   $
37.8   $
53.1   $ 19.1   $343.5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved Project Compass, a restructuring plan designed to enable our International segment to accelerate long-term growth
through increased organizational effectiveness and reduced administrative expense. In connection with this project, we expect to eliminate approximately 725 to
775 positions. We expect to incur approximately $60 million of net expenses relating to this action of which approximately $60 million will be cash. We recorded
$54.7 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016. We expect this action to be completed by the end of fiscal 2017.
Project Century (Century) began in fiscal 2015 as a review of our North American manufacturing and distribution network to streamline operations and identify
potential capacity reductions. In the second quarter of fiscal 2016, we broadened the scope of Project Century to identify opportunities to streamline our supply
chain outside of North America. As part of the expanded project, we approved a restructuring plan to close manufacturing facilities in our International segment
supply chain located in Berwick, United Kingdom and East Tamaki, New Zealand. These actions affected approximately 285 positions. We expect to incur total
restructuring charges of approximately $41 million relating to these actions, of which approximately $20 million will be cash. We recorded $30.0 million of
restructuring charges relating to these actions in fiscal 2016. We expect these actions to be completed by the end of fiscal 2018.
As part of Century, in the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved a restructuring plan to close our West Chicago, Illinois cereal and dry dinner manufacturing
plant in our U.S. Retail segment supply chain. This action will affect approximately 500 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $117 million of net
expenses relating to this action, of which approximately $53 million will be cash. We recorded $79.2 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal
2016. We expect this action to be completed by the end of fiscal 2019.
As part of Century, in the first quarter of fiscal 2016, we approved a restructuring plan to close our Joplin, Missouri snacks plant in our U.S. Retail segment supply
chain. This action affected approximately 120 positions, and we incurred $6.3 million of net expenses relating to this action, of which less than $1 million was cash.
We recorded $6.3 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016. This action was completed in fiscal 2016.
As part of Century, in the third quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to reduce our refrigerated dough capacity and exit our Midland, Ontario,
Canada and New Albany, Indiana facilities, which support our U.S. Retail, International, and Convenience Stores and Foodservice supply chains. The Midland
action will affect approximately 100 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $23 million of net expenses relating to this action, of which approximately
$16 million will be cash. We recorded $2.7 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016. We recorded $6.5 million of restructuring charges
relating to this action in fiscal 2015. The New Albany action will affect approximately 400 positions, and we expect to incur approximately $82 million of net
expenses relating to this action of which approximately $40 million will be cash. We recorded $17.1 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal
2016 and $51.3 million in fiscal 2015. We expect these actions to be completed by the end of fiscal 2018.
 
63

Table of Contents
As part of Century, in the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to consolidate yogurt manufacturing capacity and exit our Methuen,
Massachusetts facility in our U.S. Retail segment and Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment supply chains. This action affected approximately 175
positions. We expect to incur approximately $58 million of net expenses relating to this action of which approximately $12 million will be cash. We recorded $15.6
million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016 and $43.6 million in fiscal 2015. This action was largely completed in fiscal 2016.
As part of Century, in the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a restructuring plan to eliminate excess cereal and dry mix capacity and exit our Lodi,
California facility in our U.S. Retail supply chain. This action affected approximately 430 positions. We incurred $93.8 million of net expenses relating to this
action of which $20 million was cash. We recorded $30.6 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2016 and $63.2 million in fiscal 2015. This
action was completed in fiscal 2016.
In addition to the actions taken at certain facilities described above, we incurred $1.1 million of restructuring charges in fiscal 2016, relating to Century, and $17.2
million in fiscal 2015, of which $6 million was cash.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved Project Catalyst, a restructuring plan to increase organizational effectiveness and reduce overhead expense.
In connection with this project, we eliminated approximately 750 positions primarily in the United States. We incurred $140.9 million of net expenses relating to
these actions of which $118 million will be cash. In fiscal 2016, we reduced the estimate of charges related to this action by $7.5 million. We recorded $148.4
million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2015. These actions were largely completed in fiscal 2015.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a plan to combine certain Yoplait and General Mills operational facilities within our International segment to
increase efficiencies and reduce costs. This action will affect approximately 240 positions. We expect to incur approximately $15 million of net expenses relating to
this action of which approximately $12 million will be cash. We recorded $13.9 million of restructuring charges relating to this action in fiscal 2015. We expect
this action to be completed in fiscal 2017.
In fiscal 2014, we recorded $3.6 million of restructuring charges related to a productivity and cost savings plan approved in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. These
restructuring actions were completed in fiscal 2014.
In fiscal 2016, we paid $122.6 million in cash relating to restructuring initiatives. In fiscal 2015, we paid $63.6 million in cash relating to restructuring initiatives.
In fiscal 2014, we paid $22.4 million in cash related to restructuring actions.
In addition to restructuring charges, we expect to incur approximately $109 million of additional project-related costs, which will be recorded in cost of sales, all of
which will be cash. We recorded project-related costs in cost of sales of $57.5 million in fiscal 2016 and $13.2 million in fiscal 2015. In addition, we paid $54.5
million in cash in fiscal 2016 and $9.7 million in fiscal 2015 for project-related costs.
Restructuring charges and project-related costs are classified in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014 
Cost of sales
  
$ 78.4    
$ 59.6    
$ —  
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 151.4    
 283.9    
 3.6  
Total restructuring charges
  
 229.8    
 343.5    
 3.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Project-related costs classified in cost of sales
  
$ 57.5    
$ 13.2    
$ —  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
64

Table of Contents
The roll forward of our restructuring and other exit cost reserves, included in other current liabilities, is as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Severance  
Contract
Termination  
Other
Exit Costs  
Total  
Reserve balance as of May 26, 2013
  
$
19.5   
$
—   
$
—   
$
19.5  
2014 charges, including foreign 
currency translation
  
 
6.4   
 
—   
 
—   
 
6.4  
Utilized in 2014
  
 
(22.4)  
 
—   
 
—   
 
(22.4) 
Reserve balance as of May 25, 2014
  
 
3.5   
 
—   
 
—   
 
3.5  
2015 charges, including foreign 
currency translation
  
 
176.4   
 
0.6   
 
8.1   
 185.1  
Utilized in 2015
  
 
(61.3)  
 
—   
 
(6.5)  
 
(67.8) 
Reserve balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 
118.6   
 
0.6   
 
1.6   
 120.8  
2016 charges, including foreign 
currency translation
  
 
64.3   
 
1.6   
 
4.3   
 
70.2  
Utilized in 2016
  
 
(109.3)  
 
(0.7)  
 
(4.4)  
 (114.4) 
Reserve balance as of May 29, 2016
  
$
73.6   
$
1.5   
$
1.5   
$
76.6  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The charges recognized in the roll forward of our reserves for restructuring and other exit costs do not include items charged directly to expense (e.g., asset
impairment charges, the gain or loss on the sale of restructured assets, and the write-off of spare parts) and other periodic exit costs recognized as incurred, as those
items are not reflected in our restructuring and other exit cost reserves on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
NOTE 5. INVESTMENTS IN UNCONSOLIDATED JOINT VENTURES
We have a 50 percent equity interest in Cereal Partners Worldwide (CPW), which manufactures and markets ready-to-eat cereal products in more than 130
countries outside the United States and Canada. CPW also markets cereal bars in several European countries and manufactures private label cereals for customers
in the United Kingdom. We have guaranteed a portion of CPW’s debt and its pension obligation in the United Kingdom.
We also have a 50 percent equity interest in Häagen-Dazs Japan, Inc. (HDJ). This joint venture manufactures and markets Häagen-Dazs ice cream products and
frozen novelties.
Results from our CPW and HDJ joint ventures are reported for the 12 months ended March 31.
Joint venture related balance sheet activity follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Cumulative investments
  
$ 518.9    
$ 530.6  
Goodwill and other intangibles
  
 
469.2    
 
465.1  
Aggregate advances included in cumulative investments
  
 
300.3    
 
390.3  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Joint venture earnings and cash flow activity follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Sales to joint ventures
  
$ 10.5    
$ 11.6    
$12.1  
Net advances (repayments)
  
 (63.9)   
 102.4    
 54.9  
Dividends received
  
 75.1    
 
72.6    
 90.5  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
65

Table of Contents
Summary combined financial information for the joint ventures on a 100 percent basis follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Net sales:
  
  
  
CPW
  
$1,674.8    
$1,894.5    
$2,107.9  
HDJ
  
 
369.4    
 
370.2    
 
386.9  
Total net sales
  
 2,044.2    
 2,264.7    
 2,494.8  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Gross margin
  
 
867.6    
 
925.4    
 1,030.3  
Earnings before income taxes
  
 
234.8    
 
220.9    
 
219.1  
Earnings after income taxes
  
 
186.7    
 
170.7    
 
168.8  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Current assets
  
$ 814.1    
$ 800.1  
Noncurrent assets
  
 
959.9    
 
962.1  
Current liabilities
  
 1,457.3    
 1,484.8  
Noncurrent liabilities
  
 
81.7    
 
118.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOTE 6. GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
The components of goodwill and other intangible assets are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 29, 
2016
   
May 31, 
2015
 
Goodwill
  
$ 8,741.2    
$ 8,874.9  
Other intangible assets:
  
  
Intangible assets not subject to amortization:
  
  
Brands and other indefinite-lived intangibles
  
 
4,147.5    
 
4,262.1  
Intangible assets subject to amortization:
  
  
Franchise agreements, customer relationships, and other finite-lived intangibles
  
 
536.9    
 
544.0  
Less accumulated amortization
  
 
(145.8)   
 
(129.1) 
Intangible assets subject to amortization
  
 
391.1    
 
414.9  
Other intangible assets
  
 
4,538.6    
 
4,677.0  
Total
  
$13,279.8    
$13,551.9  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Based on the carrying value of finite-lived intangible assets as of May 29, 2016, amortization expense for each of the next five fiscal years is estimated to be
approximately $28 million.
 
66

Table of Contents
The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for fiscal 2014, 2015, and 2016 are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
U.S. 
Retail    
International   
Convenience
Stores and 
Foodservice    
Joint 
Ventures   
Total  
Balance as of May 26, 2013
  
$5,841.4    
$
1,387.0    
$
921.1    
$
472.7    
$8,622.2  
Divestiture
  
 
(12.2)   
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(12.2) 
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation
  
 
—    
 
15.0    
 
—    
 
25.5    
 
40.5  
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  
 5,829.2    
 
1,402.0    
 
921.1    
 
498.2    
 8,650.5  
Acquisition
  
 
589.8    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
589.8  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation
  
 
—    
 
(268.7)   
 
—    
 
(96.7)   
 (365.4) 
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 6,419.0    
 
1,133.3    
 
921.1    
 
401.5    
 8,874.9  
Acquisitions
  
 
54.1    
 
29.4    
 
—    
 
—    
 
83.5  
Divestitures
  
 (180.2)   
 
(6.2)   
 
—    
 
—    
 (186.4) 
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation
  
 
—    
 
(35.5)   
 
—    
 
4.7    
 
(30.8) 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  
$6,292.9    
$
1,121.0    
$
921.1    
$
406.2    
$8,741.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In fiscal 2015, we reorganized certain reporting units within our U.S. Retail operating segment. Our chief operating decision maker continues to assess performance
and make decisions about resources to be allocated to our segments at the U.S. Retail, International, and Convenience Stores and Foodservice operating segment
level.
We performed our fiscal 2016 impairment assessment as of the first day of the second quarter of fiscal 2016, and determined there was no impairment of goodwill
for any of our reporting units as their related fair values were substantially in excess of their carrying values.
The changes in the carrying amount of other intangible assets for fiscal 2014, 2015, and 2016 are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
U.S. 
Retail    
International   
Joint
Ventures   
Total  
Balance as of May 26, 2013
  
$3,312.4    
$
1,638.2    
$
64.5    
$5,015.1  
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation
  
 
(4.9)   
 
3.6    
 
0.5    
 
(0.8) 
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  
 3,307.5    
 
1,641.8    
 
65.0    
 5,014.3  
Acquisition
  
 
268.4    
 
—    
 
—    
 
268.4  
Impairment charge
  
 (260.0)   
 
—    
 
—    
 (260.0) 
Other activity, primarily foreign currency translation
  
 
(4.0)   
 
(340.3)   
 
(1.4)   
 (345.7) 
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 3,311.9    
 
1,301.5    
 
63.6    
 4,677.0  
Acquisitions
  
 
23.1    
 
7.0    
 
—    
 
30.1  
Divestiture
  
 (119.6)   
 
—    
 
—    
 (119.6) 
Other activity, primarily amortization and foreign currency translation
  
 
(3.7)   
 
(44.6)   
 
(0.6)   
 
(48.9) 
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  
$3,211.7    
$
1,263.9    
$
63.0    
$4,538.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
67

Table of Contents
As of our fiscal 2016 assessment date, there was no impairment of any of our indefinite-lived intangible assets as their related fair values were substantially in
excess of the carrying values, except for the  Mountain High and Uncle Toby’s brand assets. The excess fair value above the carrying value of these brand assets is
as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Carrying
Value    
Excess Fair
Value 
Above 
Carrying 
Value
 
Mountain High
  
$
35.4    
 
20% 
Uncle Toby’s
  
$
52.2    
 
11% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Our strategies for fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2018 will focus our growth investments on our brands and platforms with the strongest profitable growth potential. As a
result, certain parts of our U.S. Retail segment could experience reduced future sales projections. We performed a sensitivity analysis for certain brand intangible
assets and determined that, while not impaired as of May 29, 2016, the Progresso and Food Should Taste Good brands had risk of decreasing coverage. We will
continue to monitor these businesses.
In fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our U.S. Retail segment to other businesses within
the segment. Therefore, future sales and profitability projections in our long-range plan for this business declined. As a result of this triggering event, we performed
an interim impairment assessment of the Green Giant brand intangible asset as of May 31, 2015, and determined that the fair value of the brand asset no longer
exceeded the carrying value of the asset. Significant assumptions used in that assessment included our updated long-range cash flow projections for the Green
Giant business, an updated royalty rate, a weighted-average cost of capital, and a tax rate. We recorded a $260.0 million impairment charge in restructuring,
impairment, and other exit costs in fiscal 2015 related to this asset.
NOTE 7. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES, AND FAIR VALUES
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The carrying values of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, accounts payable, other current liabilities, and notes payable approximate fair value. Marketable
securities are carried at fair value. As of May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015, a comparison of cost and market values of our marketable debt and equity securities is as
follows:
 
 
  
Cost
   
Fair Value
   
Gross 
Gains
   
Gross 
Losses
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year    
Fiscal Year  
In Millions
  
2016    2015   
2016    
2015    2016   2015   2016   2015 
Available for sale:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Debt securities
  $165.7    $ 2.6    $165.8    $ 2.6    $ 0.1    $ —    $ —    $ —  
Equity securities
   
1.8     1.8     
8.4     
8.3     6.6     6.5     —     —  
Total
  $167.5    $ 4.4    $174.2    $10.9    $ 6.7    $ 6.5    $ —    $ —  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
There were no realized gains or losses from sales of available-for-sale marketable securities. Gains and losses are determined by specific identification.
Classification of marketable securities as current or noncurrent is dependent upon our intended holding period, and/or the security’s maturity date. The aggregate
unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities, net of tax effects, are classified in AOCI within stockholders’ equity.
 
68

Table of Contents
Scheduled maturities of our marketable securities are as follows:
 
 
  
Available for Sale  
In Millions
  
Cost    
Fair
Value  
Under 1 year (current)
  
$ 165.7    
$ 165.8  
Equity securities
  
 
1.8    
 
8.4  
Total
  
$ 167.5    
$ 174.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As of May 29, 2016, cash and cash equivalents totaling $7.5 million were pledged as collateral for derivative contracts. As of May 29, 2016, $9.1 million of certain
accounts receivable were pledged as collateral against a foreign uncommitted line of credit.
The fair value and carrying amounts of long-term debt, including the current portion, were $8,629.0 million and $8,161.1 million, respectively, as of May 29, 2016.
The fair value of long-term debt was estimated using market quotations and discounted cash flows based on our current incremental borrowing rates for similar
types of instruments. Long-term debt is a Level 2 liability in the fair value hierarchy.
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
As a part of our ongoing operations, we are exposed to market risks such as changes in interest and foreign currency exchange rates and commodity and equity
prices. To manage these risks, we may enter into various derivative transactions (e.g., futures, options, and swaps) pursuant to our established policies.
COMMODITY PRICE RISK
Many commodities we use in the production and distribution of our products are exposed to market price risks. We utilize derivatives to manage price risk for our
principal ingredients and energy costs, including grains (oats, wheat, and corn), oils (principally soybean), dairy products, natural gas, and diesel fuel. Our primary
objective when entering into these derivative contracts is to achieve certainty with regard to the future price of commodities purchased for use in our supply chain.
We manage our exposures through a combination of purchase orders, long-term contracts with suppliers, exchange-traded futures and options, and over-the-counter
options and swaps. We offset our exposures based on current and projected market conditions and generally seek to acquire the inputs at as close to our planned
cost as possible.
We use derivatives to manage our exposure to changes in commodity prices. We do not perform the assessments required to achieve hedge accounting for
commodity derivative positions. Accordingly, the changes in the values of these derivatives are recorded currently in cost of sales in our Consolidated Statements
of Earnings.
Although we do not meet the criteria for cash flow hedge accounting, we believe that these instruments are effective in achieving our objective of providing
certainty in the future price of commodities purchased for use in our supply chain. Accordingly, for purposes of measuring segment operating performance these
gains and losses are reported in unallocated corporate items outside of segment operating results until such time that the exposure we are managing affects earnings.
At that time we reclassify the gain or loss from unallocated corporate items to segment operating profit, allowing our operating segments to realize the economic
effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in unallocated corporate items.
 
69

Table of Contents
Unallocated corporate items for fiscal 2016, 2015 and 2014 included:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Net loss on mark-to-market valuation of commodity positions
  
$ (69.1)   
$(163.7)   
$ (4.9) 
Net loss on commodity positions reclassified from unallocated corporate items to segment operating profit
  
 127.9    
 
84.4    
 51.2  
Net mark-to-market revaluation of certain grain inventories
  
 
4.0    
 
(10.4)   
 
2.2  
Net mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions recognized in unallocated corporate items
  
$ 62.8    
$ (89.7)   
$48.5  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As of May 29, 2016, the net notional value of commodity derivatives was $295.4 million, of which $189.1 million related to agricultural inputs and $106.3 million
related to energy inputs. These contracts relate to inputs that generally will be utilized within the next 12 months.
INTEREST RATE RISK
We are exposed to interest rate volatility with regard to future issuances of fixed-rate debt, and existing and future issuances of floating-rate debt. Primary
exposures include U.S. Treasury rates, LIBOR, Euribor, and commercial paper rates in the United States and Europe. We use interest rate swaps, forward-starting
interest rate swaps, and treasury locks to hedge our exposure to interest rate changes, to reduce the volatility of our financing costs, and to achieve a desired
proportion of fixed rate versus floating-rate debt, based on current and projected market conditions. Generally under these swaps, we agree with a counterparty to
exchange the difference between fixed-rate and floating-rate interest amounts based on an agreed upon notional principal amount.
Floating Interest Rate Exposures — Floating-to-fixed interest rate swaps are accounted for as cash flow hedges, as are all hedges of forecasted issuances of debt.
Effectiveness is assessed based on either the perfectly effective hypothetical derivative method or changes in the present value of interest payments on the
underlying debt. Effective gains and losses deferred to AOCI are reclassified into earnings over the life of the associated debt. Ineffective gains and losses are
recorded as net interest. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less than $1 million in each of fiscal 2016, 2015, and 2014.
Fixed Interest Rate Exposures — Fixed-to-floating interest rate swaps are accounted for as fair value hedges with effectiveness assessed based on changes in the
fair value of the underlying debt and derivatives, using incremental borrowing rates currently available on loans with similar terms and maturities. Ineffective gains
and losses on these derivatives and the underlying hedged items are recorded as net interest. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less than $1 million in fiscal
2016, an $1.6 million gain in fiscal 2015, and less than $1 million in fiscal 2014.
In fiscal 2016, in advance of planned debt financing, we entered into $400.0 million of treasury locks with an average fixed rate of 2.1 percent due February 15,
2017.
In advance of planned debt financing, we entered into €600.0 million of forward starting swaps with an average fixed rate of 0.5 percent. All of these forward
starting swaps were cash settled for $6.5 million in fiscal 2015, coincident with the issuance of our €500 million 8-year fixed-rate notes and €400 million 12-year
fixed-rate notes.
In fiscal 2015, we entered into swaps to convert $500.0 million of 1.4 percent fixed-rate notes due October 20, 2017, and $500.0 million of 2.2 percent fixed-rate
notes due October 21, 2019, to floating rates.
In advance of planned debt financing, we entered into $250.0 million of treasury locks with an average fixed rate of 1.99 percent. All of these treasury locks were
cash settled for $17.9 million in fiscal 2014, coincident with the issuance of our $500.0 million 10-year fixed-rate notes.
 
70

Table of Contents
As of May 29, 2016, the pre-tax amount of cash-settled interest rate hedge gain or loss remaining in AOCI, which will be reclassified to earnings over the
remaining term of the related underlying debt, follows:
 
In Millions
  
Gain/(Loss) 
5.7% notes due February 15, 2017
  
$
(1.6) 
5.65% notes due February 15, 2019
  
 
1.4  
3.15% notes due December 15, 2021
  
 
(54.9) 
1.0% notes due April 27, 2023
  
 
(1.7) 
3.65% notes due February 15, 2024
  
 
13.8  
1.5% notes due April 27, 2027
  
 
(3.6) 
5.4% notes due June 15, 2040
  
 
(13.4) 
4.15% notes due February 15, 2043
  
 
10.5  
Net pre-tax hedge loss in AOCI
  
$
(49.5) 
  
 
 
 
The following table summarizes the notional amounts and weighted-average interest rates of our interest rate derivatives. Average floating rates are based on rates
as of the end of the reporting period.
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016  
 
May 31,
2015  
Pay-floating swaps—notional amount
  
$1,000.0  
 
$1,250.0  
Average receive rate
  
 
1.8%  
 
1.6% 
Average pay rate
  
 
1.1%  
 
0.7% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The swap contracts mature as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Pay Floating 
2018
  
$
500.0  
2020
  
 
500.0  
Total
  
$
1,000.0  
  
 
 
 
 
71

Table of Contents
The following tables reconcile the net fair values of assets and liabilities subject to offsetting arrangements that are recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets to
the net fair values that could be reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 
 
 
May 29, 2016
 
 
 
Assets
  
Liabilities
 
 
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
   
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
 
In Millions
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Assets
  
Gross 
Liabilities
Offset in 
the 
Balance 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts
of Assets
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Received   
Net 
Amount
(c)
  
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Liabilities   
Gross 
Assets 
Offset in 
the Balance
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts of
Liabilities 
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Pledged   
Net 
Amount
(d)
 
Commodity contracts
  
$4.4    
$  —    
$  4.4    
$  (3.9)   
$  —    
$  0.5    
$(22.2)   
$  —    
$(22.2)   
$  3.9    
$7.5    $(10.8) 
Interest rate contracts
  
8.5    
—    
8.5    
—    
—    
8.5    
(3.0)   
—    
(3.0)   
—    
—    
(3.0) 
Foreign exchange contracts
  
25.4    
—    
25.4    
(8.7)   
—    
16.7    
(13.7)   
—    
(13.7)   
8.7    
—    
(5.0) 
Equity contracts
  
2.4    
—    
2.4    
—    
—    
2.4    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—  
Total
  
$40.7    
$  —    
$40.7    
$(12.6)   
$  —    
$28.1    
$(38.9)   
$  —    
$(38.9)   
$12.6    
$7.5    $(18.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes related collateral offset in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(b)
Net fair value as recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(c)
Fair value of assets that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(d)
Fair value of liabilities that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(e)
Fair value of assets and liabilities reported on a gross basis in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
72

Table of Contents
 
 
May 31, 2015
 
 
 
Assets
  
Liabilities
 
 
  
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
   
   
   
  
Gross Amounts Not 
Offset in the 
Balance Sheet (e)
   
 
In Millions
 
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Assets
  
Gross 
Liabilities
Offset in 
the 
Balance 
Sheet (a)   
Net 
Amounts
of Assets
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Received   
Net 
Amount
(c)
  
Gross 
Amounts 
of 
Recognized
Liabilities   
Gross 
Assets 
Offset in
the 
Balance 
Sheet (a)  
Net 
Amounts 
of 
Liabilities
(b)
  
Financial 
Instruments  
Cash 
Collateral
Pledged   
Net 
Amount
(d)
 
Commodity contracts
 $
10.1   $
—   $
10.1   $
(1.3)  $
—   $
8.8   $
(59.4)  $
—   $
(59.4)  $
1.3   $
40.1   $
(18.0) 
Interest rate contracts
  
4.0    
—    
4.0    
—    
—    
4.0    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—    
—  
Foreign exchange
contracts
  
25.9    
—    
25.9    
(12.5)   
—    
13.4    
(65.3)   
—    
(65.3)   
12.5    
—    
(52.8) 
Total
 $
40.0   $
—   $
40.0   $
(13.8)  $
—   $
26.2   $
(124.7)  $
—   $
(124.7)  $
13.8   $
40.1   $
(70.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes related collateral offset in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(b)
Net fair value as recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(c)
Fair value of assets that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(d)
Fair value of liabilities that could be reported net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(e)
Fair value of assets and liabilities reported on a gross basis in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE RISK
Foreign currency fluctuations affect our net investments in foreign subsidiaries and foreign currency cash flows related to third party purchases, intercompany
loans, product shipments, and foreign-denominated debt. We are also exposed to the translation of foreign currency earnings to the U.S. dollar. Our principal
exposures are to the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Chinese renminbi, euro, Japanese yen, Mexican peso, and Swiss
franc. We primarily use foreign currency forward contracts to selectively hedge our foreign currency cash flow exposures. We also generally swap our foreign-
denominated commercial paper borrowings and nonfunctional currency intercompany loans back to U.S. dollars or the functional currency of the entity with
foreign exchange exposure. The gains or losses on these derivatives offset the foreign currency revaluation gains or losses recorded in earnings on the associated
borrowings. We generally do not hedge more than 18 months in advance.
As of May 29, 2016, the net notional value of foreign exchange derivatives was $997.7 million. The amount of hedge ineffectiveness was less than $1 million in
each of fiscal 2016, 2015, and 2014.
We also have many net investments in foreign subsidiaries that are denominated in euros. We previously hedged a portion of these net investments by issuing euro-
denominated commercial paper and foreign exchange forward contracts. In fiscal 2016, we entered into a net investment hedge for a portion of our net investment
in foreign operations denominated in euros by issuing €500.0 million of euro-denominated bonds. In fiscal 2015, we entered into a net investment hedge for a
portion of our net investment in foreign operations denominated in euros by issuing €900.0 million of euro-denominated bonds. In fiscal 2014, we entered into a net
investment hedge for a portion of our net investment in foreign operations denominated in euros by issuing €500.0 million of euro-denominated bonds. As of
May 29, 2016, we had deferred net foreign currency transaction losses of $20.1 million in AOCI associated with hedging activity.
Venezuela is a highly inflationary economy and as such, we remeasured the value of the assets and liabilities of our former Venezuelan subsidiary based on the
exchange rate at which we expected to remit dividends in U.S. dollars
 
73

Table of Contents
from the SIMADI market. In fiscal 2015, we recorded an $8 million foreign exchange loss. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de
Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in Venezuela.
EQUITY INSTRUMENTS
Equity price movements affect our compensation expense as certain investments made by our employees in our deferred compensation plan are revalued. We use
equity swaps to manage this risk. As of May 29, 2016, the net notional amount of our equity swaps was $113.5 million. These swap contracts mature in fiscal 2017.
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT PRESENTATION
The fair values of our assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair value and their respective levels in the fair value hierarchy as of May 29, 2016 and
May 31, 2015, were as follows:
 
 
  
May 29, 2016
   
May 29, 2016
 
 
  
Fair Values of Assets
   
Fair Values of Liabilities
 
In Millions
  Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   
Total    Level 1  
Level 2  
Level 3   
Total  
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Interest rate contracts (a) (b)
  $
—    $
7.7    $
—    $
7.7    $
—   
$
(3.0)  
$
—    $ (3.0) 
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—     
12.2     
—     
12.2     
—   
 
(12.2)  
 
—     (12.2) 
Total
   
—     
19.9     
—     
19.9     
—   
 
(15.2)  
 
—     (15.2) 
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—     
13.2     
—     
13.2     
—   
 
(1.5)  
 
—     
(1.5) 
Commodity contracts (c) (e)
   
2.6     
1.7     
—     
4.3     
(0.6)  
 
(21.6)  
 
—     (22.2) 
Grain contracts (c) (e)
   
—     
1.8     
—     
1.8     
—   
 
(5.5)  
 
—     
(5.5) 
Total
   
2.6     
16.7     
—     
19.3     
(0.6)  
 
(28.6)  
 
—     (29.2) 
Other assets and liabilities reported at fair value:
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
Marketable investments (a) (f)
   
8.4     165.8     
—     174.2     
—   
 
—   
 
—     
—  
Long-lived assets (g)
   
—     
26.0     
—     
26.0     
—   
 
—   
 
—     
—  
Total
   
8.4     191.8     
—     200.2     
—   
 
—   
 
—     
—  
Total assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair
value
  $
11.0    $ 228.4    $
—    $239.4    $
(0.6)  
$ (43.8)  
$
—    $(44.4) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
These contracts and investments are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities or other liabilities, as
appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss position. Certain marketable investments are recorded as cash and cash equivalents.
(b)
Based on LIBOR and swap rates.
(c)
These contracts are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets or as other current liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss
position.
(d)
Based on observable market transactions of spot currency rates and forward currency prices.
(e)
Based on prices of futures exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace.
(f)
Based on prices of common stock and bond matrix pricing.
(g)
We recorded $11.4 million in non-cash impairment charges in fiscal 2016 to write down certain long-lived assets to their fair value. Fair value was based on
recently reported transactions for similar assets in the marketplace. These assets had a carrying value of $28.2 million and were associated with the
restructuring actions described in Note 4.
 
74

Table of Contents
 
  
May 31, 2015
   
May 31, 2015
 
 
  
Fair Values of Assets
   
Fair Values of Liabilities
 
In Millions
  Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   
Total    Level 1   Level 2  
Level 3   
Total  
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Interest rate contracts (a) (b)
  $
—    $
4.0    $
—    $
4.0    $
—    $
—   
$
—    $
—  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—     
25.5     
—     
25.5     
—     
(23.3)  
 
—     
(23.3) 
Total
   
—     
29.5     
—     
29.5     
—     
(23.3)  
 
—     
(23.3) 
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments:
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Foreign exchange contracts (c) (d)
   
—     
0.4     
—     
0.4     
—     
(42.0)  
 
—     
(42.0) 
Commodity contracts (c) (e)
   
7.2     
2.9     
—     
10.1     
—     
(59.4)  
 
—     
(59.4) 
Grain contracts (c) (e)
   
—     
3.3     
—     
3.3     
—     
(7.8)  
 
—     
(7.8) 
Total
   
7.2     
6.6     
—     
13.8     
—     (109.2)  
 
—     (109.2) 
Other assets and liabilities reported at fair value:
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Marketable investments (a) (f)
   
8.3     
2.6     
—     
10.9     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Long-lived assets (g)
   
—     
37.8     
—     
37.8     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Indefinite-lived intangible assets (h)
   
—     
—     154.3     154.3     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Total
   
8.3     
40.4     154.3     203.0     
—     
—   
 
—     
—  
Total assets, liabilities, and derivative positions recorded at fair
value
  $
15.5    $
76.5    $ 154.3    $246.3    $
—    $(132.5)  
$
—    $(132.5) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
These contracts and investments are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets, other current liabilities or other liabilities, as
appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss position. Certain marketable investments are recorded as cash and cash equivalents.
(b)
Based on LIBOR and swap rates.
(c)
These contracts are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets or as other current liabilities, as appropriate, based on whether in a gain or loss
position.
(d)
Based on observable market transactions of spot currency rates and forward currency prices.
(e)
Based on prices of futures exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace.
(f)
Based on prices of common stock and bond matrix pricing.
(g)
We recorded $30.3 million in non-cash impairment charges in fiscal 2015 to write down certain long-lived assets to their fair value. Fair value was based on
recently reported transactions for similar assets in the marketplace. These assets had a carrying value of $68.1 million and were associated with the
restructuring actions described in Note 4.
(h)
We recorded a $260.0 million non-cash impairment charge in fiscal 2015 to write down our Green Giant brand asset to its fair value of $154.3 million. This
asset had a carrying value of $414.3 million. See Note 6 for additional information.
We did not significantly change our valuation techniques from prior periods.
 
75

Table of Contents
Information related to our cash flow hedges, fair value hedges, and other derivatives not designated as hedging instruments for the fiscal years ended May 29, 2016
and May 31, 2015, follows:
 
 
  
Interest Rate 
Contracts
  
Foreign Exchange 
Contracts
  
Equity 
Contracts
   
Commodity 
Contracts
  
Total
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year    
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016   
2015   
2016   
2015
  
2016  
2015   
2016   
2015   
2016   
2015  
Derivatives in Cash Flow Hedging Relationships:
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Amount of gain (loss) recognized in other comprehensive income (OCI) (a)   $ (2.6)  
$ (5.9)  
$ 21.2   
$
13.3   
$ —   
$ —    $
—   
$
—   
$ 18.6   
$
7.4  
Amount of net gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI into earnings (a) (b)
   (10.6)  
 (10.6)  
 
22.1   
 
5.0   
 
—   
 —     
—   
 
—   
 11.5   
 
(5.6) 
Amount of net gain (loss) recognized in earnings (c)
   
(0.1)  
 
(0.6)  
 
(0.7)  
 
0.1   
 
—   
 —     
—   
 
—   
 
(0.8)  
 
(0.5) 
Derivatives in Fair Value Hedging Relationships: Amount of net gain
recognized in earnings (d)
   
0.1   
 
1.6   
 
 
—   
 
—   
 —     
—   
 
—   
 
0.1   
 
1.6  
Derivatives in Net Investment Hedging Relationships: Amount of loss
recognized in OCI (a)
   
—   
 
—   
 
(0.2)  
 
(6.9)  
 
—   
 —     
—   
 
—   
 
(0.2)  
 
(6.9) 
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments: Amount of net gain
(loss) recognized in earnings (d)
   
—   
 
—   
 
1.1   
 
(54.3)  
 (4.5)  
 9.6     (56.1)  
 (163.7)  
 (59.5)  
 (208.4) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Effective portion.
(b)
Gain (loss) reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign
exchange contracts.
(c)
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings is related to the ineffective portion of the hedging relationship, including SG&A expenses for foreign exchange contracts
and interest, net for interest rate contracts. No amounts were reported as a result of being excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness.
(d)
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate contracts, in cost of sales for commodity contracts, and in SG&A expenses for
equity contracts and foreign exchange contracts.
AMOUNTS RECORDED IN ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
As of May 29, 2016, the after-tax amounts of unrealized gains and losses in AOCI related to hedge derivatives follows:
 
In Millions
  
After-Tax Gain/(Loss)  
Unrealized losses from interest rate cash flow hedges
  
 
$(31.3)  
Unrealized gains from foreign currency cash flow hedges
  
 
5.8  
After-tax loss in AOCI related to hedge derivatives
  
 
$(25.5)  
  
 
 
 
The net amount of pre-tax gains and losses in AOCI as of May 29, 2016, that we expect to be reclassified into net earnings within the next 12 months is $1.2
million of loss.
CREDIT-RISK-RELATED CONTINGENT FEATURES
Certain of our derivative instruments contain provisions that require us to maintain an investment grade credit rating on our debt from each of the major credit
rating agencies. If our debt were to fall below investment grade, the counterparties to the derivative instruments could request full collateralization on derivative
instruments in net liability positions. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features
 
76

Table of Contents
that were in a liability position on May 29, 2016, was $21.9 million. We have posted $7.5 million of collateral under these contracts. If the credit-risk-related
contingent features underlying these agreements had been triggered on May 29, 2016, we would have been required to post $14.4 million of collateral to
counterparties.
CONCENTRATIONS OF CREDIT AND COUNTERPARTY CREDIT RISK
During fiscal 2016, customer concentration was as follows:
 
Percent of total
  
Consolidated 
 
U.S. Retail 
 
International 
 
Convenience Stores
and Foodservice  
Wal-Mart (a):
  
 
 
 
Net sales
  
 
20%  
 
30%  
 
5%  
 
8% 
Accounts receivable
  
 
 
26%  
 
4%  
 
8% 
Five largest customers:
  
 
 
 
Net sales
  
 
 
53%  
 
22%  
 
45% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Includes Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates.
No customer other than Wal-Mart accounted for 10 percent or more of our consolidated net sales.
We enter into interest rate, foreign exchange, and certain commodity and equity derivatives, primarily with a diversified group of highly rated counterparties. We
continually monitor our positions and the credit ratings of the counterparties involved and, by policy, limit the amount of credit exposure to any one party. These
transactions may expose us to potential losses due to the risk of nonperformance by these counterparties; however, we have not incurred a material loss. We also
enter into commodity futures transactions through various regulated exchanges.
The amount of loss due to the credit risk of the counterparties, should the counterparties fail to perform according to the terms of the contracts, is $14.8 million
against which we do not hold collateral. Under the terms of our swap agreements, some of our transactions require collateral or other security to support financial
instruments subject to threshold levels of exposure and counterparty credit risk. Collateral assets are either cash or U.S. Treasury instruments and are held in a trust
account that we may access if the counterparty defaults.
We offer certain suppliers access to a third party service that allows them to view our scheduled payments online. The third party service also allows suppliers to
finance advances on our scheduled payments at the sole discretion of the supplier and the third party. We have no economic interest in these financing
arrangements and no direct relationship with the suppliers, the third party, or any financial institutions concerning this service. All of our accounts payable remain
as obligations to our suppliers as stated in our supplier agreements. As of May 29, 2016, $537.0 million of our total accounts payable is payable to suppliers who
utilize this third party service.
NOTE 8. DEBT
Notes Payable
The components of notes payable and their respective weighted-average interest rates at the end of the periods were as follows:
 
 
  
May 29, 2016
 
 
May 31, 2015
 
In Millions
  
Notes
Payable   
Weighted-
Average
Interest Rate 
 
Notes
Payable   
Weighted-
Average
Interest Rate 
U.S. commercial paper
  
$
—      
 
—  %  
$ 432.0    
 
0.3% 
Financial institutions
  
 
269.8    
 
8.6  
 
 183.8    
 
9.5  
Total
  
$ 269.8    
 
8.6%  
$ 615.8    
 
3.0% 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
77

Table of Contents
 
To ensure availability of funds, we maintain bank credit lines sufficient to cover our outstanding notes payable. Commercial paper is a continuing source of short-
term financing. We have commercial paper programs available to us in the United States and Europe. We also have uncommitted and asset-backed credit lines that
support our foreign operations.
The following table details the fee-paid committed and uncommitted credit lines we had available as of May 29, 2016:
 
In Billions
  
Facility 
Amount   
Borrowed
Amount  
Credit facility expiring:
  
  
May 2021
  
 
$2.7    
 
$ —  
June 2019
  
 
0.2    
 
0.1  
Total committed credit facilities
  
 
2.9    
 
0.1  
Uncommitted credit facilities
  
 
0.4    
 
0.1  
Total committed and uncommitted credit facilities
  
 
$3.3    
 
$0.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In fiscal 2016, we entered into a $2.7 billion fee-paid committed credit facility that is scheduled to expire in May 2021. Concurrent with the execution of this credit
facility, we terminated our $1.7 billion and $1.0 billion credit facilities.
In fiscal 2015, our subsidiary, Yoplait S.A.S., entered into a €200.0 million fee-paid committed credit facility that is scheduled to expire in June 2019.
The credit facilities contain covenants, including a requirement to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5 times. We were in compliance with all
credit facility covenants as of May 29, 2016.
Long-Term Debt
In January 2016, we issued €500.0 million principal amount of floating-rate notes due January 15, 2020. Interest on the notes are payable quarterly in arrears. The
notes are not generally redeemable prior to maturity. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net
proceeds were used to repay a portion of our maturing long-term debt.
In January 2016, we repaid $250 million of 0.875 percent fixed-rate notes and $750 million of floating-rate notes.
In April 2015, we issued €500.0 million principal amount of 1.0 percent fixed-rate notes due April 27, 2023 and €400.0 million principal amount of 1.5 percent
fixed-rate notes due April 27, 2027. Interest on the notes is payable annually in arrears. The notes may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our option at any time at
the applicable redemption price. These notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used for
general corporate purposes and to reduce our commercial paper borrowings.
In March 2015, we repaid $750.0 million of 5.2 percent notes.
In October 2014, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.4 percent fixed-rate notes due October 20, 2017 and $500.0 million aggregate principal
amount of 2.2 percent fixed-rate notes due October 21, 2019. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in arrears. The notes may be redeemed in whole, or in
part, at our option at any time at the applicable redemption price. The notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision.
The net proceeds were used to fund our acquisition of Annie’s and for general corporate purposes.
 
78

Table of Contents
In June 2014, our subsidiary, Yoplait S.A.S., issued €200.0 million principal amount of 2.2 percent fixed-rate senior notes due June 24, 2021 in a private placement
offering. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in arrears. The notes may be redeemed in whole, or in part, at our subsidiary’s option at any time at the
applicable redemption price. The notes are senior unsecured obligations that include a change of control repurchase provision. The net proceeds were used to
refinance existing debt.
In June 2014, we repaid €290.0 million of floating-rate notes.
A summary of our long-term debt is as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 29, 
2016
  
May 31, 
2015
 
5.65% notes due February 15, 2019
  
$ 1,150.0   
$ 1,150.0  
5.7% notes due February 15, 2017
  
 1,000.0   
 1,000.0  
3.15% notes due December 15, 2021
  
 1,000.0   
 1,000.0  
Euro-denominated 2.1% notes due November 16, 2020
  
 
555.8   
 
549.4  
Euro-denominated 1.0% notes due April 27, 2023
  
 
555.8   
 
549.4  
Floating-rate euro-denominated notes due January 15, 2020
  
 
555.8   
 
—  
1.4% notes due October 20, 2017
  
 
500.0   
 
500.0  
5.4% notes due June 15, 2040
  
 
500.0   
 
500.0  
4.15% notes due February 15, 2043
  
 
500.0   
 
500.0  
3.65% notes due February 15, 2024
  
 
500.0   
 
500.0  
2.2% notes due October 21, 2019
  
 
500.0   
 
500.0  
Floating-rate notes due January 29, 2016
  
 
—   
 
500.0  
Euro-denominated 1.5% notes due April 27, 2027
  
 
444.6   
 
439.5  
0.875% notes due January 29, 2016
  
 
—   
 
250.0  
Floating-rate notes due January 28, 2016
  
 
—   
 
250.0  
Euro-denominated 2.2% notes due June 24, 2021
  
 
221.0   
 
219.7  
Medium-term notes, 0.02% to 6.44%, due fiscal 2017 or later
  
 
204.2   
 
204.2  
Other, including debt issuance costs and capital leases
  
 
(26.1)  
 
(36.5) 
  
 8,161.1   
 8,575.7  
Less amount due within one year
  
 (1,103.4)  
 (1,000.4) 
Total long-term debt
  
$ 7,057.7   
$ 7,575.3  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal payments due on long-term debt in the next five years based on stated contractual maturities, our intent to redeem, or put rights of certain note holders are
$1,103.4 million in fiscal 2017, $604.7 million in fiscal 2018, $1,150.4 million in fiscal 2019, $1,056.0 million in fiscal 2020, and $555.9 million in fiscal 2021.
Certain of our long-term debt agreements contain restrictive covenants. As of May 29, 2016, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
As of May 29, 2016, the $49.5 million pre-tax loss recorded in AOCI associated with our previously designated interest rate swaps will be reclassified to net
interest over the remaining lives of the hedged transactions. The amount expected to be reclassified from AOCI to net interest in fiscal 2017 is a $10.0 million pre-
tax loss.
NOTE 9. REDEEMABLE AND NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS
Our principal redeemable and noncontrolling interests relate to our Yoplait SAS, Yoplait Marques SNC, Liberté Marques Sàrl, and General Mills Cereals, LLC
(GMC) subsidiaries. In addition, we have six foreign subsidiaries that have noncontrolling interests totaling $7.0 million as of May 29, 2016.
We have a 51 percent controlling interest in Yoplait SAS and a 50 percent interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and Liberté Marques Sàrl. Sodiaal holds the remaining
interests in each of the entities. On the acquisition date, we
 
79

Table of Contents
recorded the $904.4 million fair value of Sodiaal’s 49 percent euro-denominated interest in Yoplait SAS as a redeemable interest on our Consolidated Balance
Sheets. Sodiaal has the ability to put all or a portion of its redeemable interest to us at fair value once per year, up to three times before December 2024. We adjust
the value of the redeemable interest through additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets quarterly to the redeemable interest’s redemption value,
which approximates its fair value. Yoplait SAS pays dividends annually if it meets certain financial metrics set forth in its shareholders agreement. As of May 29,
2016, the redemption value of the euro-denominated redeemable interest was $845.6 million.
On the acquisition dates, we recorded the $281.4 million fair value of Sodiaal’s 50 percent euro-denominated interest in Yoplait Marques SNC and 50 percent
Canadian dollar-denominated interest in Liberté Marques Sàrl as noncontrolling interests on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Yoplait Marques SNC earns a
royalty stream through a licensing agreement with Yoplait SAS for the rights to  Yoplait  and related trademarks. Liberté Marques Sàrl earns a royalty stream
through licensing agreements with certain Yoplait group companies for the rights to  Liberté  and related trademarks. These entities pay dividends annually based
on their available cash as of their fiscal year end.
During fiscal 2016, we paid $74.5 million of dividends to Sodiaal under the terms of the Yoplait SAS and Yoplait Marques SNC shareholder agreements.
A subsidiary of Yoplait SAS has entered into an exclusive milk supply agreement for its European operations with Sodiaal at market-determined prices through
July 1, 2021. Net purchases totaled $321.0 million for fiscal 2016 and $271.3 million for fiscal 2015.
The holder of the GMC Class A Interests receives quarterly preferred distributions from available net income based on the application of a floating preferred return
rate to the holder’s capital account balance established in the most recent mark-to-market valuation (currently $251.5 million). On June 1, 2015, the floating
preferred return rate on GMC’s Class A interests was reset to the sum of three-month LIBOR plus 125 basis points. The preferred return rate is adjusted every three
years through a negotiated agreement with the Class A Interest holder or through a remarketing auction.
For financial reporting purposes, the assets, liabilities, results of operations, and cash flows of our non-wholly owned subsidiaries are included in our Consolidated
Financial Statements. The third-party investor’s share of the net earnings of these subsidiaries is reflected in net earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings.
Our noncontrolling interests contain restrictive covenants. As of May 29, 2016, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
NOTE 10. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Cumulative preference stock of 5.0 million shares, without par value, is authorized but unissued.
On May 6, 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 100 million shares of our common stock. Purchases under the authorization can be made
in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including the use of call options and other derivative instruments, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, and
accelerated repurchase programs. The authorization has no specified termination date.
 
80

Table of Contents
Share repurchases were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Shares of common stock
  
 
10.7    
 
22.3    
 
35.6  
Aggregate purchase price
  
$606.7    
$1,161.9    
$1,774.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The following table provides details of total comprehensive income:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2016
 
 
  
General Mills
  
Noncontrolling
Interests
   
Redeemable
Interest
 
In Millions
  
Pretax   
Tax   
Net
  
Net
   
Net
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests
  
  
  
  
  
$1,697.4   
 
$  8.4    
 
$31.0  
Other comprehensive income (loss):
  
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency translation
  
$(107.6)  
 $     —   
 (107.6)  
 
2.8    
 
(3.9) 
Net actuarial loss
  
 (514.2)  
 188.3   
 (325.9)  
 
—    
 
—  
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
 
  
Securities
  
 
0.2   
 
(0.1)  
 
0.1   
 
—    
 
—  
Hedge derivatives
  
 
16.5   
 
(2.2)  
 
14.3   
 
—    
 
1.7  
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
 
  
Hedge derivatives (a)
  
 
(13.5)  
 
2.5   
 
(11.0)  
 
—    
 
1.5  
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b)
  
 206.8   
 (78.2)  
 
128.6   
 
—    
 
—  
Other comprehensive income (loss)
  
 (411.8)  
 110.3   
 (301.5)  
 
2.8    
 
(0.7) 
Total comprehensive income
  
 
 
$1,395.9   
$
11.2    
 
$30.3  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Gain reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign exchange
contracts.
(b)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expense.
 
81

Table of Contents
 
  
Fiscal 2015
 
 
  
General Mills
  
Noncontrolling
Interests
  
Redeemable
Interest
 
In Millions
  
Pretax   
Tax   
Net
  
Net
  
Net
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests
  
  
  
  
  
$ 1,221.3   
 
$   8.2   
 
$   29.9  
Other comprehensive loss:
  
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation
  
 $   (727.9)  
 $     —   
 
(727.9)  
 
(78.2)  
 
(151.8) 
Net actuarial income
  
 
(561.1)  
 202.7   
 
(358.4)  
 
—   
 
—  
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
 
 
Securities
  
 
1.3   
 
(0.5)  
 
0.8   
 
—   
 
—  
Hedge derivatives
  
 
13.6   
 
(4.8)  
 
8.8   
 
—   
 
(4.7) 
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
 
 
Hedge derivatives (a)
  
 
0.7   
 
0.5   
 
1.2   
 
—   
 
3.7  
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b)
  
 
170.2   
 (65.1)  
 
105.1   
 
—   
 
—  
Other comprehensive loss
  
 (1,103.2)  
 132.8   
 
(970.4)  
 
(78.2)  
 
(152.8) 
Total comprehensive income (loss)
  
 
 
 $   250.9   
 
$(70.0)  
 
$(122.9) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign exchange
contracts.
(b)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expense.
 
 
  
Fiscal 2014
 
 
  
General Mills
  
Noncontrolling
Interests
   
Redeemable
Interest
 
In Millions
  
Pretax  
Tax
  
Net
  
Net
   
Net
 
Net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling
interests
  
  
  
  
  
$1,824.4   
 
$  5.8    
 
$31.1  
Other comprehensive income:
  
 
 
 
  
Foreign currency translation
  
 
$  
(71.8)  
 $      —   
 
(71.8)  
 
19.1    
 
41.4  
Net actuarial income
  
 327.2   
 (121.2)  
 
206.0   
 
—    
 
—  
Other fair value changes:
  
 
 
 
  
Securities
  
 
0.5   
 
(0.2)  
 
0.3   
 
—    
 
—  
Hedge derivatives
  
 
14.4   
 
(7.0)  
 
7.4   
 
—    
 
(2.4) 
Reclassification to earnings:
  
 
 
 
  
Hedge derivatives (a)
  
 
(4.7)  
 
0.2   
 
(4.5)  
 
—    
 
(0.1) 
Amortization of losses and prior service costs (b)
  
 172.7   
 
(65.1)  
 
107.6   
 
—    
 
—  
Other comprehensive income
  
 438.3   
 (193.3)  
 
245.0   
 
19.1    
 
38.9  
Total comprehensive income
  
 
 
$2,069.4   
 
$24.9    
 
$70.0  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Gain reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in interest, net for interest rate swaps and in cost of sales and SG&A expenses for foreign exchange
contracts.
(b)
Loss reclassified from AOCI into earnings is reported in SG&A expense.
In fiscal 2016, 2015, and 2014, except for reclassifications to earnings, changes in other comprehensive income (loss) were primarily non-cash items.
 
82

Table of Contents
Accumulated other comprehensive loss balances, net of tax effects, were as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 29, 
2016
   
May 31, 
2015
 
Foreign currency translation adjustments
  
$
(644.2)   
$
(536.6) 
Unrealized gain (loss) from:
  
  
Securities
  
 
3.8    
 
3.7  
Hedge derivatives
  
 
(25.5)   
 
(28.8) 
Pension, other postretirement, and postemployment benefits:
  
  
Net actuarial loss
  
 (1,958.2)   
 (1,756.1) 
Prior service credits
  
 
11.9    
 
7.1  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
  
$(2,612.2)   
$(2,310.7) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOTE 11. STOCK PLANS
We use broad-based stock plans to help ensure that management’s interests are aligned with those of our shareholders. As of May 29, 2016, a total of 24.3 million
shares were available for grant in the form of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and shares of unrestricted stock under the 2011 Stock
Compensation Plan (2011 Plan) and the 2011 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors. The 2011 Plan also provides for the issuance of cash-settled share-
based units, stock appreciation rights, and performance-based stock awards. Stock-based awards now outstanding include some granted under the 2005, 2006,
2007, and 2009 stock plans, under which no further awards may be granted. The stock plans provide for potential accelerated vesting of awards upon retirement,
termination, or death of eligible employees and directors.
Stock Options
The estimated fair values of stock options granted and the assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2016
   
2015
   
2014
 
Estimated fair values of stock options granted
  
 $  7.24            
 $  7.22           
 $  6.03         
Assumptions:
  
  
  
Risk-free interest rate
  
 
2.4%          
 
2.6%          
 
2.6%        
Expected term
  
 
8.5 years    
 
8.5 years    
 
9.0 years  
Expected volatility
  
 17.6%          
 17.5%          
 17.4%        
Dividend yield
  
 
3.2%          
 
3.1%          
 
3.1%        
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
We estimate the fair value of each option on the grant date using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires us to make predictive assumptions
regarding future stock price volatility, employee exercise behavior, dividend yield, and the forfeiture rate. We estimate our future stock price volatility using the
historical volatility over the expected term of the option, excluding time periods of volatility we believe a marketplace participant would exclude in estimating our
stock price volatility. We also have considered, but did not use, implied volatility in our estimate, because trading activity in options on our stock, especially those
with tenors of greater than 6 months, is insufficient to provide a reliable measure of expected volatility.
Our expected term represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding based on historical data to estimate option exercises and
employee terminations within the valuation model. Separate groups of employees have similar historical exercise behavior and therefore were aggregated into a
single pool for valuation purposes. The weighted-average expected term for all employee groups is presented in the table above. The risk-free interest rate for
periods during the expected term of the options is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve in effect at the time of grant.
 
83

Table of Contents
Any corporate income tax benefit realized upon exercise or vesting of an award in excess of that previously recognized in earnings (referred to as a windfall tax
benefit) is presented in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as a financing cash flow.
Realized windfall tax benefits are credited to additional paid-in capital within our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Realized shortfall tax benefits (amounts which are
less than that previously recognized in earnings) are first offset against the cumulative balance of windfall tax benefits, if any, and then charged directly to income
tax expense, potentially resulting in volatility in our consolidated effective income tax rate. We calculated a cumulative memo balance of windfall tax benefits for
the purpose of accounting for future shortfall tax benefits.
Options may be priced at 100 percent or more of the fair market value on the date of grant, and generally vest four years after the date of grant. Options generally
expire within 10 years and one month after the date of grant.
Information on stock option activity follows:
 
  
  
Options 
Exercisable 
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average 
Exercise
Price Per 
Share
   
Options 
Outstanding
(Thousands)   
Weighted-
Average 
Exercise
Price Per 
Share
 
Balance as of May 26, 2013
  
 
29,290.3    
 
$27.69    
 
47,672.1    
 
$30.22  
Granted
  
  
  
 
2,789.8    
 
48.33  
Exercised
  
  
  
 
(6,181.3)   
 
24.78  
Forfeited or expired
  
  
   
  
   
 
(111.6)   
 
38.74  
Balance as of May 25, 2014
  
 
29,452.8    
 
28.37    
 
44,169.0    
 
32.10  
Granted
  
  
  
 
2,253.1    
 
53.70  
Exercised
  
  
  
 
(7,297.2)   
 
26.68  
Forfeited or expired
  
  
   
  
   
 
(47.7)   
 
43.73  
Balance as of May 31, 2015
  
 
26,991.5    
 
30.44    
 
39,077.2    
 
34.35  
Granted
  
  
  
 
1,930.2    
 
55.72  
Exercised
  
  
  
 
(8,471.0)   
 
28.49  
Forfeited or expired
  
  
   
  
   
 
(134.8)   
 
48.16  
Balance as of May 29, 2016
  
 
22,385.1    
 
$32.38    
 
32,401.6    
 
$37.09  
Stock-based compensation expense related to stock option awards was $14.8 million in fiscal 2016, $18.1 million in fiscal 2015, and $18.2 million in fiscal 2014.
Compensation expense related to stock-based payments recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings includes amounts recognized in restructuring,
impairment, and other exit costs for fiscal 2016 and 2015.
Net cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options less shares used for minimum withholding taxes and the intrinsic value of options exercised were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Net cash proceeds
  
$171.9    
$163.7    
$108.1  
Intrinsic value of options exercised
  
$268.4    
$201.9    
$166.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units, and Performance Share Units
Stock and units settled in stock subject to a restricted period and a purchase price, if any (as determined by the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors), may be granted to key employees under the 2011 Plan. Restricted stock and restricted stock units generally vest and become unrestricted four years after
the date of grant. Performance share units are earned based on our future achievement of three-year goals for average organic net sales growth and cumulative free
cash flow. Performance share units are settled in common stock and are generally
 
84

Table of Contents
subject to a three year performance and vesting period. The sale or transfer of these awards is restricted during the vesting period. Participants holding restricted
stock, but not restricted stock units or performance share units, are entitled to vote on matters submitted to holders of common stock for a vote. These awards
accumulate dividends from the date of grant, but participants only receive payment if the awards vest.
Information on restricted stock unit and performance share units activity follows:
 
 
  
Equity Classified
   
Liability Classified
 
  
  
Share-Settled 
Units 
(Thousands)   
Weighted- 
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value    
Share-Settled 
Units 
(Thousands)   
Weighted- 
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value  
Non-vested as of May 31, 2015
  
 
6,235.6   
$
46.44    
 
237.0   
$
44.84  
Granted
  
 
1,287.7   
 
56.01    
 
63.8   
 
55.82  
Vested
  
 
(2,119.9)  
 
46.65    
 
(69.5)  
 
40.55  
Forfeited, expired, or reclassified
  
 
(303.0)  
 
49.45    
 
(19.9)  
 
51.45  
Non-vested as of May 29, 2016
  
 
5,100.4   
$
48.60    
 
211.4   
$
48.37  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Number of units granted (thousands)
  
 1,351.5    
 1,708.2    
 2,144.1  
Weighted average price per unit
  
$ 56.00    
$ 53.45    
$ 48.49  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The total grant-date fair value of restricted stock unit awards that vested during fiscal 2016 was $101.8 million and $133.7 million vested during fiscal 2015.
As of May 29, 2016, unrecognized compensation expense related to non-vested stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units was $93.9 million.
This expense will be recognized over 18 months, on average.
Stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock units and performance share units was $76.8 million for fiscal 2016, $96.6 million for fiscal 2015, and
$107.0 million for fiscal 2014. Compensation expense related to stock-based payments recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings includes amounts
recognized in restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs for fiscal 2016 and 2015.
 
85

Table of Contents
NOTE 12. EARNINGS PER SHARE
Basic and diluted EPS were calculated using the following:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions, Except per Share Data
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Net earnings attributable to General Mills
  
$1,697.4    
$1,221.3    
$1,824.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Average number of common shares—basic EPS
  
 
598.9    
 
603.3    
 
628.6  
Incremental share effect from: (a)
  
  
  
Stock options
  
 
9.8    
 
11.3    
 
12.3  
Restricted stock units, performance share units, and other
  
 
3.2    
 
4.2    
 
4.8  
Average number of common shares—diluted EPS
  
 
611.9    
 
618.8    
 
645.7  
Earnings per share—basic
  
$
2.83    
$
2.02    
$
2.90  
Earnings per share—diluted
  
$
2.77    
$
1.97    
$
2.83  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Incremental shares from stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units are computed by the treasury stock method. Stock options,
restricted stock units, and performance share units excluded from our computation of diluted EPS because they were not dilutive were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016   
2015   
2014 
Anti-dilutive stock options, restricted stock units, and performance share units
  
 1.1    
 2.1    
 1.7  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOTE 13. RETIREMENT BENEFITS AND POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
We have defined benefit pension plans covering many employees in the United States, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. Benefits for salaried employees
are based on length of service and final average compensation. Benefits for hourly employees include various monthly amounts for each year of credited service.
Our funding policy is consistent with the requirements of applicable laws. We made no voluntary contributions to our principal U.S. plans in fiscal 2016, 2015 and
2014. We do not expect to be required to make any contributions in fiscal 2017. Our principal domestic retirement plan covering salaried employees has a provision
that any excess pension assets would be allocated to active participants if the plan is terminated within five years of a change in control. All salaried employees
hired on or after June 1, 2013 are eligible for a retirement program that does not include a defined benefit pension plan.
Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
We also sponsor plans that provide health care benefits to many of our retirees in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. The United States salaried health care
benefit plan is contributory, with retiree contributions based on years of service. We make decisions to fund related trusts for certain employees and retirees on an
annual basis. We made $24.0 million in voluntary contributions to these plans in fiscal 2016 and $24.0 million in voluntary contributions to these plans in fiscal
2015.
 
86

Table of Contents
Health Care Cost Trend Rates
Assumed health care cost trends are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2016
   
2015
 
Health care cost trend rate for next year
   7.3% and 7.5%     6.5% and 7.3%  
Rate to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (ultimate rate)
   
5.0%     
5.0%  
Year that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate
   
2024         
2025      
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
We review our health care cost trend rates annually. Our review is based on data we collect about our health care claims experience and information provided by
our actuaries. This information includes recent plan experience, plan design, overall industry experience and projections, and assumptions used by other similar
organizations. Our initial health care cost trend rate is adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with this review, recent experiences, and short-term expectations.
Our initial health care cost trend rate assumption is 7.5 percent for retirees age 65 and over and 7.3 percent for retirees under age 65 at the end of fiscal 2016. Rates
are graded down annually until the ultimate trend rate of 5.0 percent is reached in 2024 for all retirees. The trend rates are applicable for calculations only if the
retirees’ benefits increase as a result of health care inflation. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view
on the rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate health care cost premium. Assumed trend rates for health care costs have an important effect on the amounts
reported for the other postretirement benefit plans.
A one percentage point change in the health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:
 
In Millions
  
One
Percentage
Point
Increase    
One
Percentage
Point
Decrease  
Effect on the aggregate of the service and interest cost components in fiscal 2017
  
 
$  3.1    
 
$  (2.7)  
Effect on the other postretirement accumulated benefit obligation as of May 29, 2016
  
 
71.2    
 
(63.8)  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the Act) was signed into
law in March 2010. The Act codifies health care reforms with staggered effective dates from 2010 to 2018. Estimates of the future impacts of several of the Act’s
provisions are incorporated into our postretirement benefit liability.
Postemployment Benefit Plans
Under certain circumstances, we also provide accruable benefits to former or inactive employees in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and members of our
Board of Directors, including severance and certain other benefits payable upon death. We recognize an obligation for any of these benefits that vest or accumulate
with service. Postemployment benefits that do not vest or accumulate with service (such as severance based solely on annual pay rather than years of service) are
charged to expense when incurred. Our postemployment benefit plans are unfunded.
We use our fiscal year end as the measurement date for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
 
87

Table of Contents
Summarized financial information about defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans is presented below:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
  
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
  
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016   
2015   
2016   
2015   
2016   
2015  
Change in Plan Assets:
  
 
 
 
 
 
Fair value at beginning of year
  $5,758.5   $5,611.8   $ 582.8   $ 517.3    
 
Actual return on assets
   
36.3    
373.6    
(0.1)   
44.0    
 
Employer contributions
   
23.7    
24.1    
24.1    
24.1    
 
Plan participant contributions
   
5.7    
10.3    
14.1    
13.6    
 
Benefits payments
   (277.5)   (244.9)   
(18.5)   
(16.2)   
 
Foreign currency
   
(6.8)   
(16.4)   
—    
—    
 
 
 
 
Fair value at end of year
  $5,539.9   $5,758.5   $ 602.4   $ 582.8    
 
 
 
 
Change in Projected Benefit Obligation:
  
 
 
 
 
 
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
  $6,252.1   $5,618.0   $1,079.6   $1,074.8   $ 146.6   $ 145.3  
Service cost
   
134.6    
137.0    
19.0    
22.4    
7.6    
7.5  
Interest cost
   
267.8    
249.2    
44.1    
46.9    
3.9    
4.3  
Plan amendment
   
0.9    
1.9    
—    
(42.4)   
1.1    
—  
Curtailment/other
   
7.1    
19.9    
0.5    
3.4    
10.7    
9.5  
Plan participant contributions
   
5.7    
10.3    
14.1    
13.6    
—    
—  
Medicare Part D reimbursements
   
—    
—    
3.5    
3.2    
—    
—  
Actuarial loss (gain)
   
65.2    
479.7    
(64.5)   
23.5    
11.2    
(0.4) 
Benefits payments
   (278.0)   (245.5)   
(66.4)   
(62.8)   
(16.9)   
(19.1) 
Foreign currency
   
(6.9)   
(18.4)   
(1.0)   
(3.0)   
(0.1)   
(0.5) 
Projected benefit obligation at end of year
  $6,448.5   $6,252.1   $1,028.9   $1,079.6   $ 164.1   $ 146.6  
Plan assets less than benefit
obligation as of fiscal year end
  $ (908.6)  $ (493.6)  $ (426.5)  $ (496.8)  $(164.1)  $(146.6) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assumed mortality rates of plan participants are a critical estimate in measuring the expected payments a participant will receive over their lifetime and the amount
of expense we recognize. On October 27, 2014, the Society of Actuaries published RP-2014 Mortality Tables and Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2014, which
both reflect improved longevity. We adopted the change to the mortality assumptions to remeasure our defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement
benefit plans obligations which increased the total of these obligations by $436.7 million in fiscal 2015.
The accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit pension plans was $5,950.7 million as of May 29, 2016, and $5,750.4 million as of May 31, 2015.
 
88

Table of Contents
Amounts recognized in AOCI as of May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015, are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
  
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans   
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
  
Total
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016
  
2015
  2016   2015   
2016   
2015   
2016
  
2015
 
Net actuarial loss
  $(1,886.0)  $(1,674.9)  $(57.6)  $ (72.2)  $ (14.6)  $
(9.0)  $(1,958.2)  $(1,756.1) 
Prior service (costs) credits
   
(6.8)   
(13.8)   19.9    
23.8    
(1.2)   
(2.9)   
11.9    
7.1  
Amounts recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss
  $(1,892.8)  $(1,688.7)  $(37.7)  $ (48.4)  $ (15.8)  $ (11.9)  $(1,946.3)  $(1,749.0) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plans with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined 
Benefit 
Pension Plans
   
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
   
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2016    
2015    
2016    
2015  
Projected benefit obligation
  $5,490.3    $512.3    $
—    $
—    $
4.8    $
—  
Accumulated benefit obligation
   4,998.3     440.6     1,024.7     1,074.8     159.3     143.5  
Plan assets at fair value
   4,498.5     
—     
602.4     
582.8     
—     
—  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Components of net periodic benefit expense are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
  
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
  
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016   
2015   
2014   
2016   
2015   
2014   
2016    
2015    
2014  
Service cost
  $ 134.6   
$ 137.0   
$ 133.0   
$ 19.0   
$ 22.4   
$ 22.7   
$ 7.6    $ 7.5    $ 7.7  
Interest cost
   267.8   
 249.2   
 239.5   
 44.1   
 46.9   
 50.5   
 
3.9     
4.3     
4.1  
Expected return on plan assets
   (496.9)  
 (476.4)  
 (455.6)  
 (46.2)  
 (40.2)  
 (34.6)  
 
—     
—     
—  
Amortization of losses
   189.8   
 141.7   
 151.0   
 
6.6   
 
4.9   
 15.4   
 
0.7     
0.7     
0.6  
Amortization of prior service
costs (credits)
   
4.7   
 
7.4   
 
5.6   
 
(5.4)  
 
(1.6)  
 
(3.4)  
 
2.5     
2.4     
2.4  
Other adjustments
   
5.0   
 
15.1   
 
—   
 
2.3   
 
3.3   
 
—   
 10.7     
9.5     
3.7  
Settlement or curtailment losses
   
13.1   
 
18.0   
 
—   
 
(1.0)  
 
1.3   
 
(2.9)  
 
—     
—     
—  
Net expense
  $ 118.1   
$
92.0   
$
73.5   
$ 19.4   
$ 37.0   
$ 47.7   
$25.4    $24.4    $18.5  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
We expect to recognize the following amounts in net periodic benefit expense in fiscal 2017:
 
In Millions
  
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans    
Other
Postretirement
Benefit Plans   
Postemployment
Benefit Plans  
Amortization of losses
  
 
$190.3    
 
$ 2.5   
 
$1.8  
Amortization of prior service costs (credits)
  
 
2.5    
 
(5.4)  
 
0.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89

Table of Contents
Assumptions
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine fiscal year-end benefit obligations are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
 
 
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
 
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
  
  
2016  
 
2015  
 
2016 
 
2015  
 
2016  
 
2015  
Discount rate
  
 4.19%  
 4.38%  
 3.97%  
 4.20%  
 2.94%  
 3.55% 
Rate of salary increases
  
 4.28  
 
 4.09   
 
—  
 
 
—   
 4.35  
 
 4.36  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weighted-average assumptions used to determine fiscal year net periodic benefit expense are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
 
 
Other 
Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
 
 
Postemployment 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
  
  2016 
 2015 
 2014 
 2016 
 2015 
 2014 
 2016 
 2015 
 2014 
Discount rate
   4.38%   4.54%   4.54%   4.20%   4.51%   4.52%   3.55%   3.82%   3.70% 
Rate of salary increases
   4.31  
  4.44    4.44    
—  
  
—    
—    4.36  
  4.44    4.44  
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
   8.53  
  8.53    8.53    8.14  
  8.13    8.11    
—  
  
—    
—  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discount Rates
Our discount rate assumptions are determined annually as of the last day of our fiscal year for our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and
postemployment benefit plan obligations. We also use the same discount rates to determine defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and
postemployment benefit plan income and expense for the following fiscal year. We work with our outside actuaries to determine the timing and amount of expected
future cash outflows to plan participants and, using the Aa Above Median corporate bond yield, to develop a forward interest rate curve, including a margin to that
index based on our credit risk. This forward interest rate curve is applied to our expected future cash outflows to determine our discount rate assumptions.
 
90

Table of Contents
Fair Value of Plan Assets
The fair values of our pension and postretirement benefit plans’ assets and their respective levels in the fair value hierarchy at May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015, by
asset category were as follows:
 
 
  
May 29, 2016
   
May 31, 2015
 
In Millions
  
Level 1    
Level 2    Level 3   
Total
Assets    
Level 1    
Level 2    
Level 3    
Total
Assets  
Fair value measurement of pension plan
assets:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Equity (a)
  $1,543.7    $ 943.7    $ 458.0    $2,945.4    $1,634.4    $1,010.3    $ 542.9    $3,187.6  
Fixed income (b)
   
903.8     
745.8     
—     1,649.6     
486.3     1,158.5     
—     1,644.8  
Real asset investments (c)
   
193.6     
160.8     395.0     
749.4     
124.3     
116.7     
498.1     
739.1  
Other investments (d)
   
—     
—     
0.4     
0.4     
—     
—     
0.4     
0.4  
Cash and accruals
   
195.1     
—     
—     
195.1     
186.6     
—     
—     
186.6  
Total fair value measurement of pension
plan assets
  $2,836.2    $1,850.3    $ 853.4    $5,539.9    $2,431.6    $2,285.5    $1,041.4    $5,758.5  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fair value measurement of postretirement benefit plan
assets:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Equity (a)
  $ 128.9    $ 124.1    $
23.4    $ 276.4    $ 134.0    $ 120.6    $
23.7    $ 278.3  
Fixed income (b)
   
18.0     
83.4     
—     
101.4     
14.0     
73.7     
—     
87.7  
Real asset investments (c)
   
—     
30.6     
13.8     
44.4     
0.2     
25.7     
16.6     
42.5  
Other investments (d)
   
—     
171.3     
—     
171.3     
—     
168.9     
—     
168.9  
Cash and accruals
   
8.9     
—     
—     
8.9     
5.4     
—     
—     
5.4  
Fair value measurement of postretirement benefit plan
assets
  $ 155.8    $ 409.4    $
37.2    $ 602.4    $ 153.6    $ 388.9    $
40.3    $ 582.8  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Primarily publicly traded common stock and private equity partnerships for purposes of total return and to maintain equity exposure consistent with policy
allocations. Investments include: United States and international equity securities, mutual funds, and equity futures valued at closing prices from national
exchanges; and commingled funds, privately held securities, and private equity partnerships valued at unit values or net asset values provided by the
investment managers, which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments. Various methods are used to determine fair values and may include
the cost of the investment, most recent financing, and expected cash flows. For some of these investments, realization of the estimated fair value is dependent
upon transactions between willing sellers and buyers.
(b)
Primarily government and corporate debt securities and futures for purposes of total return, managing fixed income exposure to policy allocations, and
managing duration targets. Investments include: fixed income securities and bond futures generally valued at closing prices from national exchanges, fixed
income pricing models, and independent financial analysts; and fixed income commingled funds valued at unit values provided by the investment managers,
which are based on the fair value of the underlying investments.
(c)
Publicly traded common stock and limited partnerships in the energy and real estate sectors for purposes of total return. Investments include: energy and real
estate securities generally valued at closing prices from national exchanges; and commingled funds, private securities, and limited partnerships valued at unit
values or net asset values provided by the investment managers, which are generally based on the fair value of the underlying investments.
(d)
Global balanced fund of equity, fixed income, and real estate securities for purposes of meeting Canadian pension plan asset allocation policies, and
insurance and annuity contracts to provide a stable stream of income for retirees and to fund postretirement medical benefits. Fair values are derived from
unit values provided by the investment managers, which are generally based on the fair value of the underlying investments and contract fair values from the
providers.
 
91

Table of Contents
The following table is a roll forward of the Level 3 investments of our pension and postretirement benefit plans’ assets during the years ended May 29, 2016 and
May 31, 2015:
 
 
  
Fiscal 2016
 
In Millions
  
Balance as of
May 31, 2015   
Net 
Transfers
Out
   
Net Purchases, 
Sales Issuances,
and Settlements   
Net
Gain 
(Loss)  
Balance as of
May 29, 2016 
Pension benefit plan assets:
  
  
  
  
 
Equity
  
 
$   542.9    
 
$  —    
 
$  (92.6)    
$
7.7   
 
$458.0  
Real asset investments
  
 
498.1    
 
—    
 
(72.8)    
 (30.3)  
 
395.0  
Other investments
  
 
0.4    
 
—    
 
—     
 
—   
 
0.4  
Fair value activity of level 3 pension plan assets
  
 
$1,041.4    
 
$  —    
 
$(165.4)    
$(22.6)  
 
$853.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Postretirement benefit plan assets:
  
  
  
  
 
Equity
  
 
$     23.7    
 
$  —    
 
$    (1.2)    
$
0.9   
 
$23.4  
Real asset investments
  
 
16.6    
 
—    
 
(1.8)    
 
(1.0)  
 
13.8  
Fair value activity of level 3 postretirement benefit plan assets   
 
$     40.3    
 
$  —    
 
$    (3.0)    
$ (0.1)  
 
$37.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fiscal 2015
 
In Millions
  
Balance as of
May 25, 2014   
Net 
Transfers
Out
   
Net Purchases, 
Sales Issuances,
and Settlements   
Net
Gain 
(Loss)    
Balance as of
May 31, 2015 
Pension benefit plan assets:
  
  
  
  
  
Equity
  
 
$   568.2    
 
$  —    
 
$(61.0)    
 $ 35.7     
 
$   542.9  
Real asset investments
  
 
602.9    
 
—    
 
(18.2)    
 (86.6)    
 
498.1  
Other investments
  
 
0.3    
 
—    
 
0.2     
 
(0.1)    
 
0.4  
Fair value activity of level 3 pension plan assets
  
 
$1,171.4    
 
$  —    
 
$(79.0)    
 $(51.0)    
 
$1,041.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Postretirement benefit plan assets:
  
  
  
  
  
Equity
  
 
$     21.1    
 
$  —    
 
$   0.3     
 $   2.3     
 
$     23.7  
Real asset investments
  
 
17.9    
 
—    
 
0.5     
 
(1.8)    
 
16.6  
Fair value activity of level 3 postretirement benefit plan
assets
  
 
$     39.0    
 
$  —    
 
$   0.8     
 $   0.5     
 
$     40.3  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The net change in level 3 assets attributable to unrealized losses at May 29, 2016, was $108.2 million for our pension plan assets and $3.2 million for our
postretirement benefit plan assets.
Expected Rate of Return on Plan Assets
Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by our asset allocation, our historical long-term investment performance, our estimate of future long-term
returns by asset class (using input from our actuaries, investment services, and investment managers), and long-term inflation assumptions. We review this
assumption annually for each plan; however, our annual investment performance for one particular year does not, by itself, significantly influence our evaluation.
 
92

Table of Contents
Weighted-average asset allocations for the past two fiscal years for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans are as follows:
 
 
  
Defined Benefit 
Pension Plans
 
 
Other Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2016  
 
2015  
 
2016  
 
2015
 
 
Asset category:
  
 
 
 
United States equities
  
 30.5%  
 28.9%  
 
37.2%  
 
38.7% 
International equities
  
 19.0  
 
 18.4   
 
23.4  
 
 
24.1  
Private equities
  
 
8.3  
 
 
9.5   
 
3.9  
 
 
4.1  
Fixed income
  
 28.6  
 
 30.3   
 
29.4  
 
 
26.3  
Real assets
  
 13.6  
 
 12.9   
 
6.1  
 
 
6.8  
 
Total
  
 100.0%  
 100.0%  
 
100.0%  
 
100.0% 
 
The investment objective for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans is to secure the benefit obligations to participants at a reasonable
cost to us. Our goal is to optimize the long-term return on plan assets at a moderate level of risk. The defined benefit pension plan and other postretirement benefit
plan portfolios are broadly diversified across asset classes. Within asset classes, the portfolios are further diversified across investment styles and investment
organizations. For the defined benefit pension plans, the long-term investment policy allocation is: 25 percent to equities in the United States; 15 percent to
international equities; 10 percent to private equities; 35 percent to fixed income; and 15 percent to real assets (real estate, energy, and timber). For other
postretirement benefit plans, the long-term investment policy allocations are: 30 percent to equities in the United States; 20 percent to international equities; 10
percent to private equities; 30 percent to fixed income; and 10 percent to real assets (real estate, energy, and timber). The actual allocations to these asset classes
may vary tactically around the long-term policy allocations based on relative market valuations.
Contributions and Future Benefit Payments
We do not expect to be required to make contributions to our defined benefit pension, other postretirement benefit, and postemployment benefit plans in fiscal
2017. Actual fiscal 2017 contributions could exceed our current projections, as influenced by our decision to undertake discretionary funding of our benefit trusts
and future changes in regulatory requirements. Estimated benefit payments, which reflect expected future service, as appropriate, are expected to be paid from
fiscal 2017 to 2026 as follows:
 
In Millions
  
Defined
Benefit
Pension
Plans    
Other
Postretirement
Benefit Plans
Gross Payments   
Medicare
Subsidy
Receipts    
Postemployment
Benefit
Plans
 
 
2017
  
$ 277.7    
 
$  61.3    
 
$  4.8    
 
$22.1  
2018
  
 
287.9    
 
65.5    
 
5.2    
 
20.6  
2019
  
 
297.1    
 
67.1    
 
5.6    
 
19.2  
2020
  
 
306.8    
 
68.3    
 
5.2    
 
17.8  
2021
  
 
316.4    
 
69.2    
 
4.2    
 
17.0  
2022-2026
  
 1,731.5    
 
355.2    
 
23.2    
 
75.6  
 
Defined Contribution Plans
The General Mills Savings Plan is a defined contribution plan that covers domestic salaried, hourly, nonunion, and certain union employees. This plan is a 401(k)
savings plan that includes a number of investment funds, including a Company stock fund and an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP). We sponsor another
money purchase plan for
 
93

Table of Contents
certain domestic hourly employees with net assets of $21.0 million as of May 29, 2016, and $21.9 million as of May 31, 2015. We also sponsor defined
contribution plans in many of our foreign locations. Our total recognized expense related to defined contribution plans was $61.2 million in fiscal 2016, $44.0
million in fiscal 2015, and $44.8 million in fiscal 2014.
We match a percentage of employee contributions to the General Mills Savings Plan. The Company match is directed to investment options of the participant’s
choosing. The number of shares of our common stock allocated to participants in the ESOP was 6.9 million as of May 29, 2016, and 7.5 million as of May 31,
2015. The ESOP’s only assets are our common stock and temporary cash balances.
The Company stock fund and the ESOP collectively held $711.5 million and $655.6 million of Company common stock as of May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015,
respectively.
NOTE 14. INCOME TAXES
The components of earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures and the corresponding income taxes thereon are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016   
2015   
2014 
 
Earnings before income taxes and 
after-tax earnings from joint ventures:
  
  
  
United States
  
$1,941.4    
$1,338.6    
$2,181.4  
Foreign
  
 
462.2    
 
423.3    
 
473.6  
 
Total earnings before income taxes and 
after-tax earnings from joint ventures
  
$2,403.6    
$1,761.9    
$2,655.0  
 
Income taxes:
  
  
  
Currently payable:
  
  
  
Federal
  
$ 489.8    
$ 392.7    
$ 526.7  
State and local
  
 
30.8    
 
29.3    
 
37.8  
Foreign
  
 
114.0    
 
139.5    
 
146.3  
 
Total current
  
 
634.6    
 
561.5    
 
710.8  
 
Deferred:
  
  
  
Federal
  
 
123.0    
 
70.3    
 
159.1  
State and local
  
 
(6.9)   
 
(8.7)   
 
21.3  
Foreign
  
 
4.5    
 
(36.3)   
 
(7.9) 
 
Total deferred
  
 
120.6    
 
25.3    
 
172.5  
 
Total income taxes
  
$ 755.2    
$ 586.8    
$ 883.3  
 
 
94

Table of Contents
The following table reconciles the United States statutory income tax rate with our effective income tax rate:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
 
  
2016 
 
2015 
 
2014 
 
United States statutory rate
  
 35.0%  
 35.0%  
 35.0% 
State and local income taxes, net of federal tax benefits
  
 0.7  
 
 0.7   
 1.4  
Foreign rate differences
  
 (2.2)  
 (3.1)  
 (0.1) 
Repatriation of foreign earnings
  
 
—  
 
 4.5   
 
—  
Non-deductible goodwill
  
 2.6  
 
 
—   
 
—  
Domestic manufacturing deduction
  
 (2.0)  
 (2.9)  
 (2.3) 
Other, net (a)
  
 (2.7)  
 (0.9)  
 (0.7) 
Effective income tax rate
  
 31.4%  
 33.3%  
 33.3% 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)
Fiscal 2016 includes a 0.6 percent tax benefit related to the divestiture of our business in Venezuela. See Note 3 for additional information.
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
 
Accrued liabilities
  
$
89.9    
$
98.0  
Compensation and employee benefits
  
 
491.5    
 
536.2  
Unrealized hedges
  
 
—    
 
0.8  
Pension
  
 
322.0    
 
169.0  
Tax credit carryforwards
  
 
4.5    
 
5.6  
Stock, partnership, and miscellaneous investments
  
 
353.6    
 
384.1  
Capital losses
  
 
14.5    
 
6.1  
Net operating losses
  
 
97.9    
 
89.3  
Other
  
 
84.1    
 
74.5  
 
Gross deferred tax assets
  
 1,458.0    
 1,363.6  
Valuation allowance
  
 
227.0    
 
215.4  
 
Net deferred tax assets
  
 1,231.0    
 1,148.2  
 
Brands
  
 1,311.7    
 1,346.3  
Fixed assets
  
 
476.3    
 
446.5  
Intangible assets
  
 
221.8    
 
208.4  
Tax lease transactions
  
 
48.0    
 
50.8  
Inventories
  
 
53.0    
 
59.7  
Stock, partnership, and miscellaneous investments
  
 
476.0    
 
472.5  
Unrealized hedges
  
 
22.6    
 
—  
Other
  
 
21.2    
 
14.2  
 
Gross deferred tax liabilities
  
 2,630.6    
 2,598.4  
 
Net deferred tax liability
  
$1,399.6    
$1,450.2  
 
We have established a valuation allowance against certain of the categories of deferred tax assets described above as current evidence does not suggest we will
realize sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character (e.g., ordinary income versus capital gain income) within the carryforward period to allow us to
realize these deferred tax benefits.
Of the total valuation allowance of $227.0 million, the majority relates to a deferred tax asset for losses recorded as part of the Pillsbury acquisition in the amount
of $167.9 million, $44.1 million relates to various state and foreign loss carryforwards, and $13.0 million relates to various foreign capital loss carryforwards. As of
May 29, 2016, we believe it is more-likely-than-not that the remainder of our deferred tax assets are realizable.
 
95

Table of Contents
We have $113.1 million of tax loss carryforwards. Of this amount, $100.5 million is foreign loss carryforwards. The carryforward periods are as follows: $72.6
million do not expire; $4.7 million expire in fiscal 2017 and 2018; and $23.2 million expire in fiscal 2019 and beyond. The remaining $12.6 million are state
operating loss carryforwards, the majority of which expire after fiscal 2024.
We have not recognized a deferred tax liability for unremitted earnings of approximately $2.0 billion from our foreign operations because our subsidiaries have
invested or will invest the undistributed earnings indefinitely, or the earnings will be remitted in a tax-neutral transaction. It is not practicable for us to determine
the amount of unrecognized deferred tax liabilities on these indefinitely reinvested earnings. Deferred taxes are recorded for earnings of our foreign operations
when we determine that such earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested. In fiscal 2015, we approved a one-time repatriation of $606.1 million of historical
foreign earnings to reduce the economic cost of funding restructuring initiatives and the acquisition of Annie’s. We recorded a discrete tax charge of $78.6 million
in fiscal 2015 related to this action. We have previously asserted that our historical foreign earnings are permanently reinvested and will only be repatriated in a
tax-neutral manner, and this one-time repatriation does not change this on-going assertion.
We are subject to federal income taxes in the United States as well as various state, local, and foreign jurisdictions. A number of years may elapse before an
uncertain tax position is audited and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain
tax position, we believe that our liabilities for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these liabilities, as well as the related interest, in light of
changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular position would usually require the use of cash.
The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Our major taxing jurisdictions include the United States (federal and state) and
Canada. Various tax examinations by United States state taxing authorities could be conducted for any open tax year, which vary by jurisdiction, but are generally
from 3 to 5 years.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is currently auditing our federal tax returns for fiscal 2013 and 2014. Several state and foreign examinations are currently in
progress. We do not expect these examinations to result in a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
During fiscal 2014, the IRS concluded its field examination of our federal tax returns for fiscal 2011 and 2012. The audit closure and related adjustments did not
have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position. As of May 29, 2016, we have effectively settled all issues with the IRS for fiscal years
2012 and prior.
We apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. Accordingly, we recognize the amount of tax benefit that
has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. Future changes in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of
uncertain tax positions will affect earnings in the period of such change.
 
96

Table of Contents
The following table sets forth changes in our total gross unrecognized tax benefit liabilities, excluding accrued interest, for fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2015.
Approximately $79 million of this total in fiscal 2016 represents the amount that, if recognized, would affect our effective income tax rate in future periods. This
amount differs from the gross unrecognized tax benefits presented in the table because certain of the liabilities below would impact deferred taxes if recognized.
We also would record a decrease in U.S. federal income taxes upon recognition of the state tax benefits included therein.
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015  
 
Balance, beginning of year
  
$161.1    
$150.9  
Tax positions related to current year:
  
  
Additions
  
 
31.6    
 
34.8  
Tax positions related to prior years:
  
  
Additions
  
 
23.9    
 
17.4  
Reductions
  
 (25.7)   
 (21.8) 
Settlements
  
 
(4.0)   
 (12.0) 
Lapses in statutes of limitations
  
 (10.4)   
 
(8.2) 
Balance, end of year
  
$176.5    
$161.1  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As of May 29, 2016, we expect to pay approximately $14.7 million of unrecognized tax benefit liabilities and accrued interest within the next 12 months. We are
not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes. The remaining amount of
our unrecognized tax liability was classified in other liabilities.
We report accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefit liabilities in income tax expense. For fiscal 2016, we recognized a net benefit of $2.7
million of tax-related net interest and penalties, and had $32.1 million of accrued interest and penalties as of May 29, 2016. For fiscal 2015, we recognized a net
benefit of $0.2 million of tax-related net interest and penalties, and had $35.2 million of accrued interest and penalties as of May 31, 2015.
NOTE 15. LEASES, OTHER COMMITMENTS, AND CONTINGENCIES
The Company’s leases are generally for warehouse space and equipment. Rent expense under all operating leases from continuing operations was $189.1 million,
$193.5 million, and $189.0 million in fiscal 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
Some operating leases require payment of property taxes, insurance, and maintenance costs in addition to the rent payments. Contingent and escalation rent in
excess of minimum rent payments and sublease income netted in rent expense were insignificant.
 
97

Table of Contents
Noncancelable future lease commitments are:
 
In Millions
  
 
 
Operating
Leases
   
    
 
 
Capital
Leases
   
  
2017
  
 
$107.9    
 
$0.9  
2018
  
 
83.5    
 
0.7  
2019
  
 
67.2    
 
0.6  
2020
  
 
49.6    
 
0.3  
2021
  
 
39.6    
 
0.1  
After 2021
  
 
49.8    
 
0.1  
 
Total noncancelable future lease commitments
  
 
$397.6    
 
$2.7  
 
  
Less: interest
  
  
 
(0.2) 
 
Present value of obligations under capital leases
  
  
 
$2.5  
 
These future lease commitments will be partially offset by estimated future sublease receipts of approximately $1 million. Depreciation on capital leases is recorded
as depreciation expense in our results of operations.
As of May 29, 2016, we have issued guarantees and comfort letters of $383.2 million for the debt and other obligations of consolidated subsidiaries, and guarantees
and comfort letters of $239.1 million for the debt and other obligations of non-consolidated affiliates, mainly CPW. In addition, off-balance sheet arrangements are
generally limited to the future payments under non-cancelable operating leases, which totaled $397.6 million as of May 29, 2016.
NOTE 16. BUSINESS SEGMENT AND GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
We operate in the consumer foods industry. We have three operating segments by type of customer and geographic region as follows: U.S. Retail, 60.4 percent of
our fiscal 2016 consolidated net sales; International, 28.0 percent of our fiscal 2016 consolidated net sales; and Convenience Stores and Foodservice, 11.6 percent
of our fiscal 2016 consolidated net sales.
In fiscal 2015, we changed how we assess operating segment performance to exclude the asset and liability remeasurement impact from hyperinflationary
economies. This impact is now included in unallocated corporate items. All periods presented have been changed to conform to this presentation.
In fiscal 2015, we realigned certain operating units within our U.S. Retail operating segment. We also changed the name of our Yoplait operating unit to Yogurt
and our Big G operating unit to Cereal. Frozen Foods transitioned into Meals and Baking Products. Small Planet Foods transitioned into Snacks, Cereal, and Meals.
The Yogurt operating unit was unchanged. We revised the amounts previously reported in the net sales and net sales percentage change by operating unit within our
U.S. Retail segment to conform to the new operating unit structure. These realignments had no effect on previously reported consolidated net sales, operating
segments’ net sales, operating profit, segment operating profit, net earnings attributable to General Mills, or EPS. In addition, results from the acquired Annie’s
business are included in the Meals and Snacks operating units.
Our chief operating decision maker continues to assess performance and make decisions about resources to be allocated to our segments at the U.S. Retail,
International, and Convenience Stores and Foodservice operating segment level.
Our U.S. Retail segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, drug, dollar and
discount chains, and e-commerce grocery providers operating throughout the United States. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat
cereals, refrigerated yogurt, soup, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, grain, fruit and
savory snacks, and a wide variety of organic products including meal kits, granola bars, and cereal.
 
98

Table of Contents
Our International segment consists of retail and foodservice businesses outside of the United States. Our product categories include ready-to-eat cereals, shelf stable
and frozen vegetables, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza snacks, refrigerated yogurt, grain and fruit snacks,
and super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts. We also sell super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts directly to consumers through owned retail shops. Our
International segment also includes products manufactured in the United States for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products
we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. Revenues from export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end
customer is located.
In our Convenience Stores and Foodservice segment our major product categories are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen meals, unbaked and
fully baked frozen dough products, and baking mixes. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to
distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries. Substantially all of this
segment’s operations are located in the United States.
Operating profit for these segments excludes unallocated corporate items, gain on divestitures, and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs. Unallocated
corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, contributions to the General Mills
Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative project-related costs, and other items that are not part
of our measurement of segment operating performance. These include gains and losses arising from the revaluation of certain grain inventories and gains and losses
from mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions until passed back to our operating segments. These items affecting operating profit are centrally
managed at the corporate level and are excluded from the measure of segment profitability reviewed by executive management. Under our supply chain
organization, our manufacturing, warehouse, and distribution activities are substantially integrated across our operations in order to maximize efficiency and
productivity. As a result, fixed assets and depreciation and amortization expenses are neither maintained nor available by operating segment.
Our operating segment results were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016
   
2015
   
2014
 
Net sales:
  
  
  
U.S. Retail
  
$10,007.1    
$10,507.0    
$10,604.9  
International
  
 
4,632.2    
 
5,128.2    
 
5,385.9  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice
  
 
1,923.8    
 
1,995.1    
 
1,918.8  
Total
  
$16,563.1    
$17,630.3    
$17,909.6  
Operating profit:
  
  
  
U.S. Retail
  
$ 2,179.0    
$ 2,159.3    
$ 2,311.5  
International
  
 
441.6    
 
522.6    
 
535.1  
Convenience Stores and Foodservice
  
 
378.9    
 
353.1    
 
307.3  
Total segment operating profit
  
 
2,999.5    
 
3,035.0    
 
3,153.9  
Unallocated corporate items
  
 
288.9    
 
413.8    
 
258.4  
Divestitures (gain)
  
 
(148.2)   
 
—    
 
(65.5) 
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs
  
 
151.4    
 
543.9    
 
3.6  
Operating profit
  
$ 2,707.4    
$ 2,077.3    
$ 2,957.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
99

Table of Contents
Net sales by class of similar products were as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016   
2015   
2014 
 
Snacks
  
$ 3,297.2    
$ 3,392.0    
$ 3,232.5  
Convenient meals
  
 
2,779.0    
 
2,810.3    
 
2,844.2  
Yogurt
  
 
2,760.9    
 
2,938.3    
 
2,964.7  
Cereal
  
 
2,731.5    
 
2,771.3    
 
2,860.1  
Dough
  
 
1,820.0    
 
1,877.0    
 
1,890.2  
Baking mixes and ingredients
  
 
1,704.3    
 
1,867.7    
 
1,996.4  
Super-premium ice cream
  
 
731.2    
 
769.5    
 
756.6  
Vegetables
  
 
532.3    
 
937.3    
 
1,014.7  
Other
  
 
206.7    
 
266.9    
 
350.2  
Total
  
$16,563.1    
$17,630.3    
$17,909.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The following table provides financial information by geographic area:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016
   
2015
   
2014
 
Net sales:
  
  
  
United States
  
$11,930.9    
$12,501.8    
$12,523.0  
Non-United States
  
 
4,632.2    
 
5,128.5    
 
5,386.6  
Total
  
$16,563.1    
$17,630.3    
$17,909.6  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Cash and cash equivalents:
  
  
United States
  
$ 118.5    
$
22.9  
Non-United States
  
 
645.2    
 
311.3  
Total
  
$ 763.7    
$ 334.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Land, buildings, and equipment:
  
  
United States
  
$2,755.1    
$2,727.5  
Non-United States
  
 
988.5    
 1,055.8  
Total
  
$3,743.6    
$3,783.3  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOTE 17. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
The components of certain Consolidated Balance Sheet accounts are as follows:
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Receivables:
  
  
Customers
  
$1,390.4    
$1,412.0  
Less allowance for doubtful accounts
  
 
(29.6)   
 
(25.3) 
Total
  
$1,360.8    
$1,386.7  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
100

Table of Contents
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Inventories:
  
  
Raw materials and packaging
  
$ 397.3    
$ 390.8  
Finished goods
  
 1,163.1    
 1,268.6  
Grain
  
 
72.6    
 
95.7  
Excess of FIFO over LIFO cost (a)
  
 (219.3)   
 (214.2) 
Total
  
$1,413.7    
$1,540.9  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(a)
Inventories of $841.0 million as of May 29, 2016, and $867.5 million as of May 31, 2015, were valued at LIFO. During fiscal 2015, LIFO inventory layers
were reduced. Results of operations were not materially affected by these liquidations of LIFO inventory. The difference between replacement cost and the
stated LIFO inventory value is not materially different from the reserve for the LIFO valuation method.
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Prepaid expenses and other current assets:
  
  
Other receivables
  
$ 159.3    
$ 148.8  
Prepaid expenses
  
 
177.9    
 
169.3  
Derivative receivables, primarily commodity-related
  
 
44.6    
 
80.9  
Grain contracts
  
 
1.8    
 
3.3  
Miscellaneous
  
 
15.4    
 
21.5  
Total
  
$ 399.0    
$ 423.8  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 29, 
2016
   
May 31, 
2015
 
Land, buildings, and equipment:
  
  
Land
  
$
92.9    
$
96.0  
Buildings
  
 2,236.0    
 2,272.7  
Buildings under capital lease
  
 
0.3    
 
0.3  
Equipment
  
 5,945.6    
 6,091.1  
Equipment under capital lease
  
 
3.0    
 
9.8  
Capitalized software
  
 
523.0    
 
499.0  
Construction in progress
  
 
702.7    
 
622.2  
Total land, buildings, and equipment
  
 9,503.5    
 9,591.1  
Less accumulated depreciation
  
 (5,759.9)   
 (5,807.8) 
Total
  
$ 3,743.6    
$ 3,783.3  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Other assets:
  
  
Investments in and advances to joint ventures
  
$ 518.9    
$ 530.6  
Pension assets
  
 
90.9    
 
138.2  
Exchangeable note with related party
  
 
12.7    
 
30.7  
Life insurance
  
 
26.3    
 
26.6  
Miscellaneous
  
 
102.9    
 
85.1  
Total
  
$ 751.7    
$ 811.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
101

Table of Contents
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Other current liabilities:
  
  
Accrued trade and consumer promotions
  
$ 563.7    
$ 564.7  
Accrued payroll
  
 
386.4    
 
361.8  
Dividends payable
  
 
23.8    
 
27.9  
Accrued taxes
  
 
110.5    
 
20.7  
Accrued interest, including interest rate swaps
  
 
90.4    
 
91.8  
Grain contracts
  
 
5.5    
 
7.8  
Restructuring and other exit costs reserve
  
 
76.6    
 
120.8  
Derivative payable
  
 
35.6    
 
122.9  
Miscellaneous
  
 
302.5    
 
271.5  
Total
  
$1,595.0    
$1,589.9  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In Millions
  
May 29,
2016    
May 31,
2015  
Other noncurrent liabilities:
  
  
Accrued compensation and benefits, including obligations for underfunded
other postretirement benefit and postemployment benefit plans
  
$1,755.0    
$1,451.4  
Accrued taxes
  
 
204.0    
 
202.5  
Miscellaneous
  
 
128.6    
 
90.9  
Total
  
$2,087.6    
$1,744.8  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Certain Consolidated Statements of Earnings amounts are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Depreciation and amortization
  
$608.1    
$588.3    
$585.4  
Research and development expense
  
 222.1    
 229.4    
 243.6  
Advertising and media expense (including production and communication costs)
  
 754.4    
 823.1    
 869.5  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The components of interest, net are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
Expense (Income), in Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Interest expense
  
$319.6    
$335.5    
$323.4  
Capitalized interest
  
 
(7.7)   
 
(6.9)   
 
(4.9) 
Interest income
  
 
(8.1)   
 (13.2)   
 (16.1) 
Interest, net
  
$303.8    
$315.4    
$302.4  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Certain Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows amounts are as follows:
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
2016    
2015    
2014  
Cash interest payments
  
$292.0    
$305.3    
$288.3  
Cash paid for income taxes
  
 533.8    
 562.6    
 757.2  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
102

Table of Contents
NOTE 18. QUARTERLY DATA (UNAUDITED)
Summarized quarterly data for fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2015 follows:
 
In Millions, Except Per
    Share Amounts
  
First Quarter
   
Second Quarter
   
Third Quarter
   
Fourth Quarter
 
  
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
   
Fiscal Year
 
  
2016    
2015    
2016    
2015    
2016    
2015    
2016    
2015  
Net sales
  $4,207.9    $4,268.4    $4,424.9    $4,712.2    $4,002.4    $4,350.9    $3,927.9    $4,298.8  
Gross margin
   1,554.6     1,438.7     1,540.6     1,619.1     1,357.5     1,375.9     1,376.8     1,515.5  
Net earnings attributable
to General Mills
   
426.6     
345.2     
529.5     
346.1     
361.7     
343.2     
379.6     
186.8  
EPS:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Basic
  $
0.71    $
0.56    $
0.88    $
0.58    $
0.61    $
0.57    $
0.63    $
0.31  
Diluted
  $
0.69    $
0.55    $
0.87    $
0.56    $
0.59    $
0.56    $
0.62    $
0.30  
Dividends per share
  $
0.44    $
0.41    $
0.44    $
0.41    $
0.44    $
0.41    $
0.46    $
0.44  
Market price of common stock:
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
High
  $ 59.55    $ 55.56    $ 59.23    $ 53.82    $ 60.14    $ 55.11    $ 65.36    $ 57.14  
Low
  $ 54.36    $ 50.15    $ 55.41    $ 48.86    $ 54.12    $ 51.13    $ 58.85    $ 51.70  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we sold our General Mills de Venezuela CA subsidiary to a third party and exited our business in Venezuela. As a result of
this transaction, we recorded a pre-tax loss of $37.6 million. In addition, we sold our General Mills Argentina S.A. foodservice business in Argentina to a third
party and recorded a pre-tax loss of $14.8 million.
The effective tax rate for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016 was 19.2 percent, primarily driven by tax credits and the impact of the divestiture of our business in
Venezuela.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we made a strategic decision to redirect certain resources supporting our Green Giant business in our U.S. Retail segment
to other businesses within the segment. Therefore, we recorded a $260 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015 related to the Green Giant
brand intangible asset. See Note 6 for additional information.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we approved a one-time repatriation of $606.1 million of foreign earnings and recorded a discrete income tax charge of
$78.6 million.
 
103

Table of Contents
Glossary
Accelerated depreciation associated with restructured assets. The increase in depreciation expense caused by updating the salvage value and shortening the
useful life of depreciable fixed assets to coincide with the end of production under an approved restructuring plan, but only if impairment is not present.
AOCI . Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Adjusted average total capital. Notes payable, long-term debt including current portion, redeemable interest, noncontrolling interests, and stockholders’ equity
excluding AOCI, and certain after-tax earnings adjustments are used to calculate adjusted return on average total capital. The average is calculated using the
average of the beginning of fiscal year and end of fiscal year Consolidated Balance Sheet amounts for these line items.
Adjusted operating profit margin. Operating profit adjusted for certain items affecting year-over-year comparability, divided by net sales.
Adjusted return on average total capital. Net earnings including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests, excluding after-tax net interest,
and adjusted for certain items affecting year-over-year comparability, divided by adjusted average total capital.
Average total capital. Notes payable, long-term debt including current portion, redeemable interest, noncontrolling interests, and stockholders’ equity are used to
calculate return on average total capital. The average is calculated using the average of the beginning of fiscal year and end of fiscal year Consolidated Balance
Sheet amounts for these line items.
Constant currency. Financial results translated to U.S. dollars using constant foreign currency exchange rates based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-
year period. To present this information, current period results for entities reporting in currencies other than United States dollars are translated into United States
dollars at the average exchange rates in effect during the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, rather than the actual average exchange rates in effect during
the current fiscal year. Therefore, the foreign currency impact is equal to current year results in local currencies multiplied by the change in the average foreign
currency exchange rate between the current fiscal period and the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year.
Core working capital. Accounts receivable plus inventories less accounts payable, all as of the last day of our fiscal year.
Derivatives. Financial instruments such as futures, swaps, options, and forward contracts that we use to manage our risk arising from changes in commodity prices,
interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and equity prices.
Euribor. European Interbank Offered Rate.
Fair value hierarchy. For purposes of fair value measurement, we categorize assets and liabilities into one of three levels based on the assumptions (inputs) used
in valuing the asset or liability. Level 1 provides the most reliable measure of fair value, while Level 3 generally requires significant management judgment. The
three levels are defined as follows:
 
 
Level  1:      Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
 
 
Level  2:      Observable inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets or quoted
prices for identical assets or liabilities in inactive markets.
 
 
Level  3:      Unobservable inputs reflecting management’s assumptions about the inputs used in pricing the asset or liability.
 
104

Table of Contents
Fixed charge coverage ratio. The sum of earnings before income taxes and fixed charges (before tax), divided by the sum of the fixed charges (before tax) and
interest.
Free cash flow. Net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of land, buildings, and equipment.
Free cash flow conversion rate. Free cash flow divided by our net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests adjusted for
certain items affecting year-over-year comparability.
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Guidelines, procedures, and practices that we are required to use in recording and reporting accounting
information in our financial statements.
Goodwill. The difference between the purchase price of acquired companies plus the fair value of any noncontrolling and redeemable interests and the related fair
values of net assets acquired.
Gross margin. Net sales less cost of sales.
Hedge accounting. Accounting for qualifying hedges that allows changes in a hedging instrument’s fair value to offset corresponding changes in the hedged item
in the same reporting period. Hedge accounting is permitted for certain hedging instruments and hedged items only if the hedging relationship is highly effective,
and only prospectively from the date a hedging relationship is formally documented.
LIBOR. London Interbank Offered Rate.
Mark-to-market. The act of determining a value for financial instruments, commodity contracts, and related assets or liabilities based on the current market price
for that item.
Net mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on derivative contracts that will be allocated to
segment operating profit when the exposure we are hedging affects earnings.
Net price realization. The impact of list and promoted price changes, net of trade and other price promotion costs.
Noncontrolling interests. Interests of subsidiaries held by third parties.
Notional principal amount. The principal amount on which fixed-rate or floating-rate interest payments are calculated.
OCI. Other comprehensive income (loss).
Operating cash flow conversion rate. Net cash provided by operating activities, divided by net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and
noncontrolling interests.
Operating cash flow to debt ratio. Net cash provided by operating activities, divided by the sum of notes payable and long-term debt, including the current
portion.
Organic net sales growth . Net sales growth adjusted for foreign currency translation, as well as acquisitions, divestitures, and a 53 rd week impact, when
applicable.
Project-related costs . Costs incurred related to our restructuring initiatives not included in restructuring charges.
Redeemable interest. Interest of subsidiaries held by a third party that can be redeemed outside of our control and therefore cannot be classified as a
noncontrolling interest in equity.
Reporting unit. An operating segment or a business one level below an operating segment.
 
105

Table of Contents
Return on average total capital. Net earnings including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests, excluding after-tax net interest, divided
by average total capital.
Segment operating profit margin. Segment operating profit divided by net sales for the segment.
SKU . Shop keeping unit.
Supply chain input costs. Costs incurred to produce and deliver product, including costs for ingredients and conversion, inventory management, logistics, and
warehousing.
Total debt. Notes payable and long-term debt, including current portion.
Translation adjustments. The impact of the conversion of our foreign affiliates’ financial statements to U.S. dollars for the purpose of consolidating our financial
statements.
Variable interest entities (VIEs). A legal structure that is used for business purposes that either (1) does not have equity investors that have voting rights and share
in all the entity’s profits and losses or (2) has equity investors that do not provide sufficient financial resources to support the entity’s activities.
Working capital. Current assets and current liabilities, all as of the last day of our fiscal year.
 
ITEM 9
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
 
ITEM 9A
Controls and Procedures
We, under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, have evaluated the
effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) under the 1934 Act). Based on that evaluation, our
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of May 29, 2016, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or submit under the 1934 Act is (1) recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time
periods specified in applicable rules and forms, and (2) accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Financial Officer, in a manner that allows timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the 1934 Act) during our fiscal quarter ended May 29,
2016, that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
The management of General Mills, Inc. is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in
Rule 13a-15(f) under the 1934 Act. The Company’s internal control system was designed to provide reasonable assurance to our management and the Board of
Directors regarding the preparation and fair presentation of published financial statements. Under the supervision and with the participation of management,
including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting
as of May 29, 2016. In making this assessment, management used the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO) in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) .
Based on our assessment using the criteria set forth by COSO in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) , management concluded that our internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of May 29, 2016.
KPMG LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, has issued a report on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
 
106

Table of Contents
/s/ K. J. Powell
  
/s/ D. L. Mulligan
K. J. Powell
  
D. L. Mulligan
Chairman of the Board and Chief
  
Executive Vice President and Chief
Executive Officer
  
Financial Officer
June 30, 2016
Our independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our internal control over financial reporting is included in the “Report of Independent
Registered Public Accounting Firm” in Item 8 of this report.
 
ITEM 9B
Other Information
None.
PART III
 
ITEM 10
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
The information contained in the sections entitled “Proposal Number 1 — Election of Directors,” “Director Nominations,” and “Section 16(a) Beneficial
Ownership Reporting Compliance” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
Information regarding our executive officers is set forth in Item 1 of this report.
The information regarding our Audit Committee, including the members of the Audit Committee and audit committee financial experts, set forth in the section
entitled “Board Committees and Their Functions” contained in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein
by reference.
We have adopted a Code of Conduct applicable to all employees, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, and principal accounting
officer. A copy of the Code of Conduct is available on our website at www.generalmills.com. We intend to post on our website any amendments to our Code of
Conduct and any waivers from our Code of Conduct for principal officers.
 
ITEM 11
Executive Compensation
The information contained in the sections entitled “Executive Compensation,” “Director Compensation,” and “Compensation Risk Assessment” in our definitive
Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
 
ITEM 12
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information contained in the section entitled “Ownership of General Mills Common Stock by Directors, Officers and Certain Beneficial Owners” and “Equity
Compensation Plan Information” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Stockholders is incorporated herein by reference.
 
ITEM 13
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information set forth in the sections entitled “Board Independence and Accountability” and “Certain Relationships and Related Transactions” contained in our
definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
 
107

Table of Contents
ITEM 14
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information contained in the section entitled “Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm Fees” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual
Meeting of Shareholders is incorporated herein by reference.
PART IV
 
ITEM 15
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
 
1.
Financial Statements:
The following financial statements are included in Item 8 of this report:
Consolidated Statements of Earnings for the fiscal years ended May 29, 2016, May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014.
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the fiscal years ended May 29, 2016, May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014.
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of May 29, 2016 and May 31, 2015.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended May 29, 2016, May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014.
Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest for the fiscal years ended May 29, 2016, May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Report of Management Responsibilities.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
 
2.
Financial Statement Schedule:
For the fiscal years ended May 29, 2016, May 31, 2015, and May 25, 2014:
II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
 
3.
Exhibits:
 
Exhibit No. 
Description
    3.1
 
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form
10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009).
    3.2
 
By-laws of the Registrant (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed March 8,
2016).
    4.1
 
Indenture, dated as of February 1, 1996, between the Registrant and U.S. Bank National Association (f/k/a First Trust of Illinois, National
Association) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed February 6, 1996 (File
no. 333-00745)).
    4.2
 
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 18, 2009, between the Registrant and U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 4.2 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009).
  10.1*
 
2001 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010).
 
108

Table of Contents
  10.2*
 
2005 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.3*
 
2006 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.4*
 
2007 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.5*
 
2009 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended August 29, 2010).
  10.6*
 
2011 Stock Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended May 31, 2015).
  10.7*
 
2011 Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form
10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011).
  10.8*
 
Executive Incentive Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended November 28, 2010).
  10.9*
 
Separation Pay and Benefits Program for Officers (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended May 25, 2014).
  10.10*
 
Supplemental Savings Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.11 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended February 22, 2009).
  10.11*
 
Supplemental Retirement Plan (Grandfathered) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.12 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
for the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.12*
 
2005 Supplemental Retirement Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.13*
 
Deferred Compensation Plan (Grandfathered) (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.14 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for
the fiscal quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.14*
 
2005 Deferred Compensation Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal
quarter ended February 22, 2009).
  10.15*
 
Executive Survivor Income Plan (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended May 29, 2005).
  10.16*
 
Aircraft Time Sharing Agreement, dated December 12, 2007, between General Mills Sales, Inc. and Kendall J. Powell (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed December 14, 2007).
  10.17*
 
Supplemental Benefits Trust Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011).
  10.18*
 
Supplemental Benefits Trust Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
fiscal quarter ended November 27, 2011).
  10.19*
 
Form of Performance Share Unit Award Agreement (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
for the fiscal quarter ended August 24, 2014)
  10.20
 
Agreements, dated November 29, 1989, by and between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to
Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2000).
  10.21
 
Protocol and Addendum No. 1 to Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated November 21, 1989, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 27, 2001).
 
109

Table of Contents
  10.22
 
Addendum No. 2 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated March 16, 1993, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 10.18 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 30, 2004).
  10.23
 
Addendum No. 3 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, effective as of March 15, 1993, between the Registrant and Nestle S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 28, 2000).
  10.24 +
 
Addenda Nos. 4 and 5 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide between the Registrant and Nestle S.A. (incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 10.26 to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2009).
  10.25
 
Addendum No. 10 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated January 1, 2010, among the Registrant, Nestle S.A. and CPW S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended February 28, 2010).
  10.26 +
 
Addendum No. 11 to the Protocol of Cereal Partners Worldwide, dated July 17, 2012, among the Registrant, Nestle S.A., and CPW S.A.
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended August 26, 2012).
  10.27
 
Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of May 18, 2016, among General Mills, Inc., the several financial institutions from time to time party to the
agreement and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to Registrant’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed May 18, 2016).
  12.1
 
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
  21.1
 
Subsidiaries of the Registrant.
  23.1
 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
  31.1
 
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
  31.2
 
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
  32.1
 
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
  32.2
 
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101
 
The following materials from the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 29, 2016 formatted in eXtensible
Business Reporting Language: (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Earnings; (iii) the Consolidated Statements
of Comprehensive Income; (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest; (v) the Consolidated Statements of Cash
Flows; (vi) the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; and (vii) Schedule II – Valuation of Qualifying Accounts.
 
*
Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit pursuant to Item 15 of Form 10-K.
+
Confidential information has been omitted from the exhibit and filed separately with the SEC pursuant to Rule 24b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Pursuant to Item 601(b)(4)(iii) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of our long-term debt are not filed and, in lieu
thereof, we agree to furnish copies to the SEC upon request.
 
110

Table of Contents
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
 
 
GENERAL MILLS, INC.
Dated: June 30, 2016
 
 By:  /s/ Jerald A. Young
 
 
 Name:    Jerald A. Young
 
 
 Title:      Vice President, Controller
 
111

Table of Contents
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
Signature
  
Title
 
Date
/s/ Kendall J. Powell
Kendall J. Powell
  
Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer
and Director (Principal Executive Officer)
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan
Donal L. Mulligan
  
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Jerald A. Young
Jerald A. Young
  
Vice President, Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Bradbury H. Anderson
Bradbury H. Anderson
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ R. Kerry Clark
R. Kerry Clark
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ David M. Cordani
David M. Cordani
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Paul Danos
Paul Danos
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Roger W. Ferguson Jr.
Roger W. Ferguson Jr.
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Henrietta H. Fore
Henrietta H. Fore
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Maria G. Henry
Maria G. Henry
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Heidi G. Miller
Heidi G. Miller
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Steve Odland
Steve Odland
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Michael D. Rose
Michael D. Rose
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Robert L. Ryan
Robert L. Ryan
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Eric D. Sprunk
Eric D. Sprunk
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Dorothy A. Terrell
Dorothy A. Terrell
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
/s/ Jorge A. Uribe
Jorge A. Uribe
  
Director
 
June 30, 2016
 
112

Table of Contents
General Mills, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Schedule II—Valuation of Qualifying Accounts
 
 
  
Fiscal Year
 
In Millions
  
    2016      
    2015      
    2014     
Allowance for doubtful accounts:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $   25.3   
 
$  21.0   
 
$  19.9  
Additions charged to expense
  
 
21.4   
 
19.8   
 
12.5  
Bad debt write-offs
  
 
(17.5)  
 
(12.5)  
 
(11.6) 
Other adjustments and reclassifications
  
 
0.4   
 
(3.0)  
 
0.2  
Balance at end of year
  
 $   29.6   
 
$  25.3   
 
$  21.0  
 
Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $ 215.4   
 
$221.6   
 
$232.8  
Additions charged to expense
  
 
(1.5)  
 
2.9   
 
0.1  
Adjustments due to acquisitions, translation of amounts, and other
  
 
13.1   
 
(9.1)  
 
(11.3) 
Balance at end of year
  
 $ 227.0   
 
$215.4   
 
$221.6  
 
Reserve for restructuring and other exit charges:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $ 120.8   
 
$    3.5   
 
$  19.5  
Additions charged to expense, including translation amounts
  
 
70.2   
 
185.1   
 
6.4  
Net amounts utilized for restructuring activities
  
 
(114.4)  
 
(67.8)  
 
(22.4) 
Balance at end of year
  
 $   76.6   
 
$120.8   
 
$    3.5  
 
Reserve for LIFO valuation:
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of year
  
 $ 214.2   
 
$216.9   
 
$221.8  
Increase (decrease)
  
 
5.1   
 
(2.7)  
 
(4.9) 
 
Balance at end of year
  
 $ 219.3   
 
$214.2   
 
$216.9  
 
 
113

Table of Contents
Exhibit Index
 
Exhibit No.  
Description
12.1  
  
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
21.1  
  
Subsidiaries of the Registrant.
23.1  
  
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
31.1  
  
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2  
  
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1  
  
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.2  
  
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101   
  
The following materials from the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 29, 2016 formatted in
eXtensible Business Reporting Language: (i) the Consolidated Balance Sheets; (ii) the Consolidated Statements of Earnings; (iii) the
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Earnings; (iv) the Consolidated Statements of Total Equity and Redeemable Interest; (v) the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows; (vi) the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; and (vii) Schedule II – Valuation of
Qualifying Accounts.
 
114

EXHIBIT 12.1
COMPUTATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
 
 
  
Fiscal Year Ended
 
In Millions, Except Ratios
  
May 29, 
2016
  
May 31, 
2015
  
May 25, 
2014
  
May 26, 
2013
  
May 27, 
2012
 
Earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings from joint ventures
  $2,403.6   $1,761.9   $2,655.0   $2,534.9   $2,210.5  
Distributed income of equity investees
   
75.1    
72.6    
90.5    
115.7    
68.0  
Plus: Fixed charges (1)
   
386.8    
403.5    
389.8    
400.1    
431.8  
Plus: Amortization of capitalized interest, net of interest capitalized
   
(3.4)   
(3.0)   
(0.8)   
(0.4)   
(5.5) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings available to cover fixed charges
  $2,862.1   $2,235.0   $3,134.5   $3,050.3   $2,704.8  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
   
7.40    
5.54    
8.04    
7.62    
6.26  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)   Fixed charges:
  
 
 
 
 
Interest expense
  $ 319.6   $ 335.5   $ 323.4   $ 333.8   $ 370.7  
Preferred distributions to noncontrolling interests
   
4.2    
3.5    
3.4    
3.7    
2.6  
Rentals (1/3)
   
63.0    
64.5    
63.0    
62.6    
58.5  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total fixed charges
  $ 386.8   $ 403.5   $ 389.8   $ 400.1   $ 431.8  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, earnings represent earnings before income taxes and after-tax earnings of joint ventures,
distributed income of equity investees, fixed charges, and amortization of capitalized interest, net of interest capitalized. Fixed charges represent gross interest
expense (excluding interest on taxes) and subsidiary preferred distributions to noncontrolling interest holders, plus one-third (the proportion deemed representative
of the interest factor) of rent expense.

Exhibit 21.1
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
 
Company Name
  
Jurisdiction
AB F C.V.
  
Netherlands
AESR, LLC
  
United States
AGRICOLA NOVA INDEMIL LTDA.
  
Brazil
ANNIE’S BAKING, LLC
  
United States
ANNIE’S ENTERPRISES, INC.
  
United States
ANNIE’S HOMEGROWN, INC.
  
United States
ANNIE’S, INC.
  
United States
BASILDON DAIRY FOODS LTD
  
United Kingdom
BOURNAZI PASTRIES S.A.
  
Greece
CEREALES PARTNERS LATIN AMERICA LLC
  
United States
COLOMBO, INC.
  
United States
EPIC PROVISIONS, LLC
  
United States
FOODSHOULDTASTEGOOD, INC.
  
United States
GARDETTO’S BAKERY, INC.
  
United States
GCOM ENTERPRISES, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS (CHINA) HOLDING CO., LTD.
  
China
GENERAL MILLS ARGENTINA L.S., LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS ASIA PTE. LTD.
  
Singapore
GENERAL MILLS AUSTRALIA CK PTY LTD
  
Australia
GENERAL MILLS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
  
Australia
GENERAL MILLS BELGIUM, VOF
  
Belgium
GENERAL MILLS BERWICK LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS BRASIL ALIMENTOS LTDA
  
Brazil
GENERAL MILLS CANADA B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS CANADA CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING FIVE LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING FOUR CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING ONE CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING SIX CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING THREE CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CANADA HOLDING TWO CORPORATION
  
Canada
GENERAL MILLS CAPITAL, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS CEREALS HOLDING (SOUTH AFRICA) (PTY) LTD
  
South Africa
GENERAL MILLS CEREALS, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS CHINA HOLDINGS LIMITED
  
Mauritius
GENERAL MILLS CHINA LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS CONTINENTAL INC. S.A.
  
Chile
GENERAL MILLS DE MEXICO, S. DE R.L. DE C.V.
  
Mexico
GENERAL MILLS DIRECT MARKETING, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS DL GP
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS EASTERN EUROPE s.r.o.
  
Czech Republic
GENERAL MILLS ESPANA B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS FINANCE, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS FOOD PRODUCTS INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
  
India
GENERAL MILLS FOODS (NANJING) CO. LTD.
  
China
GENERAL MILLS FOODS (SANHE) CO., LTD.
  
China
GENERAL MILLS FOODS ASIA LIMITED
  
Hong Kong

GENERAL MILLS FOUNDATION
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS FRANCE SAS
  
France
GENERAL MILLS FROZEN FOODS (GUANGZHOU) LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS FROZEN FOODS (SHANGHAI) LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL FINANCE LTD.
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS EIGHT GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS ELEVEN GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS FIVE GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS NINE GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS SEVEN LTD.
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS SIX LTD.
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TEN GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GLOBAL HOLDINGS TWO GP
  
Bermuda
GENERAL MILLS GMBH
  
Germany
GENERAL MILLS HELLAS S.A.
  
Greece
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED
  
Australia
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (FRANCE) SAS
  
France
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING (U.K.) LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING A (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING C (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING D (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING F (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING G (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING H (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING J (NETHERLANDS) B.V.
  
Netherlands
GENERAL MILLS HOLDING ONE (GERMANY) GmbH
  
Germany
GENERAL MILLS HONG KONG LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
GENERAL MILLS IBERICA, S.A. UNIPERSONAL
  
Spain
GENERAL MILLS INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED
  
India
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL (THAILAND) CO., LTD.
  
Thailand
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES TWO, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL FINANCE, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL FRANCE SAS
  
France
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL LIMITED
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS INTERNATIONAL SÀRL
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS IP HOLDINGS I, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS IP HOLDINGS II, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS ISRAEL LTD
  
Israel
GENERAL MILLS ITALIA SRL
  
Italy
GENERAL MILLS KOREA CO., LTD.
  
Korea, Republic of
GENERAL MILLS LANDES (SAS)
  
France
GENERAL MILLS LEBANON S.A.L.
  
Lebanon
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG FINANCE S.A R.L.
  
Luxembourg
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG ONE S.A. R.L.
  
Luxembourg
GENERAL MILLS LUXEMBOURG S.A.R.L.
  
Luxembourg
GENERAL MILLS MAARSSEN HOLDING, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS MAGHREB SARL
  
Morocco
GENERAL MILLS MALAYSIA SDN. BHD.
  
Malaysia
GENERAL MILLS MANUFACTURING AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED
  
Australia

GENERAL MILLS MARKETING, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS MAURITIUS, INC.
  
Mauritius
GENERAL MILLS MENAT DMCC
  
United Arab Emirates
GENERAL MILLS MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA FZE
  
United Arab Emirates
GENERAL MILLS MIDDLE EAST SAL
  
Lebanon
GENERAL MILLS MISSOURI, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS NEW ZEALAND LIMITED
  
New Zealand
GENERAL MILLS NORWAY AS
  
Norway
GENERAL MILLS OPERATIONS, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS PENSION TRUSTEE LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS PROPERTIES, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS RH, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS RIGHTS HOLDINGS, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS SALES, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS SAN ADRIAN, S.L. UNIPERSONAL
  
Spain
GENERAL MILLS SCANDINAVIA AB
  
Sweden
GENERAL MILLS SERVICES (UK) LTD.
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS SERVICES, INC.
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS SINGAPORE PTE. LTD.
  
Singapore
GENERAL MILLS SOUTH AFRICA (PROPRIETARY) LIMITED
  
South Africa
GENERAL MILLS SPECIALTY PRODUCTS, LLC
  
United States
GENERAL MILLS SWISS FOUR GMBH
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS SWISS THREE GMBH
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS SWISS TWO GMBH
  
Switzerland
GENERAL MILLS TAIWAN LIMITED
  
Taiwan
GENERAL MILLS TRADING (SHANGHAI) CO. LIMITED
  
China
GENERAL MILLS UK LIMITED
  
United Kingdom
GENERAL MILLS VENTAS DE MEXICO, S. DE R.L. DE C.V.
  
Mexico
GENERAL MILLS, INC.
  
United States
GIGANTE VERDE S. de R.L. de C.V.
  
Mexico
GIGANTE VERDE, LLC
  
United States
GLOBAL HOLDINGS ONE MANAGEMENT LLC
  
United States
GM CEREALS HOLDINGS, INC.
  
United States
GM CEREALS MANAGER, INC.
  
United States
GREEN GIANT INTERNATIONAL, LLC
  
United States
GUANGZHOU PILLSBURY V. PEARL FOODS CO., LTD.
  
China
HAAGEN-DAZS ARRAS SNC
  
France
HAAGEN-DAZS BELGIUM (BV BA)
  
Belgium
HAAGEN-DAZS INTERNATIONAL SHOPPE COMPANY, INC.
  
United States
HAAGEN-DAZS NEDERLAND N.V.
  
Netherlands
HD DISTRIBUTORS (THAILAND) CO., LTD.
  
Thailand
HD MARKETING & DISTRIBUTION SDN. BHD.
  
Malaysia
HDIP, INC.
  
United States
IMMACULATE BAKING COMPANY
  
United States
INO FITA GMBH
  
Germany
KAMPOS ESTIASI S.A.
  
Greece
KCLM RESEARCH IN NUTRITION INC.
  
Canada
KIFISSIA PASTRIES S.A.
  
Greece
LA SALTENA S.A.
  
Argentina
LATICINIOS CAROLINA LTDA
  
Brazil
LIBERTE MARQUES SARL
  
Luxembourg
LIBERTÉ USA, LLC
  
United States

MILL CITY, LLC
  
United States
MOUNTAIN HIGH LLC
  
United States
NAPA VALLEY KITCHENS, INC.
  
United States
NOBLEVAL SARL
  
France
NORTHGATE PARTNERS LLC
  
United States
PASTA MASTER DISTRIBUTION PTY. LTD.
  
Australia
PET INCORPORATED
  
United States
PINEDALE HOLDINGS PTE LIMITED
  
Singapore
POWER HOUSE FOODS PTY. LTD.
  
Australia
RODOVERY TRANSPORTES LTDA
  
Brazil
SERETRAM (SAS)
  
France
SHANGHAI HAAGEN-DAZS FOOD TRADING CO., LTD.
  
China
SHANGHAI PILLSBURY FROZEN FOODS, LIMITED
  
China
SMALL PLANET FOODS, INC.
  
United States
SOCIETE FRANCAISE D’INVESTISSEMENT POUR LE BENIN (SOFIB SAS)
  
France
SODIMA SAS
  
France
SUPER FITNESS INTERNATIONAL S.A.
  
Panama
THE PASTA MASTER PTY. LTD.
  
Australia
THE PILLSBURY COMPANY, LLC
  
United States
TRANSYOKI – TRANSPORTES YOKI LTDA.
  
Brazil
WASHBURN INVESTMENT OFFICE LLC
  
United States
Y.O. C.V.
  
Netherlands
YOKI DISTRIBUIDORA DE ALIMENTOS LTDA.
  
Brazil
YOPLAIT BENELUX NV
  
Belgium
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING A (FRANCE) SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING B (FRANCE) SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT BRANDCO HOLDING S.A R.L.
  
Luxembourg
YOPLAIT CANADA HOLDING CO.
  
Canada
YOPLAIT DAIRY CO., LTD.
  
China
YOPLAIT FRANCE SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT INTERNATIONAL SARL
  
Switzerland
YOPLAIT IRELAND LIMITED
  
Ireland
YOPLAIT LIBERTE CANADA CO./YOPLAIT LIBERTE CANADA CIE
  
Canada
YOPLAIT MARQUES SNC
  
France
YOPLAIT SAS
  
France
YOPLAIT SVERIGE AB
  
Sweden
YOPLAIT UK LTD
  
United Kingdom
YOPLAIT USA, INC.
  
United States
JOINT VENTURES
C.P.A. CEREAL PARTNERS HANDELSGESELLSCHAFT m.b.H & Co. OHG
  
Austria
C.P.A. CEREAL PARTNERS HANDELSGESELLSCHAFT m.b.H.
  
Austria
C.P.D. CEREAL PARTNERS DEUTSCHLAND GmbH & Co. oHG
  
Germany
C.P.D. CEREAL PARTNERS DEUTSCHLAND VERWALTUNGSGESELLSCHAFT mbH
  
Germany
C.P.W. HELLAS BREAKFAST CEREALS SOCIETE ANONYME
  
Greece
C.P.W. MEXICO S. de R.L. de C.V.
  
Mexico
CEREAL ASSOCIADOS PORTUGAL, A.E.I.E.
  
Portugal
CEREAL PARTNERS (MALAYSIA) SDN. BHD.
  
Malaysia
CEREAL PARTNERS AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED
  
Australia
CEREAL PARTNERS CZECH REPUBLIC, s.r.o.
  
Czech Republic
CEREAL PARTNERS ESPANA, A.E.I.E.
  
Spain
CEREAL PARTNERS FRANCE, SNC
  
France

CEREAL PARTNERS GIDA TICARET LIMITED SIRKETI
  
Turkey
CEREAL PARTNERS HUNGARIA KFT.
  
Hungary
CEREAL PARTNERS MEXICO, S.A. DE C.V.
  
Mexico
CEREAL PARTNERS NIGERIA LIMITED
  
Nigeria
CEREAL PARTNERS POLAND TORUN-PACIFIC Sp. z.o.o.
  
Poland
CEREAL PARTNERS RUS LLC
  
Russian Federation
CEREAL PARTNERS SLOVAK REPUBLIC, s.r.o.
  
Slovakia
CEREAL PARTNERS U.K.
  
United Kingdom
CEREALES C.P.W. BOLIVIA S.R.L.
  
Bolivia
CEREALES C.P.W. CHILE LIMITADA (SRL)
  
Chile
CEREALES CPW PERU LIMITADA
  
Peru
CEREALES PARTNERS COLOMBIA LTDA.
  
Colombia
CP COLOMBIA ACP
  
Colombia
CP MIDDLE EAST FZCO
  
United Arab Emirates
CP SUISSE
  
Switzerland
CPW AMA DWC – LLC
  
United Arab Emirates
CPW BRASIL LTDA.
  
Brazil
CPW CEREAL PARTNERS WORLDWIDE – Breakfast Cereals Joint Venture
  
Switzerland
CPW DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
  
Dominican Republic
CPW HONG KONG LIMITED
  
Hong Kong
CPW NEW ZEALAND
  
New Zealand
CPW OPERATIONS S.A.R.L.
  
Switzerland
CPW PARAGUAY S.R.L.
  
Paraguay
CPW PHILIPPINES, INC.
  
Philippines
CPW ROMANIA
  
Romania
CPW S.A.
  
Switzerland
CPW SINGAPORE (PTE.) LTD.
  
Singapore
CPW TIANJIN LIMITED
  
China
CPW TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, LTD.
  
Trinidad and Tobago
CPW URUGUAY S.A.
  
Uruguay
HAAGEN-DAZS JAPAN, INC.
  
Japan
HAAGEN-DAZS KOREA CO., LTD.
  
Korea, Republic of
PT CEREAL PARTNERS INDONESIA
  
Indonesia

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Stockholders
General Mills, Inc.:
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements (Nos. 333-198079 and 333-202215) on Form S-3 and registration statements (Nos. 2-
50327, 2-53523, 2-95574, 33-27628, 33-32059, 333-32509, 333-90012, 333-109050, 333-131195, 333-139997, 333-148820, 333-163849, and 333-179622) on
Form S-8 of General Mills, Inc. of our report dated June 30, 2016, with respect to the consolidated balance sheets of General Mills, Inc. as of May 29, 2016 and
May 31, 2015, and the related consolidated statements of earnings, comprehensive income, total equity and redeemable interest, and cash flows for each of the
fiscal years in the three-year period ended May 29, 2016, and the related financial statement schedule, and the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting as of May 29, 2016, which report appears in the May 29, 2016 annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.
/s/ KPMG LLP
Minneapolis, Minnesota
June 30, 2016

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Kendall J. Powell, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
(a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: June 30, 2016
/s/ Kendall J. Powell
Kendall J. Powell
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Donal L. Mulligan, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of General Mills, Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
(a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: June 30, 2016
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan
Donal L. Mulligan
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Kendall J. Powell, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of General Mills, Inc. (the “Company”), certify, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:
(1) the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 29, 2016 (the “Report”), fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m or 78o(d)); and
(2) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: June 30, 2016
/s/ Kendall J. Powell
Kendall J. Powell
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Donal L. Mulligan, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of General Mills, Inc. (the “Company”), certify, pursuant to Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:
(1) the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 29, 2016 (the “Report”), fully complies with the requirements of
Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m or 78o(d)); and
(2) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Date: June 30, 2016
/s/ Donal L. Mulligan
Donal L. Mulligan
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
