UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
☒
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021
OR
☐
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from to
Commission File No. 001-10362
MGM Resorts International
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
 
88-0215232
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
3600 Las Vegas Boulevard South - Las Vegas, Nevada 89109
(Address of principal executive office) (Zip Code)
(702) 693-7120
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
 Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common Stock, $0.01 Par Value
MGM
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months
(or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days: Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of
this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See
the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
 
 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting
standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has ﬁled a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the eﬀectiveness of its internal control over ﬁnancial reporting
under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting ﬁrm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act): Yes ☐ No ☒
The aggregate market value of the Registrant’s Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the Registrant as of June 30, 2021 (based on the closing price on the New York Stock Exchange
Composite Tape on June 30, 2021) was $17.5 billion. Shares of common stock held by each officer and director and by each person who owns 10% or more of the outstanding common shares
have been excluded. As of February 23, 2022, 439,172,269 shares of Registrant’s Common Stock, $0.01 par value, were outstanding.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for its 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Form 10-K.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
Page
PART I
Item 1.
Business
1
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
15
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
32
Item 2.
Properties
33
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
34
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
34
PART II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
35
Item 6.
Reserved
37
Item 7.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
37
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
57
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
58
 
Consolidated Financial Statements
62
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
67
 
Schedule II – Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
107
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
108
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
108
Item 9B.
Other Information
109
Item 9C.
Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections
109
PART III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
110
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
110
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
110
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
110
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
110
PART IV
Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statements Schedules
111
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
118
 
Signatures
119

PART I
ITEM 1.    BUSINESS
MGM Resorts International is referred to as the “Company,” “MGM Resorts,” or the “Registrant,” and together with its subsidiaries may also be referred
to as “we,” “us” or “our.” MGM China Holdings Limited together with its subsidiaries is referred to as “MGM China.” Except where the context indicates
otherwise, “MGP” refers to MGM Growth Properties LLC together with its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
MGM Resorts International is a Delaware corporation incorporated in 1986 that acts largely as a holding company and, through subsidiaries, owns and
operates integrated casino, hotel, and entertainment resorts across the United States and in Macau.
We believe we operate several of the finest casino resorts in the world and we continually reinvest in our resorts to maintain our competitive advantage. We
make significant investments in our resorts through newly remodeled hotel rooms, restaurants, entertainment and nightlife offerings, as well as other new features
and amenities. We believe we operate the highest quality resorts in each of the markets in which we operate. Ensuring our resorts are the premier resorts in their
respective markets requires capital investments to maintain the best possible experiences for our guests.
MGM Growth Properties LLC (“MGP”), is a consolidated subsidiary of the Company. Substantially all of its assets are owned by and substantially all of its
businesses are conducted through its subsidiary MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP (the “Operating Partnership”). As of December 31, 2021, we
lease the real estate assets of The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New York, Park MGM, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit, Beau Rivage,
Borgata, Empire City, MGM National Harbor, MGM Northfield Park, and MGM Springfield pursuant to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours
and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership. See Note 1 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding MGP and the Operating
Partnership, which we consolidate in our financial statements, and Note 18 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding the
master lease with MGP, which eliminates in consolidation.
We lease the real estate assets of Bellagio pursuant to a lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a venture that is 5% owned by such subsidiary and
95% owned by a subsidiary of Blackstone Real Estate Income Trust, Inc. (“BREIT”, and such venture, the “Bellagio BREIT Venture”). We lease the real estate
assets of Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas pursuant to a lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a venture that is 50.1% owned by a subsidiary
of the Operating Partnership and 49.9% owned by a subsidiary of BREIT (such venture, the “MGP BREIT Venture”). We lease the real estate assets of Aria
(including Vdara) pursuant to a lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and funds managed by The Blackstone Group Inc. ("Blackstone"). Refer to Note 11
for further discussion of these leases.
Business Developments
In recent years, in furtherance of our vision to be the world’s premier gaming entertainment company, we have implemented an asset-light business model,
which has involved a comprehensive review of our owned real estate assets to find opportunities to monetize those assets efficiently and allow unlocked capital to
be redeployed towards balance sheet improvements, new growth opportunities, and to return value to our shareholders. At the same time, we have continued to
focus on key growth opportunities that align with our vision, particularly by investing in U.S. online sports betting and iGaming through BetMGM, expanding our
digital capabilities, and seeking to diversify our Asia operations with development efforts in Japan.
As part of that business strategy, we have sought, and executed on, opportunities to invest in our growth areas, divest our real estate assets, and acquire, or
enter into venture transactions with respect to the operations of integrated casino, hotel, and entertainment resorts, including through the following transactions:
•
In July 2018, we and Entain plc (“Entain”) formed BetMGM, LLC (“BetMGM”), a venture that is owned 50% by each party. In connection with its
formation, we provided BetMGM with exclusive access to all of our domestic landbased and online sports betting, major tournament poker, and online
gaming operations and Entain provided BetMGM with exclusive access to its technology in the United States.
•
In  January  2019,  we  acquired  the  real  property  and  operations  associated  with  Empire  City  Casino's  racetrack  and  casino  ("Empire  City")  for  total
consideration of approximately $865 million. Subsequently, MGP acquired
1

Empire City’s developed real property from us and Empire City was added to the master lease between us and MGP. Refer to Note 4 and Note 18 for
additional information.
•
In  March  2019,  we  entered  into  an  amendment  to  the  master  lease  between  us  and  MGP  with  respect  to  improvements  made  by  us  related  to  the
rebranding  of  the  Park  MGM  and  NoMad  Las  Vegas  property  (the  “Park  MGM  Transaction”).  Refer  to  Note  18  for  additional  information  on  this
transaction, which eliminates in consolidation.
•
Additionally, in November 2019, Bellagio BREIT Venture was formed, which acquired the Bellagio real estate assets from us for total consideration of
$4.25 billion, and leased such assets back to us pursuant to a lease agreement. Refer to Note 11 for additional information relating to the lease and Note
12 for the guarantee entered into in connection with the transaction.
•
In December 2019, we completed the sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land for $825 million. See Note 16 for additional information related
to this transaction.
•
On February 14, 2020, we completed a series of transactions (collectively the “MGP BREIT Venture Transaction”) pursuant to which the real estate
assets  of  MGM  Grand  Las  Vegas  and  Mandalay  Bay  (including  Mandalay  Place)  were  contributed  to  the  newly  formed  MGP  BREIT  Venture  in
exchange  for  total  consideration  of  $4.6  billion.  See  Note  1  for  further  discussion  on  the  transaction  and  Note  12  for  the  guarantee  entered  into  in
connection with the transaction.
•
In connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, MGP BREIT Venture entered into a lease with us for the real estate assets of Mandalay Bay
and MGM Grand Las Vegas. Additionally, the master lease with MGP was modified to remove the Mandalay Bay property and the annual cash rent under
the MGP master lease was reduced by $133 million, as further discussed in Note 18. Refer to Note 11 for additional information relating to the lease.
•
Also,  on  January  14,  2020,  we,  the  Operating  Partnership,  and  MGP  entered  into  a  waiver  agreement  pursuant  to  which approximately  30  million
Operating Partnership units that we held were redeemed for $700 million on May 18, 2020 and approximately 24 million Operating Partnership units that
we held were redeemed for $700 million on December 2, 2020. As a result, the waiver terminated in accordance with its terms. Refer to Note 1 for further
information regarding this transaction, which eliminates in consolidation.
•
On March 4, 2021, we delivered a notice of redemption to MGP covering approximately 37 million Operating Partnership units that we held which was
satisfied with aggregate cash proceeds of approximately $1.2 billion, using cash on hand together with the proceeds from MGP's issuance of Class A
shares. See Note 13 for information regarding this transaction, which eliminates in consolidation.
•
On August 4, 2021, we entered into an agreement with VICI Properties, Inc. (“VICI”) and MGP whereby VICI will acquire MGP in a stock-for-stock
transaction (such transaction, the “VICI Transaction”). Pursuant to the agreement, MGP Class A shareholders will receive 1.366 shares of newly issued
VICI stock in exchange for each MGP Class A share outstanding and we will receive 1.366 units of the new VICI operating partnership (“VICI OP”) in
exchange for each Operating Partnership unit held by us. In connection with the exchange, VICI OP will redeem the majority of our VICI OP units for
cash consideration of $4.4 billion. MGP’s Class B share that is held by us will be cancelled. As part of the transaction, we will enter into an amended and
restated  master  lease  with  VICI.  The  transaction  is  expected  to  close  in  the  first  half  of  2022,  subject  to  customary  closing  conditions,  regulatory
approvals, and approval by VICI stockholders (which was obtained on October 29, 2021). Refer to Note 1 for further information.
•
On September 26, 2021, we entered into an agreement  to acquire the operations of The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas ("The Cosmopolitan") for cash
consideration of $1.625 billion, subject to customary working capital adjustments. Additionally, the Company will enter into a lease agreement for the
real estate assets of The Cosmopolitan. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2022, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary
closing conditions. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
•
On September 27, 2021, we completed the acquisition of the 50% ownership interest in CityCenter Holdings, LLC ("CityCenter") held by Infinity World
Development Corp ("Infinity World"), a wholly owned subsidiary of Dubai World, a Dubai, United Arab Emirates government decree entity, for cash
consideration of $2.125 billion. Refer to Note 4 for additional information on this acquisition.
2

•
On September 28, 2021, we sold the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) to funds managed by Blackstone for cash consideration of $3.89 billion
and entered into a lease through which the real property is leased back to a subsidiary of the Company. Refer to Note 11 for discussion of the lease
agreement.
•
On September 28, 2021, we announced that we, together with our venture partner, ORIX Corporation ("ORIX"), were selected by Osaka as the region’s
integrated resort partner. In December 2021, we and ORIX formed a venture, through which we will bid to develop one of Japan's first integrated resorts.
•
On October 29, 2021, MGP acquired the real estate assets of MGM Springfield from us for cash consideration of $400 million and MGM Springfield was
added to the MGP master lease between us and MGP through which MGP leases back the real property to a subsidiary of ours. Transactions with MGP,
including transactions under the MGP master lease, have been eliminated in our consolidation of MGP. Refer to Note 18 for further discussion of the
master lease with MGP.
•
On December 13, 2021, we entered into an agreement to sell the operations of The Mirage to an affiliate of Seminole Hard Rock Entertainment, Inc.
("Hard Rock") for cash consideration of $1.075 billion, subject to certain purchase price adjustments. Upon closing, the master lease between us and VICI
(or MGP in the event that the VICI Transaction is terminated) will be amended and restated to reflect a $90 million reduction in annual cash rent. The
transaction is expected to close during the second half of 2022, subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to, the consummation or
termination of the VICI Transaction and receipt of regulatory approvals. Refer to Note 1 for further information.
For additional information relating to our acquisitions, divestitures, venture transactions, and other arrangements, including those referred to above, see
“Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” as well as the notes to our consolidated financial statements
specified above.
Financial Impact of COVID-19. See “Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Description of
our business and key performance indicators — Financial Impact of COVID-19” for more information about the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business
and our recovery. For a discussion of the risks to our business resulting from COVID-19, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors — Risks Related to Our Business, Industry,
and Market Conditions.”
Resort Operations
General
Most of our revenue is cash-based, through customers wagering with cash or paying for non-gaming services with cash or credit cards. We rely on the
ability of our resorts to generate operating cash flow to fund capital expenditures, provide excess cash flow for future development, acquisitions or investments,
and repay debt financings.
Our results of operations do not tend to be seasonal in nature as all of our casino resorts, except as otherwise described related to the impact of COVID-19,
typically operate 24 hours a day, every day of the year, with the exception of Empire City, which operates 20 hours a day, every day of the year, though a variety of
factors may affect the results of any interim period, including the timing of major conventions, Far East baccarat volumes, the amount and timing of marketing and
special events for our high-end gaming customers, and the level of play during major holidays, including New Year and Lunar New Year. Our primary casino and
hotel operations are owned and managed by us. Other resort amenities may be owned and operated by us, owned by us but managed by third parties for a fee, or
leased to third parties. We also lease space to third-party retail and food and beverage operators, particularly for branding opportunities.
As of December 31, 2021, we have three reportable segments: Las Vegas Strip Resorts, Regional Operations, and MGM China, as generally described
below. See Note 17 for detailed financial information about our reportable segments.
Las Vegas Strip Resorts and Regional Operations
Las Vegas Strip Resorts. Las Vegas Strip Resorts consists of the following casino resorts: Aria (including Vdara) (upon acquisition in September 2021),
Bellagio, MGM Grand Las Vegas (including The Signature), Mandalay Bay (including Delano and Four Seasons), The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New York
(including The Park), Excalibur, Park MGM (including NoMad Las Vegas) and Circus Circus Las Vegas (until the sale of such property in December 2019).
Regional Operations. Regional Operations consists of the following casino resorts: MGM Grand Detroit in Detroit, Michigan; Beau Rivage in Biloxi,
Mississippi; Gold Strike Tunica in Tunica, Mississippi; Borgata in Atlantic City, New
3

Jersey; MGM National Harbor in Prince George’s County, Maryland; MGM Springfield in Springfield, Massachusetts; Empire City in Yonkers, New York (upon
its acquisition in January 2019); and MGM Northfield Park in Northfield Park, Ohio (upon MGM’s acquisition of the operations from MGP in April 2019).
Over  half  of  the  net  revenue  from  our  Las  Vegas  Strip  Resorts  is  typically  derived  from  non-gaming  operations,  including  hotel,  food  and  beverage,
entertainment and other non-gaming amenities and the majority of the net revenue from our Regional Operations is typically derived from gaming operations.
Although our domestic customer mix has changed in the near term as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our long-term strategy continues to be to market to
different customers and utilize our significant convention and meeting facilities to allow us to maximize hotel occupancy and customer volumes, which also leads
to better labor utilization. Our operating results are highly dependent on the volume of customers at our properties, which in turn affects the price we can charge for
our hotel rooms and other amenities.
Our casino operations feature a variety of slots and table games, and, through BetMGM, we offer online sports betting and iGaming in certain jurisdictions
in  the  United  States.  In  addition,  we  provide  our  premium  players  access  to  high-limit  rooms  and  lounge  experiences  where  players  may  enjoy  an  upscale
atmosphere.
MGM China
We own approximately 56% of MGM China, which owns MGM Grand Paradise, S.A. (“MGM Grand Paradise”), the Macau company that owns and
operates the MGM Macau and MGM Cotai casino resorts and holds the related gaming subconcession and land concessions. We believe our ownership interest in
MGM China plays an important role in extending our reach internationally and will foster future growth and profitability. Although visitation during 2020 and
2021 was significantly reduced by the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the long-term future growth of the Asian gaming market to drive additional visitation at
MGM Macau and MGM Cotai.
Our current MGM China operations relate to MGM Macau and MGM Cotai, discussed further below. MGM China’s revenues are generated primarily from
gaming operations which are conducted under a gaming subconcession held by MGM Grand Paradise, a subsidiary of MGM China. The Macau government has
granted three gaming concessions and each of these concessionaires has granted a subconcession. The MGM Grand Paradise gaming subconcession was granted by
SJM Resorts S.A. ("SJMSA", formerly Sociedade de Jogos de Macau, S.A.), which expires in June 2022. The Macau government currently prohibits additional
concessions and subconcessions, but does not place a limit on the number of casinos or gaming areas operated by the concessionaires and subconcessionaires,
though  additional  casinos  or  gaming  areas  require  government  approval  prior  to  commencing  operations.  See  “Risk  Factors  —  Risks  Related  to  our  Macau
Operations  — The  Macau  government  can  terminate  MGM Grand Paradise’s  subconcession  under  certain  circumstances  without  compensating  MGM Grand
Paradise, exercise its redemption right with respect to the subconcession, or refuse to grant MGM Grand Paradise an extension of the subconcession in 2022, or
MGM Grand Paradise may be unsuccessful in obtaining a gaming concession when a new public tender is held by the Macau government, any of which would
have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.”
As discussed above, gaming in Macau is currently administered by the Macau Government through concessions awarded to three different concessionaires
and  three  subconcessionaires,  of  which  a  subsidiary  of  MGM  China,  MGM  Grand  Paradise,  is  a  subconcessionaire.  In  2019,  the  expiration  of  MGM  Grand
Paradise's  subconcession  term  was  extended  from  March  31,  2020  to  June  26,  2022,  consistent  with  the  expiration  of  the  other  concessionaires  and
subconcessionaires. Pursuant to the current Macau gaming law, upon reaching the maximum duration of 20 years, the term of the concessions may be extended one
or more times by order of the Chief Executive, which period may not exceed, in total, 5 years. On January 14, 2022, the Macau Government disclosed the content
of a bill to amend Macau gaming law, which followed a 45-day public consultation process regarding draft amendment proposals that were issued in September
2021.  Under  the  bill,  the  existing  subconcessions  will  be  discontinued  and  a  maximum  of  six  concessions  will  be  awarded  for  a  term  to  be specified  in  the
concession contract that may not exceed 10 years and which may be extended by three years under certain circumstances. The bill is subject to debate and approval
by the Macau Legislative Assembly. The approval of the new gaming law bill will precede the public tender for the awarding of new gaming concessions and to
date the Macau Government has provided no indication as to whether the public tender will take place before expiry of the existing gaming concessions and
subconcessions but acknowledged that it could consider the extension of the existing concessions and subconcessions beyond their current term if the public tender
is held at a later date. Unless MGM Grand Paradise's gaming subconcession is extended or legislation with regard to reversion of casino premises is amended, the
casino area premises and gaming-related equipment subject to reversion will automatically be transferred to the Macau Government upon expiration, and MGM
Grand Paradise will cease to generate any revenues from such gaming operations. In addition, certain events relating to the loss, termination, rescission, revocation
or modification of MGM Grand Paradise’s gaming subconcession in Macau, where such events have a material adverse effect on the financial condition, business,
properties, or results of operations of MGM China, taken as a whole, may result in a special put option triggering event under MGM China’s senior notes and an
event of default under MGM China’s revolving credit facilities. MGM
4

China continues to closely monitor developments regarding the retendering process or concession extensions including the issuance of guidance by the Macau
Government. MGM China intends to respond proactively to all relevant Macau Government requirements when known relating to the retendering process. We
cannot provide any assurance that the gaming subconcession will be extended beyond the current term or that we will be able to obtain a gaming concession in a
public tender; however, management believes that MGM Grand Paradise will be successful in obtaining a gaming concession when a public tender is held.
Corporate and Other
We have additional business activities including our investments in unconsolidated affiliates, and certain other corporate and management operations. Our
unconsolidated affiliates include the ventures with BREIT, discussed elsewhere, and BetMGM. In September 2021, we completed the acquisition of the 50%
ownership interest in CityCenter held by Infinity World and now own 100% of the equity interest in CityCenter. Accordingly, we no longer account for our interest
in CityCenter under the equity method of accounting, and we now consolidate CityCenter in our financial statements.
5

Our Operating Resorts
We have provided certain information below about our resorts as of December 31, 2021.
Name and Location
Number of
Guestrooms and
Suites
Approximate Casino
Square Footage
Slots 
Gaming Tables 
Las Vegas Strip Resorts:
 
 
 
 
Aria
5,497
142,000
1,316
121
Bellagio
3,933
152,000
1,312
146
MGM Grand Las Vegas 
6,071
169,000
1,245
122
Mandalay Bay 
4,750
152,000
990
69
The Mirage
3,044
94,000
835
71
Luxor
4,397
101,000
819
45
Excalibur
3,981
93,000
894
42
New York-New York
2,024
81,000
893
54
Park MGM 
2,898
66,000
745
65
Subtotal
36,595
1,050,000
9,049
735
Regional Operations:
 
 
 
 
MGM Grand Detroit (Detroit, Michigan) 
400
147,000
2,817
140
Beau Rivage (Biloxi, Mississippi)
1,740
85,000
1,516
75
Gold Strike Tunica (Tunica, Mississippi)
1,109
57,000
1,082
61
Borgata (Atlantic City, New Jersey)
2,767
213,000
2,816
163
MGM National Harbor (Prince George's County, Maryland) 
308
150,000
2,123
158
MGM Springfield (Springfield, Massachusetts)
240
106,000
1,571
52
MGM Northfield Park (Northfield, Ohio)
—
73,000
1,669
—
Empire City (Yonkers, New York)
—
137,000
4,696
—
Subtotal
6,564
968,000
18,290
649
MGM China:
 
 
 
 
MGM Macau – 55.95% owned (Macau S.A.R.)
585
307,000
1,017
289
MGM Cotai – 55.95% owned (Macau S.A.R.)
1,418
298,000
1,026
263
Subtotal
2,003
605,000
2,043
552
Grand total
45,162
2,623,000
29,382
1,936
(1)
Casino square footage is approximate and includes the gaming floor, race and sports, high limit areas and casino specific walkways, and excludes casino cage and other non-gaming
space within the casino area.
(2)
Includes slot machines, video poker machines and other electronic gaming devices. Also include 172 and 187 gaming devices temporarily out of service due to COVID-19 restrictions
at MGM Macau and MGM Cotai, respectively.
(3)
Includes blackjack (“21”), baccarat, craps, roulette and other table games; does not include poker. MGM China gaming tables reflect the permanent table count, excludes temporary
tables.
(4)
Includes 1,495 condominium-hotel units at Vdara, which are predominantly utilized as company-owned hotel rooms.
(5)
Includes 1,078 rooms at The Signature at MGM Grand Las Vegas.
(6)
Includes 1,117 rooms at the Delano and 424 rooms at the Four Seasons Hotel.
(7)
Includes 293 rooms at NoMad Las Vegas.
(8)
Our local investors have an ownership interest of approximately 3% of MGM Grand Detroit.
(9)
Our local investors have a non-voting economic interest in MGM National Harbor. Refer to Note 2 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further description of
such interest.
(10) Our local investor has a non-voting economic interest in MGM Springfield.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
6

Customers and Competition
Our properties operate in highly competitive environments. We compete against gaming companies, as well as other hospitality companies in the markets in
which we operate, neighboring markets, and in other parts of the world, including non-gaming resort destinations such as Hawaii. Our gaming operations compete
to  a  lesser  extent  with  state-sponsored  lotteries,  off-track  wagering,  card  parlors,  iGaming  and  other  forms  of  legalized  gaming  in  the  United  States  and
internationally. For further discussion of the potential impact of competitive conditions on our business, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors — Risks Related to our
Business, Industry, and Market Conditions — We face significant competition with respect to destination travel locations generally and with respect to our peers in
the industries in which we compete, including increased competition through online sports betting and iGaming, and failure to compete effectively could materially
adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow.”
Our primary methods of successful competition include:
•
Locating our resorts in desirable leisure and business travel markets and operating at superior sites within those markets;
•
Constructing and maintaining high-quality resorts and facilities, including luxurious guestrooms, state-of-the-art convention facilities and premier dining,
entertainment, retail and other amenities;
•
Recruiting, training and retaining well-qualified and motivated employees who provide superior customer service;
•
Providing unique, “must-see” entertainment attractions; and
•
Developing distinctive and memorable marketing, promotional and customer loyalty programs.
Las Vegas Strip Resorts and Regional Operations
Our customers include premium gaming customers; leisure and wholesale travel customers; business travelers, and group customers, including conventions,
trade associations, and small meetings. We have a diverse portfolio of properties, which appeal to the upper end of each market segment and also cater to leisure
and value-oriented tour and travel customers. Many of our properties have significant convention and meeting space which we utilize to drive business to our
properties during midweek and off-peak periods.
Our Las Vegas casino resorts compete for customers with a large number of other hotel casinos in the Las Vegas area, including major hotel casinos on or
near the Las Vegas Strip, major hotel casinos in the downtown area, which is about five miles from the center of the Las Vegas Strip, and several major hotel
casinos elsewhere in the Las Vegas area. Our Las Vegas Strip Resorts also compete, in part, with each other. Major competitors, including new entrants, have
either recently expanded their hotel room capacity and convention space offerings, or have plans to expand their capacity or construct new resorts in Las Vegas.
Also, the growth of gaming in areas outside Las Vegas has increased the competition faced by our operations in Las Vegas.
Outside Nevada, our resorts primarily compete with other hotel casinos in their markets and for customers in surrounding regional gaming markets, where
location is a critical factor to success. In addition, we compete with gaming operations in surrounding jurisdictions and other leisure destinations in each region.
MGM China
The three primary customer bases in the Macau gaming market are VIP gaming operations, main floor gaming operations and slot machine operations. VIP
gaming play has historically been sourced both internally and externally. Externally sourced VIP gaming play was obtained through external gaming promoters
who  assist  VIP  players  with  their  travel  and  entertainment  arrangements.  Gaming  promoters  have  been  compensated  through  payment  of  revenue-sharing
arrangements  and  rolling  chip  turnover-based  commissions.  In-house  VIP  players  also  typically  receive  a  commission  based  on  the  program  in  which  they
participate.  Unlike  gaming  promoters  and  in-house  VIP players,  main  floor  players  do  not  receive  commissions.  The  profit  contribution  from  the  main  floor
gaming operations has historically exceeded the VIP gaming operations due to commission costs paid to gaming promoters. We offer amenities to attract players
such as premium gaming lounges and stadium-style electronic table games terminals, which include both table games and slots to create a dedicated exclusive
gaming space for premium main floor players’ use, as well as non-gaming amenities, such as The Mansion and MGM Cotai Emerald Villa to attract ultra-high end
customers.
VIP  gaming  at  MGM  China  is  conducted  by  the  use  of  special  purpose  nonnegotiable  gaming  chips.  Gaming  promoters  currently  purchase  these
nonnegotiable chips and in turn they sell these chips to their players. The nonnegotiable chips allow us to track the amount of wagering conducted by each gaming
promoters’ clients in order to determine VIP gaming play. Gaming promoter commissions are currently based on a percentage of the gross table games win or a
percentage  of the table games turnover they generate.  They also receive  a complimentary  allowance based on a percentage  of the table games turnover they
generate, which can be applied to hotel rooms, food and beverage and other discretionary
7

customer-related expenses. Gaming promoter commissions are recorded as a reduction of casino revenue. In-house VIP commissions are based on a percentage of
rolling chip turnover and are recorded as a reduction of casino revenue.
In December 2021, we suspended operations with our primary gaming promoters. In January 2022, the Macau Government disclosed the content of a bill to
amend the gaming law which includes some restrictions relating to gaming promoters, including: each gaming promoter can only exercise the activity of gaming
promotion for one concessionaire, revenue sharing arrangements between concessionaires and gaming promoters are prohibited, gaming promoters are prohibited
from having exclusive operation of casino reserved areas, and gaming promoters are restricted to only providing support to the concessionaires in the promotion of
casino gaming activities through commissions. The bill is subject to debate and approval by the Macau Legislative Assembly.
We have focused our business on main floor gaming operations and, accordingly, we do not expect VIP gaming operations to be a significant source of
revenue in future years. The majority of MGM China's casino revenue has been provided by main floor gaming operations in recent years and we expect this
customer base will be the primary source of growth in the future.
Our  key  competitors  in  Macau  include  five  other  gaming  concessionaires  and  subconcessionaires.  If  the  Macau  government  were  to  grant  additional
concessions or subconcessions, we would face additional competition which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or
cash flows. Additionally, we face competition at our Macau and Cotai properties from concessionaires who have expanded their operations, primarily on the Cotai
Strip.
We encounter competition from major gaming centers located in other areas of Asia and around the world including, but not limited to, Singapore, South
Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, the Philippines, Australia, and Las Vegas.
Marketing
Our marketing efforts are conducted through various means, including our loyalty programs. We advertise on radio, television, internet and billboards and
in newspapers and magazines in selected cities throughout the United States and overseas, as well as by direct mail, email and through the use of social media. We
also advertise through our regional marketing offices located in major U.S. and foreign cities. Our direct marketing efforts utilize advanced analytic techniques that
identify customer preferences and help predict future customer behavior, allowing us to make more relevant offers to customers, influence incremental visits, and
help build lasting customer relationships.
MGM Rewards, our customer loyalty program, is a tiered program and allows customers to qualify for benefits across our participating resorts and in both
gaming and non-gaming areas, encouraging customers to keep their total spend within our casino resorts. In January 2022, we redesigned our loyalty program to
expand the ways in which our customers can earn benefits. We also offer the Golden Lion Club for gaming focused customers, in addition to M life Rewards, at
MGM China. The structured rewards systems based on member value and tier level ensure that customers can progressively access the full range of services that
the resorts provide. Our loyalty programs focus on building a rewarding relationship with our customers, encouraging members to increase both visitation and
spend.
Strategy
We  strive  to  be  a  leader  in  the  global  gaming,  entertainment  and  hospitality  industry  that  delivers  extraordinary  entertainment  across  a  portfolio  of
properties in the United States and Macau. The quality of our properties and amenities is evidenced by our success in winning numerous awards, both domestic and
globally, including several Four and Five Diamond designations from the American Automobile Association, multiple Four and Five Star designations from Forbes
Travel Guide and numerous certifications of our Corporate Social Responsibility efforts.
In order to achieve our vision of becoming the world's premier gaming entertainment company, we developed our strategic plan, which centers on four
pillars:
•
Strong People and Culture. Recruit, develop and retain the best talent. Foster a culture of diversity and inclusion. Invest in the employee experience.
•
Customer-Centric  Model. Leverage  a  customer-centric  model  reinforced  by  a  strong  brand  and  deep  customer  insights  to  provide  unmatched
entertainment experiences for our guests and drive top-line growth.
•
Operational Excellence. Operating model refinement to maximize operating efficiencies and expand margins. Enhancement of digital capabilities to
strengthen customer loyalty.
•
Disciplined Capital Allocation to Maximize Shareholder Value. Pursuit of targeted, attractive ROI opportunities that align to our strategic vision.
Focus on shareholder returns. Fortify balance sheet.
8

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting rapidly changing environment, our strategic direction must allow for flexibility. The strategic plan was
developed with the intent to regularly revisit, measure, and reevaluate for emerging opportunities.
In allocating resources, our financial strategy is focused on managing a proper mix of investments in our existing properties, strategic growth opportunities,
debt repayment and shareholder returns. We believe there are reasonable investments for us to make in new initiatives and at our current resorts that will provide
profitable returns.
We regularly evaluate targeted opportunities that provide an attractive return on investment in domestic and international markets, including the ownership,
management and operation of gaming facilities and accessing new markets for iGaming and online sports betting. We also leverage our management expertise and
well-recognized brands through strategic partnerships and international expansion opportunities. We feel that several of our brands are well-suited to new projects
in both gaming and non-gaming developments. We may undertake these opportunities either alone or in cooperation with one or more third parties.
We  continue  to  invest  in  our  operating  model  by  expanding  the  footprint  of  our  Centers  of  Excellence  and  enabling  best  in  class  operations  through
adjustments within corporate and property business units. In addition, we have implemented several improvement and cost cutting initiatives comprised of labor,
sourcing, and revenue programs that have further improved our operating model and have positioned us as a stronger company.
We have continued to focus on our key growth opportunities of developing an integrated resort in Japan and investing in BetMGM. In September 2021, we,
together with our venture partner, ORIX, were selected by Osaka as the region’s integrated resort partner. This selection marks an important step in our long-term
bid to develop one of Japan’s first integrated casino resorts. We are currently working with Osaka to submit an area development plan to the central government
during the application period. As it relates to BetMGM, we believe that BetMGM is positioned as a long-term leader in the U.S. online sports betting and iGaming
industries. As part of our commitment to the success of BetMGM, we have integrated our MGM Rewards program with BetMGM and have BetMGM branded on-
property sportsbooks and kiosks to drive higher value customers at lower acquisition costs through a robust omni-channel strategy. Further, we continue to explore
bringing full-scale commercial gaming to Empire City in New York.
Technology
We  believe  technology,  digital  and  advanced  data  science/analytics  capabilities  are  critical  to  optimizing  customer  experience  and  loyalty,  employee
productivity and engagement, operational efficiency and revenue growth. We are focused on using these capabilities to achieve specific goals of creating ‘only at
MGM’ differentiation through unique content and experiences, establishing a perennial engagement with our guests for increased loyalty, digital diversification
through enhanced e-commerce and seamless integration of the physical integrated resorts business with digital casino and sports betting businesses, creating cross-
property experiences and promotions in Las Vegas to provide much better value to the consumer, enhancing our data driven decisioning capabilities in all aspects
of our business for faster decision making, and optimizing our operations and employee productivity and experience through digitization.
Environmental & Social Responsibility
At MGM Resorts we have had a long-standing commitment to environmental and social responsibility. For over a decade, we have had a dedicated board
committee focused on Corporate Social Responsibility (“CSR”). In 2019, we had bolstered governance of these topics by uniting our key pillars of Diversity and
Inclusion,  Philanthropy  and  Community  Engagement  and  Environmental  Sustainability  under  one  Executive  Committee-level  leader  who  manages  the  MGM
Resorts Social Impact and Sustainability Center of Excellence, reports directly to the Chief Executive Officer and President, and serves as liaison to the CSR and
Sustainability board committee. This leader now also oversees the Human Resources function, and is thus able to integrate Environmental, Social and Governance
(“ESG”) considerations more deeply into the core culture of our organization.
The year 2021 was a critical one in terms of progress on our ESG initiatives. In May 2021, we published our 2020 Social Impact & Sustainability Report
containing our most robust ESG disclosures to date. In this report we showed the significant progress made towards many of our ESG goals that we had announced
publicly in prior reports, and we expect to publish a report in 2022 reflecting our progress on these goals during 2021.
Importantly, 2021 saw the opening of the 100MW “MGM Resorts Mega Solar Array” in North Las Vegas. This is the hospitality industry’s largest direct-
connect renewable electricity project world-wide and has significantly improved our trajectory to achieve our previously announced carbon reduction goals. In
connection with the opening of this array, we enhanced our climate ambition by announcing two new 2030 goals: to cut global total operational carbon emissions
by
9

50%, and source 100% renewable electricity in the USA. Beyond the environmental benefits associated with the renewable electricity generated, the array will also
help us hedge our electricity costs and reduce our exposure to price volatility risks.
In  2021,  we  also  made  substantial  progress  against  our  commitment  to  aligning  more  of  our  ESG  report  disclosures  to  leading  ESG  frameworks  by
publishing our first ever disclosures informed by guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB)
Hotels & Lodging and Casinos & Gaming Sector Standards.
Our  full  list  of  ESG  goals  and  performance  against  them  are  available  in  our  2020  Social  Impact  &  Sustainability  Report,  available  at
mgmresorts.com/focused. The content on this website and report is for informational purposes only and such content is not incorporated by reference into this
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Trademarks
Our principal intellectual property consists of trademarks for, among others, Aria, Vdara, Bellagio, The Mirage, Borgata, Mandalay Bay, MGM, MGM
Grand, MGM Resorts International, Luxor, Excalibur, New York-New York, Beau Rivage and Empire City, all of which have been registered or allowed in
various classes in the United States. In addition, we have also registered or applied to register numerous other trademarks in connection with our properties,
facilities and development projects in the United States and in various other foreign jurisdictions. These trademarks are brand names under which we market our
properties and services. We consider these brand names to be important to our business since they have the effect of developing brand identification. We believe
that  the  name  recognition,  reputation  and  image  that  we  have  developed  attract  customers  to  our  facilities.  Once  granted,  our  trademark  registrations  are  of
perpetual duration so long as they are used and periodically renewed. It is our intent to pursue and maintain our trademark registrations consistent with our goals
for brand development and identification, and enforcement of our trademark rights.
Human Capital
We are focused on fostering a people-driven culture exemplified by how we lead and uphold our core values, which in 2021 evolved to: captivate our
audience, inspire excellence, champion inclusion, and win together, to create an engaged and diverse workforce. Our long-term people strategy is designed to
enhance  talent  attraction  and  development  to  support  business  objectives,  guest  experience,  community  engagement,  and  financial  goals.  Our  workforce
development strategies support local hiring and developing a robust workforce in the local communities in which we operate through veteran support, community
training and employment, fulfilling local hiring commitments (where applicable), and through internship and management development programs.
Growth and Development
We invest significant resources to develop the talent needed, now and in the future, to continue to be a premier employer of choice across the gaming,
hospitality, and entertainment industries. We are committed to a culture of continuous learning where employees, at all levels, are engaged in developing their
knowledge, skills, and abilities and we support the long-term career aspirations of our employees through education and professional/personal development. In
2021, we introduced several new learning and development initiatives focused on a broad range of employee segments. Except as otherwise temporarily impacted
due  to  COVID-19,  we  offer  tuition  reimbursement,  contribute  toward  student  loan  debt  repayment,  and  have  partnered  with  the  Nevada  System  of  Higher
Education to allow employees to earn a degree online free of charge for all credit hours.
Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (“ED&I”)
Our  approach  to  ED&I  is  anchored  by  our  corporate  and  people  strategies  and  a  social  impact  and  sustainability  approach  that  centers  on  embracing
humanity and protecting the planet. A concise framework lays out four strategic pillars to guide our work: invest in people; build an inclusive culture; grow
business and customer engagement and supplier diversity; and, enhance marketplace leadership and community relations. As part of our commitment, we have
committed to the following four long-range goals: (1) ensure that all employees have equal access to leadership opportunities, (2) spend at least 10% of our
biddable procurement with diverse suppliers, (3) expand our Supplier Diversity Mentorship Program to achieve 50 graduates and (4) train 100% of management
employees  on social  impact  policies  and  goals. In connection  with each goal, we have established  robust key  performance  indicators,  which are tracked  and
published  in  our  annual  Social  Impact  and  Sustainability  Report.In  addition,  we  have  detailed  internal  Human  Capital  workforce  reports,  which  include
demographic and diversity data, and are reviewed with the Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability Committee of the Board, leadership teams and
executive management on a regular basis.
10

Internally, we use multiple channels to facilitate communication and to continuously advance our core value of inclusiveness. The channels include but are
not limited to open forums with executives, employee engagement surveys with detailed action planning, and employee network groups.
Work  in  the  area  of  equity,  diversity  and  inclusion  is  advanced  through  a  range  of  programs  and  initiatives  which  include  education  and  training,
community  partnerships,  recruitment  and  talent  development,  advocacy,  engagement  and  outreach.  Responsibility  is  driven  and  led  by  the  Company’s  Chief
People, Inclusion and Sustainability Officer, who reports directly to the Chief Executive Officer and President, and is supported by a centralized diversity and
inclusion team and the Human Resources department.
Health, Safety, and Wellness
In order to promote our culture of overall employee health and wellness we provide benefits, tools and resources to help maintain or improve physical,
mental,  and  financial  health.  We  continue  to  align  benefit  offerings  to  the  needs  of  a  diverse  workforce  across  an  expanded  regional  presence  and  leverage
innovative solutions to expand access to health and wellness resources, including the recent addition of a service to help connect LGBTQIA+ people and their
loved ones with culturally and clinically competent health care providers.
To ensure our employees' continued health, safety, and wellness in response to COVID-19, we coordinated with medical experts to put in place extensive
testing protocols for our employees and required COVID-19 vaccination as a condition of employment for all salaried employees and new hires throughout the
United States. As a commitment to our employees impacted by the pandemic, we have maintained benefits eligibility for many employees who were furloughed in
2020 and were unable to work enough hours to qualify for benefits until business conditions improved.
Community Engagement and Philanthropy
Our philanthropic focus centers around: Embracing Humanity and Protecting the Planet. We organize our major programs and initiatives under the pillars
of caring for one another and investing in the community. We established the MGM Resorts Foundation in 2002 as an engagement opportunity for employees to
contribute to charitable causes, which provides two types of grants (1) the Employee Emergency Grant, which benefits our employees, and (2) the Community
Grant, which benefits local communities. We endeavor to care for our communities through volunteerism and philanthropy and encourage all of our employees to
volunteer through a variety of programs. In addition, we offer opportunities for our employees to give back to their communities, including through programs such
as VolunteerREWARDS, which provides employees with opportunities to earn grant money to their charity of choice based on volunteer hours.
Employees and Labor Relations
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 42,000 full-time and 17,000 part-time employees domestically. In addition, we had approximately 10,000
employees at MGM China. We had collective bargaining agreements with unions covering approximately 35,000 of our employees as of December 31, 2021.
Collective bargaining agreements covering multiple bargaining units at our Regional Operations and Las Vegas Strip Resorts are scheduled to expire in 2022. This
includes all bargaining units at Gold Strike Tunica in Mississippi, all bargaining units at Borgata in Atlantic City, our hotel/food & beverage bargaining unit at
MGM National Harbor, and all valet operations in Las Vegas (with the exception of The Signature). Negotiations for successor contracts covering those employees
are being scheduled as expiration dates approach and will continue throughout 2022. As of December 31, 2021, none of the employees of MGM China are part of a
labor union and the MGM China resorts are not party to any collective bargaining agreements.
Government Regulation and Licensing
The gaming industry is highly regulated, and we must maintain our licenses and pay gaming taxes to continue our operations. Each of our casinos is subject
to extensive regulation under the laws, rules and regulations of the jurisdiction in which it is located. These laws, rules and regulations generally concern the
responsibility, financial stability and character of the owners, managers, and persons with financial interest in the gaming operations. Violations of laws in one
jurisdiction could result in disciplinary action in other jurisdictions.
A more detailed description of the gaming regulations to which we are subject is contained in Exhibit 99.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which
Exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
Our businesses are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations affecting businesses in general. These laws and regulations
include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  restrictions  and  conditions  concerning  alcoholic  beverages,  smoking,  employees,  currency  transactions,  taxation,  zoning  and
building codes (including regulations under
11

the Americans with Disabilities Act, which requires all public accommodations to meet certain federal requirements related to access and use by persons with
disabilities), construction, land use and marketing and advertising. We also deal with significant amounts of cash in our operations and are subject to various
reporting  and  anti-money  laundering  regulations.  Such  laws  and  regulations  could  change  or  could  be  interpreted  differently  in  the  future,  or  new  laws  and
regulations could be enacted. Material changes, new laws or regulations, or material differences in interpretations by courts or governmental authorities could
adversely affect our operating results.
In addition, we are subject to certain federal, state and local environmental laws, regulations and ordinances, including the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water
Act, the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.
Under various federal, state and local laws and regulations, an owner or operator of real property may be held liable for the costs of removal or remediation of
certain hazardous or toxic substances or wastes located on its property, regardless of whether or not the present owner or operator knows of, or is responsible for,
the presence of such substances or wastes. We have not identified any issues associated with our properties that could reasonably be expected to have an adverse
effect on us or the results of our operations.
For a discussion of potential risks to our business relating to regulatory matters, including due to the potential impact of legislative and regulatory changes,
please see “Item 1A. Risk Factors — Risks Related to Legal and Regulatory Matters and Changes in Public Policy.”
Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K and our 2021 Annual Report to Stockholders contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements can be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “seeks,” “believes,” “estimates,”
“expects,” “will,” “may” and similar references to future periods. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements we make
regarding the impact of COVID-19 on our business, our ability to reduce expenses and otherwise maintain our liquidity position during the pandemic, our ability to
generate significant cash flow, execute on ongoing and future strategic initiatives, including the development of an integrated resort in Japan and investments we
make in online sports betting and iGaming, the closing of the VICI Transaction, The Cosmopolitan transaction, and The Mirage transaction, amounts we will spend
on  capital  expenditures  and  investments,  our  expectations  with  respect  to  future  share  repurchases  and  cash  dividends  on  our  common  stock,  dividends  and
distributions  we  will  receive  from  MGM  China  or  the  Operating  Partnership,  our  ability  to  achieve  the  benefits  of  our  cost  savings  initiatives,  and  amounts
projected to be realized as deferred tax assets. The foregoing is not a complete list of all forward-looking statements we make.
Forward-looking  statements  are  based  on  our  current  expectations  and  assumptions  regarding  our  business,  the  economy  and  other  future  conditions.
Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks, and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict.
Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements. They are neither statements of historical fact nor guarantees or
assurances of future performance. Therefore, we caution you against relying on any of these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, regional, national or global political, economic, business,
competitive, market, and regulatory conditions and the following:
•
our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments, including the fixed component of our rent payments under our triple-net leases and
guarantees we provide of the indebtedness of Bellagio BREIT Venture and MGP BREIT Venture could adversely affect our development options and
financial results and impact our ability to satisfy our obligations;
•
current and future economic, capital and credit market conditions could adversely affect our ability to service our substantial indebtedness and significant
financial commitments, including the fixed components of our rent payments, and to make planned expenditures;
•
restrictions and limitations in the agreements governing our senior credit facility and other senior indebtedness could significantly affect our ability to
operate our business, as well as significantly affect our liquidity;
•
the fact that we are required to pay a significant portion of our cash flows as rent, which could adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and
growth, service our indebtedness and limit our ability to react to competitive and economic changes;
•
the VICI Transaction, The Cosmopolitan transaction, and The Mirage transaction each remain subject to the satisfaction of certain closing conditions,
including the receipt of certain regulatory approvals, and any anticipated benefits from such transactions may take longer to realize than expected or may
not be realized at all;
•
potential litigation instituted against us, our transaction counterparties, or our respective directors challenging the VICI Transaction may prevent such
transaction from becoming effective within the expected timeframe or at all;
12

•
the global COVID-19 pandemic has continued to materially impact our business, financial results and liquidity, and such impact could worsen and last for
an unknown period of time;
•
significant competition we face with respect to destination travel locations generally and with respect to our peers in the industries in which we compete;
•
the impact on our business of economic and market conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate and in the locations in which our customers reside;
•
the possibility that we may not realize all of the anticipated benefits of our cost savings initiatives, including our MGM 2020 Plan, or our asset light
strategy;
•
the fact that our ability to pay ongoing regular dividends is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and certain other limitations;
•
All of our domestic gaming facilities are leased and could experience risks associated with leased property, including risks relating to lease termination,
lease extensions, charges and our relationship with the lessor, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position or results of
operations;
•
financial, operational, regulatory or other potential challenges that may arise with respect to MGP, as the lessor for a significant portion of our properties,
may adversely impair our operations;
•
the fact that MGP has adopted a policy under which certain transactions with us, including transactions involving consideration in excess of $25 million,
must be approved in accordance with certain specified procedures;
•
the concentration of a significant number of our major gaming resorts on the Las Vegas Strip;
•
the fact that we extend credit to a large portion of our customers and we may not be able to collect such gaming receivables;
•
the potential occurrence of impairments to goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets or long-lived assets which could negatively affect future profits;
•
the susceptibility of leisure and business travel, especially travel by air, to global geopolitical events, such as terrorist attacks, other acts of violence, acts
of war or hostility or outbreaks of infectious disease (including the COVID-19 pandemic);
•
the fact that co-investing in properties or businesses, including our investment in BetMGM, decreases our ability to manage risk;
•
the fact that future construction, development, or expansion projects will be subject to significant development and construction risks;
•
the fact that our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all possible losses that our properties could suffer, our insurance costs may increase and
we may not be able to obtain similar insurance coverage in the future;
•
the fact that a failure to protect our trademarks could have a negative impact on the value of our brand names and adversely affect our business;
•
the fact that a significant portion of our labor force is covered by collective bargaining agreements;
•
the sensitivity of our business to energy prices and a rise in energy prices could harm our operating results;
•
the potential failure of future efforts to expand through investments in other businesses and properties or through alliances or acquisitions, or to divest
some of our properties and other assets;
•
the potential that failure to maintain the integrity of our computer systems and internal customer information could result in damage to our reputation
and/or subject us to fines, payment of damages, lawsuits or other restrictions on our use or transfer of data;
•
the potential reputational harm as a result of increased scrutiny related to our corporate social responsibility efforts;
•
extreme weather conditions or climate change may cause property damage or interrupt business;
•
the fact that our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and the cost of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations could adversely affect
our business;
•
the risks associated with doing business outside of the United States and the impact of any potential violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or
other similar anti-corruption laws;
•
increases in gaming taxes and fees in the jurisdictions in which we operate;
•
our ability to recognize our foreign tax credit deferred tax asset and the variability of the valuation allowance we may apply against such deferred tax
asset;
•
changes to fiscal and tax policies;
•
risks related to pending claims that have been, or future claims that may be brought against us;
•
restrictions on our ability to have any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, other than through MGM
China;
•
the ability of the Macau government to terminate MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession under certain circumstances without compensating MGM Grand
Paradise, exercise its redemption right with respect to the subconcession, or refuse to grant MGM Grand Paradise an extension of the subconcession in
2022; and
•
the potential for conflicts of interest to arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors of MGM China.
13

Any forward-looking statement made by us in this Form 10-K or our 2021 Annual Report to Stockholders speaks only as of the date on which it is made.
Factors or events that could cause our actual results to differ may emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all of them. We undertake no
obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, except as may be required
by law. If we update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be made that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other
forward-looking statements.
You should also be aware that while we from time to time communicate with securities analysts, we do not disclose to them any material non-public
information, internal forecasts or other confidential business information. Therefore, you should not assume that we agree with any statement or report issued by
any analyst, irrespective of the content of the statement or report. To the extent that reports issued by securities analysts contain projections, forecasts or opinions,
those reports are not our responsibility and are not endorsed by us.
Information about our Executive Officers
The following table sets forth, as of February 25, 2022, the name, age and position of each of our executive officers. Executive officers are elected by and
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Directors.
Name
Age
Position
William J. Hornbuckle
64
Chief Executive Officer and President
Corey I. Sanders
58
Chief Operating Officer
Jonathan S. Halkyard
57
Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
John M. McManus
54
Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary
Tilak Mandadi
58
Chief Strategy, Innovation and Technology Officer
Mr. Hornbuckle has served as Chief Executive Officer since July 2020 and as President since December 2012. He served as Acting Chief Executive Officer
from  March  2020  to  July  2020,  as  Chief  Operating  Officer  from  March  2019  to  March  2020,  as  President  and  Chief  Customer  Development  Officer  from
December 2018 to February 2019, as Chief Marketing Officer from August 2009 to August 2014 and President and Chief Operating Officer of Mandalay Bay
Resort & Casino from April 2005 to August 2009.
Mr. Sanders has served as Chief Operating Officer since December 2020. Previously, he served as Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer from March 2019
to January 2021, as Chief Operating Officer from September 2010 through February 2019, as Chief Operating Officer for the Company’s Core Brand and Regional
Properties from August 2009 to September 2010, as Executive Vice President—Operations from August 2007 to August 2009, and as Executive Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer for MGM Grand Resorts from April 2005 to August 2007.
Mr. Halkyard has served as Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer since January 2021. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Halkyard served as President and
Chief Executive Officer of Extended Stay America, Inc. ("Extended Stay") and its paired-share REIT, ESH Hospitality, Inc., from January 2018 through November
2019, as Chief Financial Officer of Extended Stay from January 2015 through December 2017, and as Chief Operating Officer of Extended Stay from September
2013 through January 2015. Prior to joining Extended Stay, Mr. Halkyard served as Chief Financial Officer of NV Energy, Inc. from July 2012 through September
2013 and, prior to that, he served in various executive, finance and managerial roles at Caesars Entertainment Inc. since 1999, including as Chief Financial Officer
from 2006 through 2012.
Mr.  McManus  has  served  as  Executive  Vice  President,  General  Counsel  and  Secretary  since  July  2010.  He  served  as  Acting  General  Counsel  from
December 2009 to July 2010, as a senior member of the Company’s Corporate Legal Department from July 2008 to December 2009, and he served as counsel to
various MGM operating subsidiaries from May 2001 to July 2008.
Mr. Mandadi has served as Chief Strategy, Innovation and Technology Officer since July 2021. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Mandadi served as
Executive Vice President of Digital and Global Chief Technology Officer for Disney Parks, Experiences and Products, Inc. from March 2013. Prior to joining
Disney, Mr. Mandadi served as Senior Vice President of Digital for American Express Company from July 2006 to March 2013.
14

Available Information
We maintain a website at www.mgmresorts.com that includes financial and other information for investors. We provide access to our SEC filings, including
our annual report on Form 10-K and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q (including related filings in XBRL format), filed and furnished current reports on Form 8-K,
and amendments to those reports on our website, free of charge, through a link to the SEC’s EDGAR database. Through that link, our filings are available as soon
as reasonably practicable after we file or furnish the documents with the SEC. These filings are also available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Because of the time differences between Macau and the United States, we also use our corporate website as a means of posting important information about
MGM China.
References in this document to our website address do not incorporate by reference the information contained on the websites into this Annual Report on
Form 10-K.
ITEM 1A.    RISK FACTORS
You should be aware that the occurrence of any of the events described in this section and elsewhere in this report or in any other of our filings with the
SEC could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In evaluating us, you should consider carefully,
among other things, the risks described below.
Summary of Risk Factors
The following is a summary of the principal risks that could adversely affect our business, operations and financial results.
Risks Related to Our Substantial Financial Commitments
•
Our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments, including the fixed component of our rent payments and guarantees we provide on
the indebtedness of Bellagio BREIT Venture and MGP BREIT Venture could adversely affect our operations and financial results and impact our ability
to satisfy our obligations.
•
Current and future economic, capital and credit market conditions could adversely affect our ability to service our substantial indebtedness and significant
financial commitments or make planned expenditures.
•
The agreements governing our senior credit facility and other senior indebtedness contain restrictions and limitations that could significantly affect our
ability to operate our business, as well as significantly affect our liquidity, and therefore could adversely affect our results of operations.
•
We  are  required  to  pay  a  significant  portion  of  our  cash  flows  as  rent,  which  could  adversely  affect  our  ability  to  fund  our  operations  and  growth
initiatives, service our indebtedness and limit our ability to react to competitive and economic changes.
Risks Related to Our Announced Transactions
•
The VICI Transaction, The Cosmopolitan transaction, and The Mirage transaction each remain subject to the satisfaction of certain closing conditions,
including the receipt of certain regulatory approvals, and any anticipated benefits from such transactions may take longer to realize than expected or may
not be realized at all.
•
The potential litigation instituted against us, our transaction counterparties, or our respective directors challenging the VICI Transaction may prevent such
transaction from becoming effective within the expected timeframe or at all.
Risks Related to Our Business, Industry, and Market Conditions
•
The global COVID-19 pandemic has continued to materially impact our business, financial results and liquidity, and such impact could worsen and last
for an unknown period of time.
•
We face significant competition with respect to destination travel locations generally and with respect to our peers in the industries in which we compete,
including  increased  competition  through  online  sports  betting  and  iGaming,  and  failure  to  compete  effectively  could  materially  adversely  affect  our
business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
•
Our business is affected by economic and market conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate and in the locations in which our customers reside.
•
We may not realize all of the anticipated benefits of our cost savings initiatives, including those associated with our MGM 2020 Plan.
15

•
Our ability to pay ongoing regular dividends to our stockholders is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and may be limited by our holding
company structure, existing and future debt agreements entered into by us or our subsidiaries and state law requirements.
•
All of our domestic gaming facilities are leased and could experience risks associated with leased property, including risks relating to lease termination,
lease extensions, charges and our relationship with the lessor, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position or results of
operations.
•
Paul Salem, our Chairman, Daniel J. Taylor, one of our directors, and Corey Sanders, and John M. McManus, members of our senior management, may
have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their positions at MGP.
•
Despite our ability to exercise control over the affairs of MGP as a result of our ownership of the single outstanding Class B share of MGP, MGP has
adopted a policy under which certain transactions with us, including transactions involving consideration in excess of $25 million, must be approved in
accordance with certain specified procedures, which could affect our ability to execute our operational and strategic objectives.
•
Because a significant number of our major gaming resorts are concentrated on the Las Vegas Strip, we are subject to greater risks than a gaming company
that is more geographically diversified.
•
We extend credit to a large portion of our customers and we may not be able to collect gaming receivables.
•
We may incur impairments to goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets, or long-lived assets which could negatively affect our future profits.
•
Leisure  and  business  travel,  especially  travel  by  air,  are  particularly  susceptible  to  global  geopolitical  events,  such  as  terrorist  attacks,  other  acts  of
violence or acts of war or hostility or the outbreak of infectious diseases.
•
Co-investing in properties or businesses, including our investment in BetMGM, decreases our ability to manage risk.
•
Any of our future construction, development or expansion projects will be subject to significant development and construction risks, which could have a
material adverse impact on related project timetables, costs and our ability to complete the projects.
•
Our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all possible losses that our properties could suffer. In addition, our insurance costs may increase and
we may not be able to obtain similar insurance coverage in the future.
•
Any failure to protect our trademarks could have a negative impact on the value of our brand names and adversely affect our business.
•
A significant portion of our labor force is covered by collective bargaining agreements.
•
Our business is particularly sensitive to energy prices and a rise in energy prices could harm our operating results.
•
We may seek to expand through investments in other businesses and properties or through alliances or acquisitions, and we may also seek to divest some
of our properties and other assets, any of which may be unsuccessful.
•
The failure to maintain the integrity of our computer systems and customer information could result in damage to our reputation and/or subject us to fines,
payment of damages, lawsuits and restrictions on our use of data.
•
We are subject to risks related to corporate social responsibility and reputation.
•
We are subject to risks and costs related to climate change.
Risks Related to Legal and Regulatory Matters and Changes in Public Policy
•
Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and the cost of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations may adversely affect our business
and results of operations.
•
Any violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or any other similar anti-corruption laws could have a negative impact on us.
•
If the jurisdictions in which we operate increase gaming taxes and fees, as well as other taxes and fees, our results could be adversely affected.
•
The future recognition of our foreign tax credit deferred tax asset is uncertain, and the amount of valuation allowance we may apply against such deferred
tax asset may change materially in future periods.
•
We face risks related to pending claims that have been, or future claims that may be, brought against us.
Risks Related to Our Macau Operations
•
We have agreed not to have any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, other than through MGM China.
•
The Macau government can terminate MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession under certain circumstances without compensating MGM Grand Paradise,
exercise its redemption right with respect to the subconcession, or refuse to grant MGM Grand Paradise an extension of the subconcession in 2022, or
MGM Grand Paradise may be unsuccessful in obtaining a gaming concession when a new public tender is held by the Macau government, any of
16

which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
•
We are subject to risks associated with doing business outside of the United States.
•
Conflicts of interest may arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors of MGM China, the holding company for MGM Grand
Paradise which owns and operates MGM Macau and MGM Cotai.
For a more complete discussion of the material risks facing our business, please see below.
Risks Related to Our Substantial Financial Commitments
Our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments, including the fixed component of our rent payments and guarantees we provide of
the indebtedness of Bellagio BREIT Venture and MGP BREIT Venture could adversely affect our operations and financial results and impact our ability to
satisfy our obligations. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $12.9 billion of principal amount of indebtedness outstanding on a consolidated basis,
including $4.3 billion of outstanding indebtedness of the Operating Partnership and $3.1 billion of outstanding indebtedness of MGM China. Any increase in the
interest rates applicable to our existing or future borrowings would increase the cost of our indebtedness and reduce the cash flow available to fund our other
liquidity needs. We do not guarantee MGM China’s or the Operating Partnership’s obligations under their respective debt agreements and, to the extent MGM
China or the Operating Partnership were to cease to produce cash flow sufficient to service their indebtedness, our ability to make additional investments into such
entities is limited by the covenants in our existing senior credit facility.
In addition, our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments could have important negative consequences on us, including:
•
increasing our exposure to general adverse economic and industry conditions;
•
limiting our flexibility to plan for, or react to, changes in our business and industry;
•
limiting our ability to borrow additional funds for working capital requirements, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, execution of our business
strategy (including returning value to our shareholders) or other general operating requirements;
•
making it more difficult for us to make payments on our indebtedness; or
•
placing us at a competitive disadvantage compared to less-leveraged competitors.
We currently also provide shortfall guarantees of the $3.01 billion and $3.0 billion principal amount of indebtedness (and any interest accrued and unpaid
thereon) of Bellagio BREIT Venture and MGP BREIT Venture, respectively. The terms of each guarantee provide that, after the lenders have exhausted certain
remedies to collect on the obligations under the underlying indebtedness, we would then be responsible for any shortfall between the value of the collateral and the
debt obligation, which amount may be material, and we may not have sufficient cash on hand to fund any such obligation to the extent it is triggered in the future.
If we do not have sufficient cash on hand, we may need to raise capital, including incurring additional indebtedness, in order to satisfy our obligation. There can be
no assurance that any financing will be available to us, or, if available, will be on terms that are satisfactory to us.
Moreover, our businesses are capital intensive. For our owned, leased and managed resorts to remain attractive and competitive, we must periodically invest
significant capital to keep the properties well-maintained, modernized and refurbished. The leases for our operating properties have fixed rental payments (with
annual escalators) and also require us to apply a percentage of net revenues generated at the leased properties to capital expenditures at those properties. Such
investments require an ongoing supply of cash and, to the extent that we cannot fund expenditures from cash generated by operations, funds must be borrowed or
otherwise obtained. Similarly, development projects, including any potential future development of an integrated resort in Japan, strategic initiatives, including
positioning BetMGM as a leader in online sports betting and iGaming, and acquisitions could require significant capital commitments, the incurrence of additional
debt, guarantees of third-party debt or the incurrence of contingent liabilities, any or all of which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows.
Current  and  future  economic,  capital  and  credit  market  conditions  could  adversely  affect  our  ability  to  service  our  substantial  indebtedness  and
significant financial commitments or make planned expenditures. Our ability to make payments on our substantial indebtedness and other significant financial
commitments, including the rent payments under our leases, and to fund planned or committed capital expenditures and other investments depends on our ability to
generate cash flow, receive distributions from our unconsolidated affiliates and subsidiaries (including MGM China and the Operating Partnership), and borrow
under our senior credit facility or incur new indebtedness. In 2020 and 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in significant deterioration to the global economy,
and substantial declines in our revenues from operations and expected distributions from our unconsolidated affiliates and subsidiaries. We expect that the recent
17

emergence and global spread of COVID-19 variants may continue to impact consumer spending levels in 2022 and potentially thereafter, and if we fail to generate
cash  sufficient  to  fund  our  liquidity  needs  or  satisfy  the  financial  and  other  covenants  in  our  debt  and  lease  instruments,  we  cannot  assure  you  that  future
borrowings will be available to us under our senior secured credit facility in an amount sufficient to enable us to pay our indebtedness or fund our other liquidity
needs or that we will be able to access the capital markets in the future to borrow additional debt on terms favorable to us, or at all.
In  addition,  we  have  a  significant  amount  of  indebtedness  maturing  in  2022,  and  thereafter.  Our  ability  to  fund  or  timely  refinance  and  replace  our
indebtedness will depend upon the economic and credit market conditions discussed above. If we are unable to fund or refinance our indebtedness on a timely
basis, we might be forced to seek alternate forms of financing, dispose of certain assets or minimize capital expenditures and other investments. There is no
assurance that any of these alternatives would be available to us, if at all, on satisfactory terms, on terms that would not be disadvantageous to us, or on terms that
would not require us to breach the terms and conditions of our existing or future debt agreements or leases.
The agreements governing our senior credit facility and other senior indebtedness contain restrictions and limitations that could significantly affect our
ability to operate our business, as well as significantly affect our liquidity, and therefore could adversely affect our results of operations. Covenants governing
our senior secured credit facility and certain of our debt securities restrict, among other things, our ability to:
•
pay dividends or distributions, repurchase equity, prepay certain debt or make certain investments;
•
incur additional debt;
•
incur liens on assets;
•
sell assets or consolidate with another company or sell all or substantially all of our assets;
•
enter into transactions with affiliates;
•
allow certain subsidiaries to transfer assets or enter into certain agreements; and
•
enter into sale and lease-back transactions.
Our ability to comply with these provisions may be affected by events beyond our control. The breach of any such covenants or obligations not otherwise
waived or cured could result in a default under the applicable debt obligations and could trigger acceleration of those obligations, which in turn could trigger cross-
defaults under other agreements governing our long-term indebtedness. Any default under our senior credit facility or the indentures governing our other debt
could adversely affect our growth, our financial condition, our results of operations and our ability to make payments on our debt and other financial commitments.
In addition, each of MGM China and the Operating Partnership has issued debt securities and is a borrower under credit facilities, all of which contain
covenants that restrict the respective borrower’s ability to engage in certain transactions, require them to satisfy certain financial covenants and impose certain
operating and financial restrictions on them and their respective subsidiaries. These restrictions include, among other things, limitations on their ability to pay
dividends or distributions to us, incur additional debt, make investments or engage in other businesses, merge or consolidate with other companies, or transfer or
sell assets.
We are required to pay a significant portion of our cash flows as rent, which could adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and growth
initiatives, service our indebtedness and limit our ability to react to competitive and economic changes. As of December 31, 2021 we are required to make annual
rent payments of $1.6 billion, in the aggregate, under the triple-net lease agreements, which leases are also subject to annual escalators as described elsewhere in
this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The leases also require us to spend a certain amount on capital expenditures at the leased properties. In addition, the leases
governing the Bellagio, MGM Grand Las Vegas, Mandalay Bay, Aria (including Vdara) real estate assets require us to comply with certain financial covenants
which, if not met, will require us to deposit cash collateral or issue letters of credit for the benefit of the applicable landlord equal to 1 year of rent under the MGM
Grand Las Vegas and Mandalay Bay lease and the Aria lease and 2 years of rent under the Bellagio lease. As a result of the foregoing rent and capital expenditure
obligations, our ability to fund our operations, raise capital, make acquisitions, make investments, service our debt and otherwise respond to competitive and
economic changes may be adversely affected. For example, our obligations under the leases may:
•
make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to our indebtedness and to obtain additional indebtedness;
•
increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions or a downturn in our business;
•
require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to making rent payments, thereby reducing the availability of our cash flow to
fund working capital, capital expenditures, development projects, pay dividends, repurchase shares and other general corporate purposes;
18

•
limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry in which we operate;
•
restrict our ability to make acquisitions, divestitures and engage in other significant transactions; and
•
cause us to lose our rights with respect to the applicable leased properties if we fail to pay rent or other amounts or otherwise default on the leases.
Any of the above factors could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Risks Related to Our Announced Transactions
The VICI Transaction, The Cosmopolitan transaction and The Mirage transaction each remain subject to the satisfaction of certain closing conditions,
including the receipt of certain regulatory approvals, and any anticipated benefits from such transactions may take longer to realize than expected or may not
be realized at all. Each of the VICI Transaction, The Cosmopolitan transaction and The Mirage transaction is subject to certain closing conditions, which may not
be satisfied within the anticipated timeframe or at all. For example, completion of the transactions remains subject to the receipt of certain regulatory approvals.
There can be no assurance that any required regulatory approvals will be obtained, and the regulatory authorities from which approvals are required may impose
conditions on the consummation of the transaction or require changes to the terms of the transaction or agreements to be entered into in connection with the
transaction. Such conditions or changes and the process of obtaining regulatory approvals could have the effect of delaying or impeding the completion of the
transactions, which might reduce the anticipated benefits to us of the transaction or have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of
operations. The completion of the VICI Transaction is also subject to the satisfaction of additional closing conditions, including, among others, (i) receipt of
approval of VICI’s shareholders (which was obtained on October 29, 2021), (ii) the absence of any restraining order, injunction or other judgment, order or decree
from any applicable governmental authority prohibiting the consummation of the transaction, (iii) the effectiveness of the registration statement for VICI’s shares
to be issued in the VICI Transaction and the authorization for listing of those shares on the New York Stock Exchange, (iv) the absence of a material adverse effect
on the parties to the master transaction agreement, (v) the accuracy of each party’s representations and warranties in the master transaction agreement, subject to
customary materiality standards, and (vi) compliance of each party with its respective covenants under the master transaction agreement. No assurance can be
given  that  these  or  any  other  required  conditions  to  closing  will  be  satisfied.  If  the  conditions  precedent  to  the  VICI  Transaction  are  not  satisfied,  the  VICI
Transaction will not be completed unless such conditions are validly waived. Such conditions may jeopardize or delay the completion of the transaction or may
reduce the anticipated benefits of the transaction.
If any of the transactions are not completed, or are not completed on a timely basis, our business may be adversely affected and, without realizing any of the
benefits of having completed such transactions, we may be subject to additional risks, costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the following:
•
we will be required to pay our costs relating to such transactions, such as legal, accounting, financial advisory and printing fees, whether or not the
transactions are completed;
•
the diversion of time and resources committed by our management to matters relating to the transactions could otherwise have been devoted to pursuing
other beneficial opportunities;
•
we may be subject to negative publicity or be negatively perceived by the investment or business communities as a result of the failure to consummate
any or all of the transactions;
•
the price of our shares may decline to the extent that the current market price of our shares reflects a higher price than it otherwise would have based on
the assumption that any or all of the transactions will be consummated;
•
we would have incurred significant expenses relating to such transactions that we may be unable to recover, including termination fees if applicable; and
•
we  may  be  subject  to  litigation  related  to  the  failure  to  consummate  the  transactions  or  to  perform  our  obligations  under  the  respective  transaction
agreements.
In addition, we entered into the transactions as part of our current growth strategy. Even if the transactions are completed as currently anticipated, there can
be no assurances that any anticipated benefits from the transactions will be realized as expected or that such benefits will be achieved within the anticipated time
frame or at all. Failure to achieve the anticipated benefits of the transactions could adversely affect our results of operations or cash flows, cause dilution to our
earnings per share, decrease or delay any accretive effect of such transactions and negatively impact the price of our common stock.
The potential litigation instituted against us, our transaction counterparties, or our respective directors challenging the proposed VICI Transaction may
prevent such transaction from becoming effective within the expected timeframe or at all. Potential litigation related to the VICI Transaction may result in
injunctive or other relief prohibiting, delaying or otherwise adversely affecting the parties’ ability to complete the VICI Transaction. One of the conditions to the
19

VICI Transaction under the master transaction agreement is that no temporary restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or other judgment, order or
decree issued by any governmental authority of competent jurisdiction prohibiting consummation of the VICI Transaction or any other transactions contemplated
by the master transaction agreement shall be in effect. Accordingly, any such injunctive or other relief may prevent the VICI Transaction from becoming effective
within the expected timeframe or at all. In addition, defending against such claims may be expensive and divert management’s attention and resources, which could
adversely affect our business and the businesses of the counterparties to such transactions.
Risks Related to Our Business, Industry, and Market Conditions
The global COVID-19 pandemic has continued to materially impact our business, financial results and liquidity, and such impact could worsen and last
for an unknown period of time. As of the date of this annual report, there continues to be uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic, its duration, and its impact
on U.S. and global economic activity and consumer behavior. The omicron variant of COVID-19, which appears to be the most transmissible and contagious
variant to date, has caused an increase in COVID-19 cases globally. The impact of the omicron variant, or of any other variants that may emerge, cannot be
predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including the availability of vaccines in different parts of the world, vaccination rates among the
population, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against the variants, and the response by governmental bodies to reinstate mandated business closures, orders
to “shelter in place,” occupancy limitations, and travel and transportation restrictions. While restrictions have eased throughout 2021, new restrictions to combat
the spread of the variants, such as restrictions and bans on travel or transportation, stay-at-home directives, limitations on the size of gatherings, closures of work
facilities, schools, public buildings and businesses, cancellation of events, including sporting events, concerts, conferences and meetings, and quarantines and lock-
downs may be put into place in the future. In addition, the spread of new variants, including omicron, has had a material impact on domestic and international
travel, which has resulted in reduced demand for hotel rooms, convention space and other casino resorts amenities.
In Macau, while all of our properties were open during 2021, several travel and entry restrictions were in place in Macau, Hong Kong and mainland China
(including  the  temporary  suspension  of  ferry  services  between  Hong  Kong  and  Macau,  the  nucleic  acid  test  result  certificate  and  mandatory  quarantine
requirements for returning residents, for visitors from Hong Kong, Taiwan, and certain regions in mainland China, and bans on entry on other visitors) which
significantly impacted visitation to MGM Macau and MGM Cotai. In addition, from time to time during 2021 local COVID-19 cases were identified in Macau.
Upon such occurrences, a state of immediate prevention was declared and mass mandatory nucleic acid testing was imposed in Macau, the validity period of
negative test results for re-entry into mainland China was shortened and quarantine requirements were imposed, certain events were cancelled or suspended, and in
some instances certain entertainment and leisure facilities were closed throughout Macau. Although gaming and hotel operations have remained open during these
states  of immediate  prevention,  such measures  have had a negative  effect  on MGM Grand Paradise's  operations  and  it is uncertain  whether further  closures,
including the closure of MGM Grand Paradise's properties, or travel restrictions to Macau will be implemented if additional local COVID-19 cases are identified.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and new variants continue to impact our business, results of operations, and financial results, including the
duration and magnitude of such effects, will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict or assess, including, but not
limited to: the duration and scope of the pandemic (and whether there is a, or multiple, further resurgences in the future); the efficacy of the vaccine against
existing and new variants of the COVID-19 virus; the adoption rate of vaccines and the ability to effectively and efficiently distribute vaccines domestically and
internationally to allow travel to resume to pre-pandemic levels; the negative impact the pandemic has on global and regional economies and economic activity,
including the duration and magnitude of its impact on unemployment rates and consumer discretionary spending; its short and longer-term impact on the demand
for travel, transient and group business, and levels of consumer confidence even after travel advisories and restrictions are lifted; our and our business partners'
ability to successfully navigate the impacts of the pandemic; actions governments, businesses and individuals take in response to the pandemic (including the rise
of variant strains of the virus), such as limiting or banning travel and limiting or banning leisure, casino and entertainment (including sporting events) activities,
including  the  complete  or  partial  closures  of  our  properties;  and  how  quickly  economies,  travel  activity,  and  demand  for  gaming,  entertainment  and  leisure
activities recovers after the pandemic subsides. We may also face unforeseen liability or be subject to additional obligations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic,
including as a result of claims alleging exposure to COVID-19 in connection with our operations or facilities or to the extent we are subject to a governmental
enforcement action as a result of health and safety compliance. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may also have the effect of exacerbating many of the other
risks described in this section or in any other filings with the SEC. As a result of the foregoing, we cannot predict the ultimate scope, duration and impact the
COVID-19 pandemic will have on our results of operations, but it may continue to have a material impact on our business, financial condition, liquidity, results of
operations (including revenues and profitability) and stock price.
20

We  face  significant  competition  with  respect  to  destination  travel  locations  generally  and  with  respect  to  our  peers  in  the  industries  in  which  we
compete, including increased competition through online sports betting and iGaming, and failure to compete effectively could materially adversely affect our
business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. The hotel, resort, entertainment, and gaming industries are highly competitive. We do not
believe that our competition is limited to a particular geographic area, and hotel, resort, entertainment, and gaming operations in other states or countries, as well as
the increased availability of online sports betting and iGaming, could attract our customers. To the extent that new casinos enter our markets or hotel room capacity
is expanded by others in major destination locations, competition will increase. Major competitors, including potential new entrants, may also expand their hotel
room capacity, expand their range of amenities, improve their level of service, or construct new resorts in Las Vegas, Macau or in the domestic regional markets in
which we operate, all of which could attract our customers. Also, the growth of retail gaming in areas outside Las Vegas has increased the competition faced by our
operations in Las Vegas and elsewhere. For instance, local referendums were recently passed to allow retail gaming in Virginia and Nebraska, with active lobbying
occurring in additional states. While we believe our principal competitors are major gaming and hospitality resorts with well-established and recognized brands, we
also compete against smaller hotel offerings and peer-to-peer inventory sources, which allow travelers to book short-term rentals of homes and apartments from
owners. We expect that we will continue to face increased competition from new channels of distribution, innovations in consumer-facing technology platforms
and other transformations in the travel industry that could impact our ability to attract and retain customers and related business.
We have also seen significant expansion across the United States in legalized forms of iGaming and online sports betting and expect additional jurisdictions
will likely legalize iGaming and online sports betting in the future. We participate in the domestic iGaming and online sports betting market through our venture,
BetMGM, which faces significant competition from other industry participants as well as the broader gaming and entertainment industries. If BetMGM is unable to
sustain or grow interest in its offerings it may not be able to gain the scale necessary to successfully compete in the growing market and, as a result, we may not
receive the anticipated benefits from our investment. In addition, the expansion of iGaming, online sports betting, and other types of gaming may further compete
with our land-based operations by reducing customer visitation and spend at our properties.
In addition, competition could increase if changes in gaming restrictions in the United States and elsewhere are enacted, including the addition of new
gaming establishments located closer to our customers than our casinos. For example, while our Macau operations compete to some extent with casinos located
elsewhere in or near Asia, certain areas in the region have legalized casino gaming (including Japan) and others (such as Taiwan and Thailand) may legalize casino
gaming (or iGaming) in the future. Furthermore, currently MGM Grand Paradise holds one of only six gaming concessions authorized by the Macau government to
operate casinos in Macau. If the Macau government were to allow additional competitors to operate in Macau through the grant of additional concessions or if
current  concessionaires  and  subconcessionaires  open  additional  facilities,  we  would  face  increased  competition.  Similarly,  as  a  result  of  Macau’s  Gaming
Inspection and Co-ordination Bureau increasing scrutiny and restrictions imposed on gaming promoters, we along with certain other casino operators in Macau,
suspended our primary gaming promoters, which has led to substantial declines in revenues from gaming promoters. As a result, we expect competition for the
mass market segment amongst Macau operators will grow and if we are unable to maintain and further develop our mass market business and replace revenue
previously obtained through use of gaming promoters, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be adversely affected.
Most jurisdictions where casino gaming is currently permitted place numerical and/or geographical limitations on the issuance of new gaming licenses.
Although a number of jurisdictions in the United States and foreign countries are considering legalizing or expanding casino gaming, in some cases new gaming
operations may be restricted to specific locations and we expect that there will be intense competition for any attractive new opportunities (which may include
acquisitions of existing properties) that do arise.
In addition to competition with other hotels, resorts and casinos, we compete with destination travel locations outside of the markets in which we operate.
Our failure to compete successfully in our various markets and to continue to attract customers could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows.
Our business is affected by economic and market conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate and in the locations in which our customers reside.
Our  business  is  particularly  sensitive  to  reductions  in  discretionary  consumer  spending  and  corporate  spending  on  conventions,  trade  shows  and  business
development. Adverse macroeconomic conditions, including inflation, economic contraction, economic uncertainty or the perception by our customers of weak or
weakening economic conditions may cause a decline in demand for hotels, casino resorts, trade shows and conventions, and for the type of luxury amenities we
offer. In addition, changes in discretionary consumer spending or consumer preferences could be driven by factors such as the increased cost of travel, an unstable
job market, perceived or actual disposable consumer income and wealth, outbreaks of contagious diseases or fears of war and acts of terrorism or other
21

acts of violence. Consumer preferences also evolve over time due to a variety of factors, including demographic changes, which, for instance, have resulted in
recent growth in consumer demand for non-gaming offerings. Our success depends in part on our ability to anticipate the preferences of consumers and timely
react to these trends, and any failure to do so may negatively impact our results of operations. In particular, Aria, Bellagio and MGM Grand Las Vegas may be
affected  by  economic  conditions  in  the  Far  East,  and  all  of  our  Nevada  resorts  are  affected  by  economic  conditions  in  the  United  States,  and  California  in
particular. A recession, economic slowdown or any other significant economic condition, including inflationary pressures, affecting consumers, corporations, or the
supply chain, generally is likely to cause a reduction in visitation to our resorts, which would adversely affect our operating results. In addition, due to the COVID-
19 pandemic, our business has also been impacted by labor shortages and global supply chain disruptions. If we are unable to hire and retain sufficient employees
to operate our properties or procure necessary supplies, our business, results of operations and reputation could be negatively impacted.
In addition, since we expect a significant number of customers to come to MGM Macau and MGM Cotai (and, to a lesser extent, our domestic properties)
from mainland China, general economic, regulatory, geopolitical and market conditions in China could impact our financial prospects. Any slowdown in economic
growth or changes to China’s current  restrictions  on travel  and currency  conversion or movements,  including  continued  market  impacts from the COVID-19
outbreak and market impacts resulting from China’s anti-corruption campaign and related tightening of liquidity provided by non-bank lending entities and cross-
border currency monitoring (including increased restrictions on Union Pay withdrawals and other ATM limits on the withdrawal of patacas and facial recognition
technology on ATM machines  in Macau to strictly  enforce  the "know your customer"  regulations  for mainland  Chinese bank cardholders),  could disrupt the
number of visitors from mainland China and/or the amounts they are willing to spend at our properties. It is unclear whether these and other measures will continue
to be in effect, become more restrictive, or be readopted in the future. These developments have had, and any future policy developments that may be implemented
may have, the effect of reducing the number of visitors to Macau from mainland China, which could adversely impact tourism and the gaming industry in Macau.
Furthermore, our operations in Macau may be impacted by competition for limited labor resources and our ability to retain and hire employees. We compete
with  a  large  number  of  casino  resorts  for  a  limited  number  of  employees  and  we  anticipate  that  such  competition  will  grow  in  light  of  the  opening  of  new
developments in Macau. While we seek employees from outside of Macau to adequately staff our resorts, certain Macau government policies limit our ability to
import labor in certain job classifications (for instance, the Macau government requires that we only hire Macau residents as dealers in our casinos) and any future
government policies that freeze or cancel our ability to import labor could cause labor costs to increase (including limitations on our ability to import labor as a
result of temporary travel restrictions adopted as part of the COVID-19 mitigation efforts). Finally, because additional casino projects have commenced operations
and other projects are under construction, the existing transportation infrastructure may need to be expanded to accommodate increased visitation to Macau. If
transportation facilities to and from Macau are inadequate to meet the demands of an increased volume of gaming customers visiting Macau, the desirability of
Macau as a gaming destination, as well as the results of operations at our developments in Macau, could be negatively impacted.
We may not realize all of the anticipated benefits of our cost savings initiatives, including those associated with our MGM 2020 Plan. As part of our
MGM 2020 Plan, we undertook several initiatives to reduce costs and further position us for growth by the end of 2020. In addition, as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, we implemented several additional cost savings initiatives in 2020 to improve our operating model. However, we cannot be sure that we will be able to
successfully implement these cost savings initiatives in the time frames contemplated or at all, that we will ultimately be able to realize the expected benefits of
these or any other cost savings initiatives, or that any new additional costs or increases in existing expenses will not offset any cost savings. If we fail to achieve
the anticipated benefits of any current or future cost savings initiatives, our profitability and results of operations could be negatively impacted.
Our ability to pay ongoing regular dividends to our stockholders is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and may be limited by our holding
company structure, existing and future debt agreements entered into by us or our subsidiaries and state law requirements. During the COVID-19 pandemic we
significantly reduced our historic dividend rate. Although we intend to pay ongoing regular quarterly cash dividends on our common stock; our board of directors
may, in its sole discretion, change the amount or frequency of dividends or discontinue the payment of dividends entirely. In addition, our ability to pay dividends
is restricted by certain covenants in our credit agreement, and because we are a holding company with no material direct operations, we are dependent on receiving
cash from our operating subsidiaries to generate the funds from operations necessary to pay dividends on our common stock. Our subsidiaries ability to generate
the  cash  flow  necessary  to  maintain  quarterly  dividend  payments  on  our  common  stock  is  subject  to  their  operating  results,  cash  requirements  and  financial
condition. In addition, our subsidiaries’ ability to make distributions to us is subject to any applicable provisions of state law that may limit the amount of funds
available to us, and compliance with covenants and financial ratios related to existing or future agreements governing any indebtedness at such subsidiaries and any
limitations in other agreements such subsidiaries may have with third parties. In addition, each of the companies in our
22

corporate chain must manage its assets, liabilities and working capital in order to meet all of their respective cash obligations. As a consequence of these various
limitations and restrictions, future dividend payments may be further reduced or eliminated in their entirety. Any change in the level of our dividends or the
suspension of the payment thereof could adversely affect the market price of our common stock.
All of our domestic gaming facilities are leased and could experience risks associated with leased property, including risks relating to lease termination,
lease extensions, charges and our relationship with the lessor, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position or results of
operations. All of our domestic properties are subject to triple-net leases that, in addition to rent, require us to pay: (1) all facility maintenance, (2) all insurance
required in connection with the leased properties and the business conducted on the leased properties, (3) taxes levied on or with respect to the leased properties
(other than taxes on the income of the lessor), (4) all capital expenditures, and (5) all utilities and other services necessary or appropriate for the leased properties
and the business conducted on the leased properties. We are responsible for paying these expenses notwithstanding the fact that many of the benefits received in
exchange for such costs shall accrue in part to the landlords as the owners of the associated facilities. Furthermore, our obligation to pay rent as well as the other
costs described above is absolute in virtually all circumstances, regardless of the performance of the properties and other circumstances that might abate rent in
leases that now place these risks on the tenant, such as certain events of casualty and condemnation. Finally, our leases limit our ability to cease operations at our
properties, subject to certain limited exceptions.
Paul Salem, our Chairman, Daniel J. Taylor, one of our directors, and Corey Sanders, and John M. McManus, members of our senior management,
may have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their positions at MGP. Paul Salem serves as our Chairman and as the Chairman of MGP. In
addition, Daniel J. Taylor, one of our directors, is also a director of MGP, and Corey Sanders and John M. McManus, members of our senior management, are also
directors of MGP. While we have procedures in place to address such situations and the organizational documents with respect to MGP contain provisions that
reduce or eliminate duties (including fiduciary duties) to any MGP shareholder to the fullest extent permitted by law, these overlapping positions could nonetheless
create, or appear to create, potential conflicts of interest when our or MGP’s management and directors pursue the same corporate opportunities, such as potential
acquisition targets, or face decisions that could have different implications for us and MGP. Further, potential conflicts of interest could arise in connection with
the  resolution  of  any  dispute  between  us and  MGP (or  its  subsidiaries)  regarding  the  terms  of  the  agreements  governing  the  separation  and the  relationship,
between us and MGP, such as under the master lease. Potential conflicts of interest could also arise if we and MGP enter into any commercial or other adverse
arrangements with each other in the future.
Despite our ability to exercise control over the affairs of MGP as a result of our ownership of the single outstanding Class B share of MGP, MGP has
adopted  a  policy  under  which  certain  transactions  with  us,  including  transactions  involving  consideration  in  excess  of  $25  million,  must  be  approved  in
accordance with certain specified procedures, which could affect our ability to execute our operational and strategic objectives. We own the single outstanding
Class B share of MGP. The Class B Share is a non-economic interest in MGP which does not provide its holder any rights to profits or losses or any rights to
receive distributions from operations of MGP or upon liquidation or winding up of MGP, and which represents a majority of the voting power of MGP’s shares so
long as the holder of the Class B share and its controlled affiliates’ (excluding MGP) aggregate beneficial ownership of the combined economic interests in MGP
and the Operating Partnership does not fall below 30%. We, therefore, have the ability to exercise significant control over MGP’s affairs, including control over the
outcome of all matters submitted to MGP’s shareholders for approval. MGP’s operating agreement, however, provides that whenever a potential conflict of interest
exists or arises between us or any of our affiliates (other than MGP and its subsidiaries), on the one hand, and MGP or any of its subsidiaries, on the other hand,
any resolution or course of action by MGP’s board of directors in respect of such conflict of interest shall be conclusively deemed to be fair and reasonable to MGP
if it is (i) approved by a majority of a conflicts committee which consists solely of “independent” directors (which MGP refers to as “Special Approval”) (such
independence determined in accordance with the NYSE’s listing standards, the standards established by the Exchange Act to serve on an audit committee of a
board of directors and certain additional independence requirements in our operating agreement), (ii) determined by MGP’s board of directors to be fair and
reasonable to MGP or (iii) approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the voting power of MGP’s outstanding voting shares (excluding
voting shares owned by us and our affiliates). Furthermore, MGP’s operating agreement provides that any transaction with a value, individually or in the aggregate,
over $25 million between us or any of our affiliates (other than MGP and its subsidiaries), on the one hand, and MGP or any of its subsidiaries, on the other hand
(any such transaction (other than the exercise of rights by us or any of our affiliates (other than MGP and its subsidiaries) under any of the material agreements
entered into on the closing day of MGP’s formation transactions), a “Threshold Transaction”), shall be permitted only if (i) Special Approval is obtained or (ii)
such transaction is approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the voting power of MGP’s outstanding voting shares (excluding voting
shares owned by us and our affiliates). As a result, certain transactions, including any Threshold Transactions that we may want to pursue with MGP and that could
have significant benefit to us may require Special Approval. There can be no assurance that the required approval will be
23

obtained with respect to these transactions either from a conflicts committee comprised of independent MGP directors or the affirmative vote of a majority of the
shares not held by us and our affiliates. The failure to obtain such requisite consent could materially affect our ability and the cost to execute our operational and
strategic objectives.
Because a significant number of our major gaming resorts are concentrated on the Las Vegas Strip, we are subject to greater risks than a gaming
company that is more geographically diversified. Given that a significant number of our major resorts are concentrated on the Las Vegas Strip, our business may
be significantly affected by risks common to the Las Vegas tourism industry. For example, the cost and availability of air services and the impact of any events that
disrupt air travel to and from Las Vegas can adversely affect our business. We cannot control the number or frequency of flights to or from Las Vegas, but we rely
on air traffic for a significant portion of our visitors. Reductions in flights by major airlines as a result of higher fuel prices or lower demand, as a result of
limitations on travel imposed to address the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, can impact the number of visitors to our resorts. Additionally, there is one principal
interstate highway between Las Vegas and Southern California, where a large number of our customers reside. Capacity constraints of that highway or any other
traffic disruptions may also affect the number of customers who visit our facilities.
We extend credit to a large portion of our customers and we may not be able to collect gaming receivables. We conduct a portion of our gaming activities
on a credit basis through the issuance of markers which are unsecured instruments. Table games players typically are issued more markers than slot players, and
high-end players typically are issued more markers than patrons who tend to wager lower amounts. High-end gaming is more volatile than other forms of gaming,
and variances in win-loss results attributable to high-end gaming may have a significant positive or negative impact on cash flow and earnings in a particular
quarter. Furthermore, the loss or a reduction in the play of the most significant of these high-end customers could have an adverse effect on our business, financial
condition,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows.  We  issue  markers  to  those  customers  whose  level  of  play  and  financial  resources  warrant,  in  the  opinion  of
management, an extension of credit. Uncollectible receivables from high-end customers could have a significant impact on our results of operations.
While gaming debts evidenced by markers and judgments on gaming debts are enforceable under the current laws of Nevada, and Nevada judgments on
gaming debts are enforceable in all states under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the U.S. Constitution, other jurisdictions may determine that enforcement of
gaming debts is against public policy. Although courts of some foreign nations will enforce gaming debts directly and the assets in the U.S. of foreign debtors may
be reached to satisfy a judgment, judgments on gaming debts from United States courts are not binding on the courts of many foreign nations.
Furthermore, we expect that MGM China will be able to enforce its gaming debts only in a limited number of jurisdictions, including Macau. To the extent
MGM China gaming customers are from other jurisdictions, MGM China may not have access to a forum in which it will be able to collect all of its gaming
receivables because, among other reasons, courts of many jurisdictions do not enforce gaming debts and MGM China may encounter forums that will refuse to
enforce such debts. Moreover, under applicable law, MGM China remains obligated to pay taxes on uncollectible winnings from customers.
Even where gaming debts are enforceable, they may not be collectible. Our inability to collect gaming debts could have a significant negative impact on our
operating results.
We may incur impairments to goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets, or long-lived assets which could negatively affect our future profits. We review
our  goodwill,  intangible  assets  and  long-lived  assets  on  an  annual  basis  and  during  interim  reporting  periods  in  accordance  with  the  authoritative  guidance.
Significant negative trends, reduced estimates of future cash flows, disruptions to our business, slower growth rates or lack of growth have resulted in write-downs
and impairment charges in the past and, if one or more of such events occurs in the future, additional impairment charges or write-downs may be required in future
periods. If we are required to record additional impairment charges or write-downs, this could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated results of
operations.
Leisure and business travel, especially travel by air, are particularly susceptible to global geopolitical events, such as terrorist attacks, other acts of
violence or acts of war or hostility or the outbreak of infectious diseases. We are dependent on the willingness of our customers to travel by air. Since most of our
customers travel by air to our Las Vegas and Macau properties, any terrorist act or other acts of violence, outbreak of hostilities, escalation of war, or any actual or
perceived threat to the security of travel by air, could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. In addition, the outbreak of
infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, has severely disrupted, and is expected to continue to disrupt, domestic and international travel. The COVID-19 pandemic
has resulted in governments, public institutions and other organizations imposing or recommending, and businesses and individuals implementing, restrictions on
various activities or other actions to combat its spread, such as restrictions and bans on travel or transportation, stay-at-home directives, limitations on the size of
gatherings, closures of work facilities, schools, public buildings and businesses,
24

cancellation of events, including sporting events, concerts, conferences and meetings, and quarantines and lock-downs. Even when those restrictions are removed,
consumer willingness to attend large scale conferences may be impacted for the foreseeable future due to continued concerns over safety and social distancing. See
“—The global COVID-19 pandemic has continued to materially impact our business, financial results and liquidity, and such impact could worsen and last for an
unknown period of time.”
Furthermore, although we have been able to purchase some insurance coverage for certain types of terrorist acts, insurance coverage against physical loss or
business interruption resulting from war and some forms of terrorism continues to be unavailable.
Co-investing  in  properties  or  businesses,  including  our  investment  in  BetMGM,  decreases  our  ability  to  manage  risk. In  addition  to  acquiring  or
developing hotels and resorts or acquiring companies that complement our business directly, we have from time to time invested, and expect to continue to invest,
in properties or businesses as a co-investor. Co-investors often have shared control over the operation of the property or business. Therefore, the operation of such
properties or businesses is subject to inherent risk due to the shared nature of the enterprise and the need to reach agreements on material matters. In addition,
investments with other investors may involve risks such as the possibility that the co-investor might become bankrupt or not have the financial resources to meet its
obligations, or have economic or business interests or goals that are inconsistent with our business interests or goals, or be in a position to take action contrary to
our instructions or requests or contrary to our policies or objectives. Consequently, actions by a co-investor might subject the properties or businesses owned by
such entities to additional risk. Further, we may be unable to take action without the approval of our co-investors, or our co-investors could take actions binding on
the property without our consent. Additionally, should a co-investor become bankrupt, we could become liable for its share of liabilities.
For example, we share control of BetMGM with Entain with all major operating, investing and financial activities requiring the consent of both members.
Disagreements between us and Entain could arise in the future, including with respect to the amount and timing of capital contributions. If we and Entain are
unable to support the future funding of BetMGM, then BetMGM may not have the resources to execute on the development or implementation of its strategies,
including funding efforts to increase its market share, which could result in us not receiving the anticipated benefits from our investment. In addition, if we are
awarded a concession to develop an integrated casino resort in Japan, we would do so in a consortium with ORIX and other local investors. As a result, we could
be subject to additional risks related to being unable to directly control development activities or the timing of development completion, which may impact our
ability to complete the project on our anticipated timeline, or at all, or within the agreed upon specifications.
Any of our future construction, development or expansion projects will be subject to significant development and construction risks, which could have a
material adverse impact on related project timetables, costs and our ability to complete the projects.
Although our business model is primarily asset-light, we intend to continue to evaluate opportunities for future construction, development or expansion
projects. Any of our future construction, development or expansion projects, such as our proposed integrated resort in Japan, will be subject to a number of risks,
including:
•
lack of sufficient, or delays in the availability of, financing;
•
changes to plans and specifications;
•
engineering problems, including defective plans and specifications;
•
shortages of, and price increases in, energy, materials and skilled and unskilled labor;
•
pricing inflation, including wage inflation, in key supply markets;
•
delays in obtaining or inability to obtain necessary permits, licenses and approvals;
•
changes in laws and regulations, or in the interpretation and enforcement of laws and regulations, applicable to gaming, leisure, residential, real estate
development or construction projects;
•
labor disputes or work stoppages;
•
availability of qualified contractors and subcontractors;
•
disputes with and defaults by contractors and subcontractors;
•
personal injuries to workers and other persons;
•
environmental, health and safety issues, including site accidents and the spread of viruses;
•
weather interferences or delays;
•
fires, typhoons and other natural disasters;
•
geological, construction, excavation, regulatory and equipment problems; and
•
other unanticipated circumstances or cost increases.
The occurrence of any of these development and construction risks could increase the total costs, delay or prevent the construction, development, expansion
or opening or otherwise affect the design and features of any future projects
25

which we might undertake. In addition, the regulatory approvals associated with our development projects may require us to open future casino resorts by a certain
specified time and to the extent we are unable to meet those deadlines, and any such deadlines are not extended, we may lose our regulatory approval to open a
casino resort in a proposed jurisdiction, or incur payment penalties in connection with any delays which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows.
We also make significant capital expenditures to maintain and upgrade our resorts, which may disrupt operations and displace revenue at the properties,
including revenue lost while rooms, restaurants and meeting spaces are under renovation and out of service.
Our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all possible losses that our properties could suffer. In addition, our insurance costs may increase
and we may not be able to obtain similar insurance coverage in the future. Although we have “all risk” property insurance coverage for our operating properties,
which covers damage caused by a casualty loss (such as fire, natural disasters, or terrorism or other acts of violence), each policy has certain exclusions. In
addition, our property insurance coverage is in an amount that may be significantly less than the expected replacement cost of rebuilding the facilities if there was a
total loss. Our level of insurance coverage also may not be adequate to cover all losses in the event of a major casualty. In addition, certain casualty events, such as
labor strikes, nuclear events, acts of war, loss of income due to cancellation of room reservations or conventions due to fear of terrorism or other acts of violence,
loss of electrical power due to catastrophic events, rolling blackouts or otherwise, deterioration or corrosion, insect or animal damage, and pollution, may not be
covered at all under our policies. Therefore, certain acts could expose us to substantial uninsured losses.
In addition to the damage caused to our properties by a casualty loss, we may suffer business disruption as a result of these events or be subject to claims by
third parties that may be injured or harmed. While we carry business interruption insurance and general liability insurance, this insurance may not be adequate to
cover  all  losses  in  any  such  event.  Furthermore,  the  leases  we  entered  into  in  connection  with  the  MGP  BREIT  Venture  Transaction  and  the  Bellagio  sale-
leaseback transaction require us to maintain specified insurance coverage. We cannot assure you that we will continue to be able to obtain the types and limits of
insurance coverage required by these leases and, to the extent such required insurance coverage cannot be obtained at commercially reasonable cost or at all, then
we would need to obtain amendments to the leases or face a default by the applicable tenant under the lease, which could have material adverse effect on our
business.
We renew our insurance policies on an annual basis. The cost of coverage may become so high that we may need to further reduce our policy limits, further
increase our deductibles or self-insured retentions, or agree to certain exclusions from our coverage.
Any failure to protect our trademarks could have a negative impact on the value of our brand names and adversely affect our business. The development
of intellectual property is part of our overall business strategy, and we regard our intellectual property to be an important element of our success. While our
business as a whole is not substantially dependent on any one trademark or combination of several of our trademarks or other intellectual property, we seek to
establish and maintain our proprietary rights in our business operations through the use of trademarks. We file applications for, and obtain trademarks in, the
United States and in foreign countries where we believe filing for such protection is appropriate. Despite our efforts to protect our proprietary rights, parties may
infringe our trademarks and our rights may be invalidated or unenforceable. The laws of some foreign countries do not protect proprietary rights to as great an
extent  as  the  laws  of  the  United  States.  Monitoring  the  unauthorized  use  of  our  intellectual  property  is  difficult.  Litigation  may  be  necessary  to  enforce  our
intellectual property rights or to determine the validity and scope of the proprietary rights of others. Litigation of this type could result in substantial costs and
diversion of resource. We cannot assure you that all of the steps we have taken to protect our trademarks in the United States and foreign countries will be adequate
to prevent imitation of our trademarks by others. The unauthorized use or reproduction of our trademarks could diminish the value of our brand and its market
acceptance, competitive advantages or goodwill, which could adversely affect our business.
    
A significant portion of our labor force is covered by collective bargaining agreements. Work stoppages and other labor problems could negatively affect
our business and results of operations. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 35,000 of our employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. A
prolonged dispute with the covered employees or any labor unrest, strikes or other business interruptions in connection with labor negotiations or others could have
an adverse impact on our operations, and adverse publicity in the marketplace related to union messaging could further harm our reputation and reduce customer
demand for our services. Also, wage and/or benefit increases resulting from new labor agreements may be significant and could also have an adverse impact on our
results  of  operations.  To  the  extent  that  our  non-union  employees  seek  union  representation  or  elect  union  representation,  we  would  have  exposure  to  risks
associated with representation proceedings, labor negotiations and/or economic impacts of newly negotiated labor agreements. Furthermore, we may have, or
acquire in the future, multi-employer plans that are classified as “endangered,”
26

“seriously endangered,” or “critical” status. For instance, Borgata’s most significant plan is the Legacy Plan of the UNITE HERE Retirement Fund, which has been
listed in “critical status” and is subject to a rehabilitation plan. Plans in these classifications must adopt measures to improve their funded status through a funding
improvement or rehabilitation plan, which may require additional contributions from employers (which may take the form of a surcharge on benefit contributions)
and/or modifications to retiree benefits. In addition, while Borgata has no current intention to withdraw from these plans, a withdrawal in the future could result in
the incurrence of a contingent liability that would be payable in an amount and at such time (or over a period of time) that would vary based on a number of factors
at the time of (and after) withdrawal. Any such additional costs may be significant.
Our business is particularly sensitive to energy prices and a rise in energy prices could harm our operating results. We are a large consumer of electricity
and other energy and, therefore, higher energy prices may have an adverse effect on our results of operations. Accordingly, increases in energy costs may have a
negative impact on our operating results. Additionally, higher electricity and gasoline prices that affect our customers may result in reduced visitation to our resorts
and a reduction in our revenues.
We may seek to expand through investments in other businesses and properties or through alliances or acquisitions, and we may also seek to divest
some of our properties and other assets, any of which may be unsuccessful. We intend to consider strategic and complementary acquisitions and investments in
other businesses, properties or other assets. Furthermore, we may pursue any of these opportunities in alliance with third parties, including MGP. Acquisitions and
investments in businesses, properties or assets, as well as these alliances, are subject to risks that could affect our business, including risks related to:
•
spending cash and incurring debt;
•
assuming contingent liabilities;
•
unanticipated issues in integrating information, communications and other systems;
•
unanticipated incompatibility of purchasing, logistics, marketing and administration methods;
•
retaining key employees; and
•
consolidating corporate and administrative infrastructures.
We cannot assure you that we will be able to identify opportunities or complete transactions on commercially reasonable terms or at all. In addition, even if
we are able to identify any such opportunities and complete transactions, we cannot assure you that we will realize the anticipated synergies and benefits of our
acquisitions or that they will be accretive to our results of operations. Our estimates and assumptions regarding expected synergies and benefits of our acquisitions
could materially change, including as a result of factors beyond our control, and could delay, decrease or eliminate the expected accretive effect of the acquisitions.
In addition, even if we are able to successfully integrate new assets and businesses, the integration of such assets and businesses may result in unanticipated costs,
competitive responses, loss of customer or other business relationships and the diversion of management attention, and the expansion of our operations in general,
whether through acquisition, development or internal growth, could also cause us to incur substantial costs, including legal, professional and consulting fees.
In  addition,  we  periodically  review  our  business  to  identify  properties  or  other  assets  that  we  believe  either  are  non-core,  no  longer  complement  our
business, are in markets which may not benefit us as much as other markets or could be sold at significant premiums. From time to time, we may attempt to sell
these identified properties and assets. There can be no assurance, however, that we will be able to complete dispositions on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
The failure to maintain the integrity of our computer systems and customer information could result in damage to our reputation and/or subject us to
fines, payment of damages, lawsuits and restrictions on our use of data. We collect and process information relating to our employees, guests, and others for
various business purposes, including marketing and promotional purposes. The collection and use of personal data are governed by privacy laws and regulations
enacted by the various states, the United States and other jurisdictions around the world. Privacy laws and regulations continue to evolve and on occasion may be
inconsistent (or conflict) between jurisdictions. Various federal, state and foreign legislative or regulatory bodies may enact or adopt new or additional laws and
regulations concerning privacy, data retention, data transfer, and data protection. For example, the European Union has adopted a data protection regulation known
as the General Data Protection Regulation, which became fully enforceable in May 2018, that includes operational and compliance requirements with significant
penalties for non-compliance. California has enacted a comprehensive privacy law, known as the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018, which went into effect
on January 1, 2020 and provides some of the strongest privacy requirements in the United States. In addition, new privacy requirements in California, Colorado,
and Virginia generally go into effect on January 1, 2023.
Compliance with applicable privacy laws and regulations may increase our operating costs and/or adversely impact our ability to market our products,
properties and services to our guests. In addition, non-compliance with applicable
27

privacy laws and regulations by us (or in some circumstances non-compliance by third parties engaged by us), including accidental loss, inadvertent disclosure,
unapproved dissemination  or a breach of security on systems storing our data may result in damage  to our reputation  and/or subject us to fines, payment of
damages, lawsuits or restrictions on our use or transfer of data. We rely on proprietary and commercially available systems, software, and tools to provide security
for processing of customer and employee information, such as payment card and other confidential or proprietary information. Our data security measures are
reviewed  and  evaluated  regularly;  however,  they  might  not  protect  us  against  increasingly  sophisticated  and  aggressive  threats  including,  but  not  limited  to,
computer malware, viruses, hacking and phishing attacks by third parties. In addition, while we maintain cyber risk insurance to assist in the cost of recovery from
a significant cyber event, such coverage may not be sufficient.
We also rely extensively on computer systems to process transactions, maintain information and manage our businesses. Disruptions in the availability of
our computer systems, through cyber-attacks or otherwise, could impact our ability to service our customers and adversely affect our sales and the results of
operations. For instance, there has been an increase in criminal cyber security attacks against companies where customer and company information has been
compromised and company data has been destroyed. Our information systems and data, including those we maintain with our third-party service providers, have
been subject to cyber security breaches in the past and may be subject to cyber security breaches in the future. In addition, our third-party information system
service  providers  face  risks  relating  to  cyber  security  similar  to  ours,  and  we  do  not  directly  control  any  of  such  parties’  information  security  operations.  A
significant theft, loss or fraudulent use of customer or company data maintained by us or by a third-party service provider could have an adverse effect on our
reputation, cause a material disruption to our operations, and result in remediation expenses, regulatory penalties and litigation by customers and other parties
whose information was subject to such attacks, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and cash flows.
We  are  subject  to  risks  related  to  corporate  social  responsibility  and  reputation. Many  factors  influence  our  reputation  and  the  value  of  our  brands
including the perception  held by our  customers,  business partners,  other key stakeholders  and the communities  in which  we do business. Our business faces
increasing scrutiny related to environmental, social and governance factors and risk of damage to our reputation and the value of our brands if we fail to act
responsibly in several areas including diversity and inclusion, community engagement and philanthropy, environmental sustainability, plastic pollution, climate
change, responsible gaming, supply chain management, workplace conduct, human rights, and many others, some of which may be unforeseen. Any harm to our
reputation could further impact employee engagement and retention and the willingness of customers and our partners to do business with us, which could have a
material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and cash flows.
We are subject to risks and costs related to climate change. Extreme weather conditions, potentially exacerbated by climate change, may cause property
damage or interrupt business, which could harm our business and results of operations. Certain of our properties are located in areas that may be subject to extreme
weather conditions, including, but not limited to, hurricanes, floods, tornados, wildfires, and winter storms in the United States and severe typhoons in Macau.
Such extreme weather conditions may interrupt our operations or the operations of critical suppliers, damage our properties, and reduce the number of customers
who visit our facilities in such areas. In addition, our operations or the operations of critical suppliers could be adversely impacted by a drought or other cause of
water stress or shortage. A severe drought of extensive duration experienced in Las Vegas or in the other regions in which we operate or source critical supplies
could adversely affect our business. Although we maintain both property and business interruption insurance coverage for certain extreme weather conditions, such
coverage is subject to deductibles and limits on maximum benefits, including limitation on the coverage period for business interruption, and we cannot assure you
that we will be able to fully insure such losses or fully collect, if at all, on claims resulting from such extreme weather conditions.
Furthermore, such extreme weather conditions may result in reduced availability or increased price volatility of certain critical supplies, may interrupt or
impede  access  to  our  affected  properties,  and  may  cause  visits  to  our  affected  properties  to  decrease  for  an  indefinite  period.  Additionally,  many  states  and
municipalities  have  begun  to  adopt  laws  and  policies  on  climate  change  and  emission  reduction  targets.  Changes  in  federal,  state,  and  local  legislation  and
regulation based on concerns about climate change could result in increased regulatory costs, which may include capital expenditures on our existing properties to
ensure compliance with any new or updated regulations,  which may potentially  adversely affect our operations. There can be no assurance that the potential
impacts of climate change and severe weather will not have a material adverse effect on our properties, operations or business.
28

Risks Related to Legal and Regulatory Matters and Changes in Public Policy
Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and the cost of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations may adversely affect our
business and results of operations. Our ownership and operation of gaming facilities is subject to extensive regulation by the countries, states and provinces in
which we operate. These laws, regulations and ordinances vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but generally concern the responsibility, financial stability and
character of the owners and managers of gaming operations as well as persons financially interested or involved in gaming operations. As such, our gaming
regulators can require us to disassociate ourselves from suppliers or business partners found unsuitable by the regulators or, alternatively, cease operations in that
jurisdiction. In addition, unsuitable activity on our part or on the part of our domestic or foreign unconsolidated affiliates or subsidiaries in any jurisdiction could
have a negative effect on our ability to continue operating in other jurisdictions. The regulatory environment in any particular jurisdiction may change in the future
and any such change could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. Furthermore, our iGaming and online sports betting initiatives may be
particularly subject to risks related to potential changes in the regulatory environment as a result of the continued development of regulations in this industry. For
example, in 2018, the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”) reversed its previously-issued opinion published in 2011, which stated that interstate transmissions of
wire communications that do not relate to a “sporting event or contest” fall outside the purview of the Wire Act of 1961 (“Wire Act”). The DOJ’s updated opinion
concluded instead that the Wire Act was not uniformly limited to gaming relating to sporting events or contests and that certain of its provisions apply to non-
sports-related wagering activity. In June 2019, a federal district court in New Hampshire ruled that the DOJ’s new interpretation of the Wire Act was erroneous and
vacated DOJ’s new opinion. The DOJ appealed the decision of the district court to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. In January 2021, the Court of
Appeals essentially affirmed the decision of the district court, and the DOJ did not file a further appeal. For a summary of gaming and other regulations that affect
our business, see “Regulation and Licensing” and Exhibit 99.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Further,  our  directors,  officers,  key  employees  and  investors  in  our  properties  must  meet  approval  standards  of  certain  state  and  foreign  regulatory
authorities. If state regulatory authorities were to find such a person or investor unsuitable, we would be required to sever our relationship with that person or the
investor may be required to dispose of his, her or its interest in the property. State regulatory agencies may conduct investigations into the conduct or associations
of our directors, officers, key employees or investors to ensure compliance with applicable standards. Certain public and private issuances of securities, borrowings
under credit agreements, guarantees of indebtedness and other transactions also require the approval of certain regulatory authorities.
Macau laws and regulations concerning gaming and gaming concessions are complex, and a court or administrative or regulatory body may in the future
render an interpretation of these laws and regulations, or issue new or modified regulations, that differ from MGM China’s interpretation, which could have a
material  adverse  effect  on  its  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations.  In  addition,  MGM  Grand  Paradise's  activities  in  Macau  are  subject  to
administrative  review  and  approval  by  various  government  agencies.  We  cannot  assure  you  that  MGM  Grand  Paradise  will  be  able  to  obtain  all  necessary
approvals, and any such failure to do so may materially affect its long-term business strategy and operations. Macau laws permit redress to the courts with respect
to administrative actions; however, to date such redress is largely untested in relation to gaming issues.
In addition to gaming regulations, we are also subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations affecting businesses in general. These
laws  and  regulations  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  restrictions  and  conditions  concerning  alcoholic  beverages,  environmental  matters,  smoking,  employees,
currency  transactions,  taxation,  zoning  and  building  codes,  and  marketing  and  advertising.  For  instance,  we  are  subject  to  certain  federal,  state  and  local
environmental laws, regulations and ordinances, including the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, the Energy Policy Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, Renewable Portfolio Standards, the Oil Pollution
Act of 1990, and many others. Under various federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations, an owner or operator of real property may be held liable
for the costs of removal or remediation of certain hazardous or toxic substances or wastes located on its property, regardless of whether or not the present owner or
operator knows of, or is responsible for, the presence of such substances or wastes. Such laws and regulations could change or could be interpreted differently in
the future, or new laws and regulations could be enacted. In addition, effective January 1, 2019, smoking in casinos in Macau, including MGM Macau and MGM
Cotai, is only permitted inside specially ventilated smoking rooms, rather than outside smoking areas or VIP areas. The likelihood or outcome of similar legislation
in  other  jurisdictions  and  referendums  in  the  future  cannot  be  predicted,  though  any  smoking  ban  would  be  expected  to  negatively  impact  our  financial
performance.
We also deal with significant amounts of cash in our operations and are subject to recordkeeping and reporting obligations as required by various anti-
money laundering laws and regulations. For instance, we are subject to regulation under the Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act of 1970, commonly
known as the “Bank Secrecy Act”, which, among other things, requires us to report to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) any currency transactions in excess of
$10,000 that occur within a 24-hour gaming day, including identification of the individual(s) involved in the currency
29

transaction. We are also required to report certain suspicious activity where we know, suspect or have reason to suspect transactions, among other things, involve
funds from illegal activity or are intended to evade federal regulations or avoid reporting requirements or have no business or lawful purpose. In addition, under the
Bank Secrecy Act we are subject to various other rules and regulations involving reporting, recordkeeping and retention. Our compliance with the Bank Secrecy
Act is subject to periodic examinations by the IRS. Any such laws and regulations could change or could be interpreted differently in the future, or new laws and
regulations could be enacted. Any violations of the anti-money laundering laws, including the Bank Secrecy Act, or regulations by any of our properties could have
an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in governments, public institutions and other organizations imposing or recommending restrictions on
various activities or other actions to combat its spread. See “—The global COVID-19 pandemic has continued to materially impact our business, financial results
and liquidity, and such impact could worsen and last for an unknown period of time.” In addition to the pandemic-related restrictions that resulted in the temporary
closures  of  our  properties  during  2020,  governmental  or  other  COVID-19-related  restrictions  have  been  extended  or  reimposed  from  time-to-time  and  new
restrictions may be imposed in the future.
Any  violation  of  the  Foreign  Corrupt  Practices  Act  or  any  other  similar  anti-corruption  laws  could  have  a  negative  impact  on  us. Historically,  a
significant portion of our revenue was derived from operations outside the United States, which exposes us to complex foreign and U.S. regulations inherent in
doing cross-border business and in each of the countries in which we transact business. We are subject to compliance with the United States Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act (“FCPA”) and other similar anti-corruption laws, which generally prohibit companies and their intermediaries from making improper payments to
foreign government officials for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business. While our employees and agents are required to comply with these laws, we cannot
be sure that our internal policies and procedures will always protect us from violations of these laws, despite our commitment to legal compliance and corporate
ethics. Violations of these laws by us or our non-controlled ventures may result in severe criminal and civil sanctions as well as other penalties against us, and the
SEC and U.S. Department of Justice continue to vigorously pursue enforcement of the FCPA. The occurrence or allegation of these types of risks may adversely
affect our business, performance, prospects, value, financial condition, and results of operations.
If the jurisdictions in which we operate increase gaming taxes and fees, as well as other taxes and fees, our results could be adversely affected. State and
local authorities raise a significant amount of revenue through taxes and fees, including taxes and fees on gaming activities. From time to time, legislators and
government officials have proposed changes in tax laws, or in the administration of such laws, affecting the gaming industry. Periods of economic downturn or
uncertainty and budget deficits may intensify such efforts to raise revenues through increases in gaming or other taxes, the imposition of new taxes or changes to
tax laws that result in increased taxes to us. If the jurisdictions in which we operate were to increase taxes, impose new taxes or change existing tax laws, our
financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
The future recognition of our foreign tax credit deferred tax asset is uncertain, and the amount of valuation allowance we may apply against such
deferred tax asset may change materially in future periods. We currently have significant deferred tax assets resulting from foreign tax credit carryforwards that
are available to reduce taxes attributable to potential taxable foreign-sourced income in future periods, including the recapture of overall domestic losses to the
extent of 50 percent of U.S. taxable income per year. We evaluate our foreign tax credit deferred tax asset for recoverability and record a valuation allowance to the
extent that we determine it is not more likely than not such asset will be recovered. This evaluation is based on all available evidence, including assumptions
concerning future U.S. operating profits and foreign source income. As a result, significant judgment is required in assessing the possible need for a valuation
allowance and changes to our assumptions could result in a material change in the valuation allowance with a corresponding impact on the provision for income
taxes in the period including such change.
We face risks related to pending claims that have been, or future claims that may be, brought against us. Claims have been brought against us and our
subsidiaries in various legal proceedings, and additional legal and tax claims arise from time to time. We may not be successful in the defense or prosecution of our
current  or  future  legal  proceedings,  which  could  result  in  settlements  or  damages  that  could  significantly  impact  our  business,  financial  condition,  results  of
operations and reputation. Please see the further discussion in “Legal Proceedings” and Note 12 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Risks Related to Our Macau Operations
We have agreed not to have any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, other than through MGM
China. As a result of the extension of the Macau gaming subconcession, we entered into a First Renewed Deed of Non-Compete Undertakings with MGM China
and Ms. Ho, Pansy Catilina Chiu King (“Ms.
30

Ho”), pursuant to which we are restricted from having any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in the People’s Republic of China, Macau, Hong Kong and
Taiwan, other than through MGM China. While gaming is currently prohibited in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, if it is legalized in the future our ability to
compete in these locations could be limited until the earliest of (i) the date MGM China’s ordinary shares cease to be listed on The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong
Limited or (ii) the last day of MGM Grand Paradise's subconcession for operation of casino games (or any extension thereof); or (iii) the date when our ownership
of MGM China shares is less than 20% of the then-issued share capital of MGM China.
The  Macau  government  can  terminate  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  subconcession  under  certain  circumstances  without  compensating  MGM  Grand
Paradise, exercise its redemption right with respect to the subconcession, or refuse to grant MGM Grand Paradise an extension of the subconcession in 2022,
or MGM Grand Paradise may be unsuccessful in obtaining a gaming concession when a new public tender is held by the Macau government, any of which
would  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our  business, financial  condition , results  of  operations  and  cash  flows . The  Macau  government  has  the  right  to
unilaterally  terminate  the  subconcession  in  the  event  of  fundamental  non-compliance  by  MGM  Grand  Paradise  with  applicable  Macau  laws  or  MGM  Grand
Paradise’s basic obligations under the subconcession contract. MGM Grand Paradise has the opportunity to remedy any such non-compliance with its fundamental
obligations under the subconcession contract within a period to be stipulated by the Macau government. Upon such termination, all of MGM Grand Paradise’s
casino area premises and gaming-related equipment would be transferred automatically to the Macau government without compensation to MGM Grand Paradise,
and we would cease to generate any revenues from these operations. We cannot assure you that MGM Grand Paradise will perform all of its obligations under the
subconcession contract in a way that satisfies the requirements of the Macau government.
Furthermore, under the subconcession contract, MGM Grand Paradise is obligated to comply with any laws and regulations that the Macau government
might promulgate in the future. We cannot assure you that MGM Grand Paradise will be able to comply with these laws and regulations or that these laws and
regulations would not adversely affect our ability to construct or operate our Macau businesses. If any disagreement arises between MGM Grand Paradise and the
Macau government regarding the interpretation of, or MGM Grand Paradise’s compliance with, a provision of the subconcession contract, MGM Grand Paradise
will be relying on a consultation and negotiation process with the Macau government. During any consultation or negotiation, MGM Grand Paradise will be
obligated to comply with the terms of the subconcession contract as interpreted by the Macau government. Currently, there is no precedent concerning how the
Macau government will treat the termination of a concession or subconcession upon the occurrence of any of the circumstances mentioned above. The loss of the
subconcession would require us to cease conducting gaming operations in Macau, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows.
In addition, the subconcession contract expires on June 26, 2022. Pursuant to the current Macau gaming law, upon reaching the maximum duration of 20
years, the term of the concessions may be extended one or more times by order of the Chief Executive, which period may not exceed, in total, 5 years. On January
14, 2022, the Macau Government disclosed the content of a bill to amend Macau gaming law, which followed a 45-day public consultation process regarding draft
amendment proposals that were issued in September 2021. Under the bill, the existing subconcessions will be discontinued and a maximum of six concessions will
be  awarded  for  a  term  to  be  specified  in  the  concession  contract  that  may  not  exceed  10  years  and  which  may  be  extended  by  three  years,  under  certain
circumstances. The bill is subject to debate and approval by the Macau Legislative Assembly. The approval of the new gaming law bill will precede the public
tender for the awarding of new gaming concessions and to date the Macau Government has provided no indication as to whether the public tender will take place
before expiry of the existing gaming concessions and subconcessions, which is on June 26, 2022, but acknowledged that it could consider the extension of the
existing concessions and subconcessions beyond their current term if the public tender is held at a later date. Unless MGM Grand Paradise's gaming subconcession
is extended, or legislation with regard to reversion of casino premises is amended, the casino area premises and gaming-related equipment subject to reversion will
automatically  be  transferred  to  the  Macau  Government  upon  expiration,  and  MGM  Grand  Paradise  will  cease  to  generate  any  revenues  from  such  gaming
operations. In addition, certain events relating to the loss, termination, rescission, revocation or modification of MGM Grand Paradise’s gaming subconcession in
Macau, where such events have a material adverse effect on the financial condition, business, properties, or results of operations of MGM China, taken as a whole,
may result in a special put option triggering event under MGM China’s senior notes and an event of default under MGM China’s revolving credit facilities.
Beginning on April 20, 2017, the Macau government may redeem the subconcession contract by providing us at least 1 year prior notice. In the event the Macau
government exercises this redemption right, MGM Grand Paradise is entitled to fair compensation or indemnity. The amount of such compensation or indemnity
will  be  determined  based  on  the  amount  of  gaming  and  non-gaming  revenue  generated  by  MGM  Grand  Paradise,  excluding  the  convention  and  exhibition
facilities, during the taxable year prior to the redemption, before deducting interest, depreciation and amortization, multiplied by the number of remaining years
before expiration of the subconcession. We cannot assure you that MGM Grand Paradise will be able to obtain an extension of the subconcession contract or be
awarded a new gaming concession on terms favorable to MGM Grand Paradise or at all. In
31

addition, there is uncertainty on the terms associated with any extension, which could include additional fees or other financial commitments that may have an
adverse impact on the financial position of MGM Grand Paradise. We also cannot assure you that if the subconcession is redeemed, the compensation paid to
MGM Grand Paradise will be adequate to compensate for the loss of future revenues.
We are subject to risks associated with doing business outside of the United States. Our operations outside of the United States are subject to risks that are
inherent in conducting business under non-United States laws, regulations and customs. In particular, the risks associated with the operation of MGM China or any
future operations in which we may engage in any other foreign territories, include:
•
changes in laws and policies that govern operations of companies in Macau or other foreign jurisdictions;
•
changes in non-United States government programs;
•
possible failure by our employees or agents to comply with anti-bribery laws such as the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and similar anti-
bribery laws in other jurisdictions;
•
general economic conditions and policies in China, including restrictions on travel and currency movements;
•
difficulty in establishing, staffing and managing non-United States operations;
•
different labor regulations;
•
changes in environmental, health and safety laws;
•
outbreaks of diseases or epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
potentially negative consequences from changes in or interpretations of tax laws;
•
political instability and actual or anticipated military and political conflicts;
•
economic instability and inflation, recession or interest rate fluctuations; and
•
uncertainties regarding judicial systems and procedures.
These risks, individually or in the aggregate, could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We are
also exposed to a variety of market risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. If the United States dollar strengthens in relation to
the currencies of other countries, our United States dollar reported income from sources where revenue is denominated in the currencies of other such countries
will decrease.
Conflicts of interest may arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors of MGM China, the holding company for MGM Grand
Paradise which owns and operates MGM Macau and MGM Cotai. As a result of the initial public offering of shares of MGM China common stock in 2011,
MGM China has stockholders who are not affiliated with us, and we and certain of our officers and directors who also serve as officers and/or directors of MGM
China  may  have  conflicting  fiduciary  obligations  to  our  stockholders  and  to  the  minority  stockholders  of  MGM  China.  Decisions  that  could  have  different
implications for us and MGM China, including contractual arrangements that we have entered into or may in the future enter into with MGM China, may give rise
to the appearance of a potential conflict of interest or an actual conflict of interest.
ITEM 1B.    UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
32

ITEM 2.    PROPERTIES
The location and general characteristics of our properties are provided in Part I, Item 1. Business. As detailed in the aforementioned section, the majority of
our facilities are subject to leases of the underlying real estate assets, which among other things, includes the land underlying the facility and the buildings used in
the operations.
The following table lists certain of our principal land and leasehold holdings as of December 31, 2021.
 
Approximate
Name and Location
Acres
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
 
Aria
64
Bellagio
75
MGM Grand Las Vegas
102
Mandalay Bay
124
The Mirage
77
Luxor
73
Excalibur
51
New York-New York
23
Park MGM
21
Regional Operations
MGM Grand Detroit (Detroit, Michigan)
27
Beau Rivage (Biloxi, Mississippi)
40
Gold Strike Tunica (Tunica, Mississippi)
24
MGM National Harbor (Prince George's County, Maryland)
23
Borgata (Atlantic City, New Jersey)
46
MGM Springfield (Springfield, Massachusetts)
14
MGM Northfield Park (Northfield, Ohio)
113
Empire City (Yonkers, New York)
97
MGM China
MGM Macau
10
MGM Cotai
18
(1)
Subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and funds managed by Blackstone.
(2)
Subject to a lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and Bellagio BREIT Venture.
(3)
Subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and MGP BREIT Venture.
(4)
Subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership.
(5)
58 acres are subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership. We own an additional 15 acres of land located across the
Las Vegas Strip from Luxor.
(6)
Includes 3 acres of land related to The Park entertainment district development located between Park MGM and New York-New York.
(7)
24 acres are subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership.
(8)
26 acres are subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership, which leases 10 acres pursuant to a tidelands lease with a
third party.
(9)
All 23 acres are subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership, which leases all 23 acres pursuant to a ground lease
with a third party.
(10) 37 acres are subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership, which leases 11 acres pursuant to a ground lease with a
third party.
(11) 41 acres are subject to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of ours and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership. We own an additional 56 acres adjacent to the property
retained for potential future development.
(12) Subject to separate land concession agreements with the Macau government.
The land and substantially all of the assets of MGP’s properties, indicated within the table above, other than MGM National Harbor, Empire City, and
MGM Springfield, secure the obligations under the Operating Partnership’s credit agreement. These borrowings are non-recourse to us.
Other than as described above, none of our properties are subject to any major encumbrance.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(3)
(4)
(4)(5)
(4)
(4)(6)
(4)
(4)(7)
(4)(8)
(4)
(4)(9)
(4)(10)
(4)
(4)
(4)(11)
(12)
(12)
33

ITEM 3.    LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
See discussion of legal proceedings in Note 12 – Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
ITEM 4.    MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
34

PART II
ITEM 5.    MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES
Common Stock Information
Our common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the symbol “MGM.”
There were approximately 3,294 record holders of our common stock as of February 23, 2022.
Dividend Policy
The Company implemented a dividend program in February 2017 pursuant to which it has paid regular quarterly dividends. In the second quarter of 2020
the Company reduced its annual dividend to $0.01 per share in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its operations at that time. The Company has
maintained an annual dividend of $0.01 per share throughout 2021. The amount, declaration and payment of any future dividends will be subject to the discretion
of our Board of Directors who will evaluate our dividend policy from time to time based on factors it deems relevant, and the contractual limitations described
below. In addition, as a holding company with no independent operations, our ability to pay dividends will depend upon the receipt of cash from our operating
subsidiaries to generate the funds from operations necessary to pay dividends on our common stock. Furthermore, our senior credit facility contains financial
covenants and restrictive covenants that could restrict our ability to pay dividends, subject to certain exceptions. In addition, the Operating Partnership and MGM
China credit facilities each contain limitations on the ability of the applicable subsidiary under each credit agreement to pay dividends to us. There can be no
assurance that we will continue to pay dividends in the future.
Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer
The following table provides information about share repurchases made by the Company of its common stock during the quarter ended December 31, 2021:
Period
Total Number of Shares
Purchased
Average Price Paid
per Share
Total Number of Shares
Purchased as Part of a
Publicly Announced
Program
Dollar Value of
Shares that May Yet
be Purchased Under
the Program
(In thousands)
October 1, 2021 — October 31, 2021
1,800,000 $
44.51 
1,800,000 
$
1,897,460 
November 1, 2021 — November 30, 2021
3,747,997 $
43.71 
3,747,997 
$
1,733,626 
December 1, 2021 — December 31, 2021
11,598,650 $
41.67 
11,598,650 
$
1,250,266 
In February 2020, upon substantial completion of the May 2018 $2.0 billion stock repurchase program, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a $3.0
billion stock repurchase program. Under the stock repurchase program, the Company may repurchase shares from time to time in the open market or in privately
negotiated agreements. Repurchases of common stock may also be made under a Rule 10b5-1 plan, which would permit common stock to be purchased when the
Company might otherwise be precluded from doing so under insider trading laws. The timing, volume and nature of stock repurchases will be at the sole discretion
of management, dependent on market conditions, applicable securities laws, and other factors, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. All shares
repurchased  by  the  Company  during  the  quarter  ended  December  31,  2021  were  purchased  pursuant  to  the  Company’s  publicly  announced  stock  repurchase
programs and have been retired.
35

PERFORMANCE GRAPH
The graph below matches our cumulative 5-year total shareholder return on common stock with the cumulative total returns of the Dow Jones US Total
Return index, the S&P 500 index and the Dow Jones US Gambling index. The graph tracks the performance of a $100 investment in our common stock and in each
index (with the reinvestment of all dividends as required by the SEC) from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2021. The return shown on the graph is not
necessarily indicative of future performance.
The  following  performance  graph  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  "filed"  for  purposes  of  Section  18  of  the  Exchange  Act,  nor  shall  this  information  be
incorporated by reference into any future filing under the Securities Act or the Exchange Act, except to the extent that we specifically incorporate it by reference
into a filing.
12/16
12/17
12/18
12/19
12/20
12/21
MGM Resorts International
100.00 
117.48 
86.75 
121.19 
115.78 
164.94 
Dow Jones US Total Return
100.00 
121.50 
115.45 
151.41 
182.30 
230.61 
S&P 500
100.00 
121.83 
116.49 
153.17 
181.35 
233.41 
Dow Jones US Gambling
100.00 
140.14 
97.24 
143.49 
128.65 
112.16 
The stock price performance included in this graph is not necessarily indicative of future stock price performance.
36

ITEM 6.    RESERVED
ITEM 7.    MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations includes discussion as of and for the year ended December 31,
2021 compared to December 31, 2020. Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to
December 31, 2019 can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”) on February 26, 2021.
Description of our business and key performance indicators
Our primary business is the operation of casino resorts, which offer gaming, hotel, convention, dining, entertainment, retail and other resort amenities. We
operate several of the finest casino resorts in the world and we continually reinvest in our resorts to maintain our competitive advantage. Most of our revenue is
cash-based, through customers wagering with cash or paying for non-gaming services with cash or credit cards. We rely on the ability of our resorts to generate
operating cash flow to fund capital expenditures, provide excess cash flow for future development, repay debt financings, and return capital to our shareholders.
We make significant investments in our resorts through newly remodeled hotel rooms, restaurants, entertainment and nightlife offerings, as well as other new
features and amenities.
Our results of operations are affected by decisions we make related to our capital allocation, our access to capital and our cost of capital. While we continue
to be focused on improving our financial position and returning capital to shareholders, we are also dedicated to capitalizing on strategic development or initiatives.
Our results of operations do not tend to be seasonal in nature, though a variety of factors may affect the results of any interim period, including the timing of
major conventions, Far East baccarat volumes, the amount and timing of marketing and special events for our high-end gaming customers, and the level of play
during major holidays, including New Year and Lunar New Year. While our results do not depend on key individual customers, a significant portion of our
operating income is generated from high-end gaming customers, which can cause variability in our results. In addition, our success in marketing to customer
groups such as convention customers and the financial health of customer segments such as business travelers or high-end gaming customers from a specific
country or region can affect our results.
Financial Impact of COVID-19
The spread of COVID-19 and developments surrounding the global pandemic have had a significant impact on our business, financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows in 2020 and 2021 and may continue to impact our business in 2022 and thereafter. In March 2020, all of our domestic properties were
temporarily closed pursuant to state and local government restrictions imposed as a result of COVID-19. Throughout the second and third quarters of 2020, all of
our properties that were temporarily closed re-opened to the public, with temporary re-closures and re-openings occurring for certain of our properties or portions
thereof into the first quarter of 2021. Upon re-opening, the properties continued to operate without certain amenities and subject to certain occupancy limitations,
with restrictions varying by jurisdiction. Beginning in the latter part of the first quarter of 2021 and continuing into the second quarter of 2021, our domestic
jurisdictions eased and removed prior operating restrictions, including capacity and occupancy limits, as well as social distancing policies.
Although all of our properties have re-opened, in light of the unpredictable nature of the pandemic, including the emergence and spread of COVID-19
variants, the properties may be subject to new operating restrictions and/or temporary, complete, or partial shutdowns in the future. At this time, we cannot predict
whether jurisdictions, states or the federal government will adopt similar or more restrictive measures in the future than in the past, including stay-at-home orders
or the temporary closure of all or a portion of our properties as a result of the pandemic.
In  Macau,  following  a  temporary  closure  of  our  properties  on  February  5,  2020,  operations  resumed  on  February  20,  2020,  subject  to  certain  health
safeguards, such as limiting the number of seats available at each table game, slot machine spacing, reduced operating hours at a number of restaurants and bars,
temperature  checks,  and  mask  protection.  Although  the  issuance  of  tourist  visas  (including  the  individual  visit  scheme)  for  residents  of  Zhuhai,  Guangdong
Province and all other provinces in mainland China to travel to Macau resumed on August 12, 2020, August 26, 2020 and September 23, 2020, respectively,
several travel and entry restrictions in Macau, Hong Kong and mainland China remain in place (including the temporary suspension of ferry services between
Hong Kong and Macau, the negative nucleic acid test result certificate, and mandatory quarantine requirements for returning residents, for visitors from Hong
Kong, Taiwan, and
37

mainland China, and bans on entry on other visitors), which significantly impacted visitation to our Macau properties. In the third and fourth quarters of 2021, local
COVID-19 cases were identified in Macau. Upon such occurrences, a state of immediate prevention was declared and mass mandatory nucleic acid testing was
imposed in Macau, the validity period of negative test results for re-entry into mainland China was shortened and quarantine requirements were imposed, certain
events were cancelled or suspended, and in some instances, certain entertainment and leisure facilities were closed throughout Macau. Although gaming and hotel
operations have remained open during these states of immediate prevention, such measures have had a negative effect on our operations and it is uncertain whether
further closures, including the closure of our properties, or travel restrictions to Macau will be implemented if additional local COVID-19 cases are identified.
The Las Vegas Strip segment results of operations are heavily impacted by visitor volume and trends. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Las Vegas
visitor volume increased 69% compared to the prior year period according to information published by the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority. The Las
Vegas market has had the addition of new sporting events and venues, the expansion of convention centers, as well as music and entertainment events, which have
positively impacted visitation, along with the easing of COVID-19 related restrictions, as discussed above.
The MGM China segment results of operations also are heavily impacted by visitor volume and trends. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Macau
visitor arrivals increased 31% compared to the prior year period according to statistics published by the Statistics and Census Service of the Macau Government, as
the prior year period was more negatively affected by travel and entry restrictions in Macau than in the current year period.
For a discussion of the risks to our business resulting from COVID-19, please see “Item 1A. Risk Factors — Risks Related to Our Business, Industry, and
Market Conditions.”
Other Developments
As of December 31, 2021, we lease the real estate assets of The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New York, Park MGM, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike
Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit, Beau Rivage, Borgata, Empire City, MGM National Harbor, MGM Northfield Park, and MGM Springfield pursuant to a master
lease agreement with MGP. See Note 1 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding MGP and the Operating Partnership,
which we consolidate in our financial statements. All intercompany transactions, including transactions under the master lease with MGP, have been eliminated in
consolidation.
As further discussed below, we lease the real estate assets of Bellagio pursuant to a lease agreement with Bellagio BREIT Venture, the real estate assets of
Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas pursuant to a lease agreement with MGP BREIT Venture, and the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) pursuant
to a lease agreement with a fund managed by Blackstone, as further discussed below.
In April 2019, we acquired the membership interests of Northfield Park Associates, LLC (“Northfield”), an Ohio limited liability company that owned the
real estate assets and operations of the Hard Rock Rocksino Northfield Park, from MGP and MGP retained the real estate assets. We then rebranded the property to
MGM Northfield Park, and added it to the master lease between us and MGP. See Note 18 in the accompanying financial statements for information regarding this
acquisition.
Also, in January 2019, we acquired the real property and operations associated with Empire City in Yonkers, New York for consideration of approximately
$865 million. Subsequently, MGP acquired the developed real property associated with Empire City from us and Empire City was added to the master lease
between us and MGP. In addition, pursuant to the master lease amendment, we agreed to provide MGP a right of first offer with respect to certain undeveloped
land adjacent to the property to the extent that we develop additional gaming facilities and choose to sell or transfer such property in the future. See Note 4 and
Note 18 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding this acquisition.
In March 2019, we entered into an amendment to the master lease between us and MGP with respect to improvements made by us related to the rebranding
of the Park MGM and NoMad Las Vegas. See Note 18 in the accompanying financial statements for information regarding this transaction with MGP, which is
eliminated in consolidation.
In November 2019, we completed the Bellagio transaction, pursuant to which Bellagio BREIT Venture was formed, which acquired the Bellagio real estate
assets from us and entered into a lease agreement to lease the real estate assets back to us. The Bellagio lease has an initial term of 30 years with two 10-year
renewal periods, exercisable at our option. The initial term of the lease provides for an initial annual rent of $245 million with a fixed 2% escalator for the first 10
years
38

and, thereafter, an escalator equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase during the prior year, subject to a cap of 3% during the 11th through 20th years and 4%
thereafter. In addition, the lease obligates us to spend a specified percentage of net revenues at the property on capital expenditures and that we comply with certain
financial covenants, which, if not met, would require us to maintain cash security or provide one or more letters of credit in favor of the landlord in an amount
equal to rent for the succeeding 2-year period. In exchange for the contribution of the real estate assets, we received total consideration of $4.25 billion, which
consisted  of  a  5%  equity  interest  in  the  venture  and  cash  of  approximately  $4.2  billion.  We  also  provide  a  shortfall  guarantee  of  the  principal  amount  of
indebtedness of Bellagio BREIT Venture (and any interest accrued and unpaid thereon). As a result of the sale, we recorded a gain of approximately $2.7 billion.
See Note 1, Note 11, and Note 12 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding this transaction, lease agreement, and shortfall
guarantee, respectively.
In December 2019, we sold Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land for $825 million, which consisted of $663 million paid in cash and a secured note
due 2024 with a face value of $163 million and fair value of $134 million. In connection with our review of the carrying value of assets to be sold due to the offer
for sale received during the third quarter of 2019, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $219 million. Upon completion of the sale in the fourth quarter, we
recorded a loss of $2 million. See Note 1 and Note 16 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding this transaction.
In February 2020, we completed the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction pursuant to which the real estate assets of MGM Grand Las Vegas and Mandalay
Bay (including Mandalay Place) were contributed to MGP BREIT Venture, owned 50.1% by the Operating Partnership and 49.9% by a subsidiary of BREIT. In
exchange for the contribution of the real estate assets, MGM and MGP received total consideration of $4.6 billion, which was comprised of $2.5 billion of cash,
$1.3 billion of the Operating Partnership’s secured indebtedness assumed by MGP BREIT Venture, and the Operating Partnership’s 50.1% equity interest in MGP
BREIT Venture. In addition, the Operating Partnership issued approximately 3 million Operating Partnership units to us representing 5% of the equity value of
MGP BREIT Venture. We also provide a shortfall guarantee of the principal amount of indebtedness of MGP BREIT Venture (and any interest accrued and unpaid
thereon). On the closing date, BREIT also purchased approximately 5 million MGP Class A shares for $150 million. See Note 1, Note 11, and Note 12 in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding this transaction, lease agreement, and shortfall guarantee, respectively.
In connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, MGP BREIT Venture entered into a lease with us for the real estate assets of Mandalay Bay and
MGM Grand Las Vegas. The lease has an initial term of 30 years with two 10-year renewal periods, exercisable at our option. The initial term of the lease provides
for an initial annual rent of $292 million with a fixed 2% escalator for the first 15 years and, thereafter, an escalator equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase
during the prior year, subject  to a cap of 3%. In addition,  the lease  obligates  us to spend a specified percentage  of net revenues  at the properties  on capital
expenditures and that we comply with certain financial covenants, which, if not met, would require us to maintain cash security or provide one or more letters of
credit  in  favor  of  the  landlord  in  an  amount  equal  to  the  rent  for  the  succeeding  1-year  period.  See  Note  11  in  the  accompanying  financial  statements  for
information regarding this lease agreement.
In connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, the master lease with MGP was modified to remove the Mandalay Bay property and the annual
cash rent under the MGP master lease was reduced by $133 million, as further discussed in Note 18.
Also, in January 2020, we, the Operating Partnership, and MGP entered into an agreement for the Operating Partnership to waive its right following the
closing of the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction to issue MGP Class A shares, in lieu of cash, to us in connection with us exercising our right to require the
Operating Partnership to redeem the Operating Partnership units we hold, at a price per unit equal to a 3% discount to the ten day average closing price prior to the
date of the notice of redemption. The waiver was effective upon closing of the transaction on February 14, 2020 and was scheduled to terminate on the earlier of
February 14, 2022 or upon our receipt of cash proceeds of $1.4 billion as consideration for the redemption of our Operating Partnership units. On May 18, 2020 the
Operating Partnership redeemed approximately 30 million Operating Partnership units that we held for $700 million, or $23.10 per unit, and on December 2, 2020,
the Operating Partnership redeemed approximately 24 million Operating Partnership units that we held for the remaining $700 million, or $29.78 per unit. As a
result, the waiver terminated in accordance with its terms.
In  March  2021,  we delivered  a  notice  of  redemption  to MGP covering  approximately  37  million  Operating  Partnership  units  that  we  held  which  was
satisfied with aggregate cash proceeds of approximately $1.2 billion, using cash on hand together with the proceeds from MGP's issuance of Class A shares. See
Note 13 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding this transaction, which eliminates in consolidation.
39

In August 2021, we entered into an agreement with VICI and MGP whereby VICI will acquire MGP. Pursuant to the agreement, MGP Class A shareholders
will receive 1.366 shares of newly issued VICI stock in exchange for each MGP Class A share outstanding and we will receive 1.366 units of the new VICI OP in
exchange for each Operating Partnership unit we hold. The fixed exchange ratio represents an agreed upon price of $43 per share of MGP Class A share to the
five-day volume weighted average price of VICI stock as of the close of business on July 30, 2021. In connection with the exchange, VICI OP will redeem the
majority of our VICI OP units for cash consideration of $4.4 billion, with us retaining an approximate $370 million ownership interest in the VICI OP (based upon
the close price of VICI stock as of August 3, 2021). MGP’s Class B share that we hold will be cancelled. As part of the transaction, we will enter into an amended
and restated master lease with VICI. The new master lease will have an initial term of 25 years, with three 10-year renewals, and initial annual rent of $860 million,
escalating annually at a rate of 2% per annum for the first 10 years and thereafter equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase during the prior year subject to a
cap of 3%. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2022, subject to customary closing conditions, regulatory approvals, and approval by VICI
stockholders (which was obtained on October 29, 2021). See “Item 1A. Risk Factors — Risks Related to Our Announced Transactions — The VICI Transaction,
The Cosmopolitan transaction, and The Mirage transaction each remain subject to the satisfaction of certain closing conditions, including the receipt of certain
regulatory approvals, and any anticipated benefits from such transactions may take longer to realize than expected or may not be realized at all.”
In  September  2021,  we  entered  into  an  agreement  to  acquire  the  operations  of  The  Cosmopolitan  for  cash  consideration  of  $1.625  billion,  subject  to
customary working capital adjustments. Additionally, we will enter into a lease agreement for the real estate assets of The Cosmopolitan. The Cosmopolitan lease
will have an initial term of 30 years with three subsequent 10-year renewal periods, exercisable at our option. The initial term of the lease provides for an initial
annual cash rent of $200 million with a fixed 2% escalator for the first 15 years, and thereafter, an escalator equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase during
the prior year, subject to a cap of 3%. Additionally, the lease will require us to spend a specified percentage of net revenues over a rolling 5-year period at the
property on capital expenditures and for us to comply with certain financial covenants, which, if not met, would require us to maintain cash security or one or more
letters of credit in favor of the landlord in an amount equal to rent for the succeeding 1-year period. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2022,
subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions.
In September 2021, we completed the acquisition of the 50% ownership interest in CityCenter held by Infinity World for cash consideration of $2.125
billion. Upon the closing of the transaction, we own 100% of CityCenter and accordingly no longer account for our interest under the equity method of accounting,
and we now consolidate CityCenter in our financial statements. See Note 4 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding this
transaction.
In September 2021, we sold the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) for cash consideration of $3.89 billion and entered into a lease pursuant to which
we lease back the real property. The lease has an initial term of 30 years with three 10-year renewal periods, exercisable at our option. The initial term of the lease
provides for an initial annual rent of $215 million with a fixed 2% escalator for the first 15 years and, thereafter, an escalator equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI
increase during the prior year, subject to a cap of 3%. In addition, the lease obligates us to spend a specified percentage of net revenues at the properties on capital
expenditures and that we comply with certain financial covenants, which, if not met, would require us to maintain cash security or provide a letter of credit in favor
of the landlord in an amount equal to the rent for the succeeding 1-year period. See Note 11 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information
regarding this lease.
In October 2021, MGP acquired the real estate assets of MGM Springfield from us and MGM Springfield was added to the MGP master lease between us
and MGP through which we lease back the real property. Transactions with MGP, including transactions under the MGP master lease, have been eliminated in our
consolidation of MGP. Refer to Note 18 for further discussion of the master lease with MGP.
In December 2021, we entered into an agreement to sell the operations of The Mirage to an affiliate of Hard Rock for cash consideration of $1.075 billion,
subject to certain purchase price adjustments. Pursuant to the agreement, Hard Rock is obligated to use its reasonable best efforts to obtain the requisite antitrust
and gaming regulatory approvals. The agreement may be terminated by either party if the closing has not occurred on or before December 13, 2022, which date
may be extended by either party to March 13, 2023 under certain circumstances. The agreement contemplates a reverse termination fee of $322.5 million that is
payable by Hard Rock to us in the event that the parties are unable to obtain antitrust or gaming regulatory approval. Upon closing, the master lease between us and
VICI (or MGP in the event that the VICI Transaction is terminated) will be amended and restated to reflect a $90 million reduction in annual cash rent. The
transaction is expected to close during the second half of 2022, subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to, the consummation or termination
of the VICI Transaction and receipt of regulatory approvals.
40

Key Performance Indicators
Key performance indicators related to gaming and hotel revenue are:
•
Gaming revenue indicators: table games drop and slots handle (volume indicators); “win” or “hold” percentage, which is not fully controllable by us. Our
normal table games hold percentage at our Las Vegas Strip Resorts is in the range of 25.0% to 35.0% of table games drop for Baccarat and 19.0% to
23.0% for non-Baccarat; however, reduced gaming volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic could cause volatility in our hold percentages; and
•
Hotel  revenue  indicators:  hotel  occupancy  (a  volume  indicator);  average  daily  rate  (“ADR,”  a  price  indicator);  and  revenue  per  available  room
(“REVPAR,” a summary measure of hotel results, combining ADR and occupancy rate). Our calculation of ADR, which is the average price of occupied
rooms per day, includes the impact of complimentary rooms. Complimentary room rates are determined based on standalone selling price. Because the
mix of rooms provided on a complimentary basis, particularly to casino customers, includes a disproportionate suite component, the composite ADR
including complimentary rooms is slightly higher than the ADR for cash rooms, reflecting the higher retail value of suites. Rooms that were out of service
during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as a result of closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic were excluded from the available room count
when calculating hotel occupancy and REVPAR.
Additional key performance indicators at MGM China are:
•
Gaming  revenue  indicators:  MGM  China  utilizes  “turnover,”  which  is  the  sum  of  nonnegotiable  chip  wagers  won  by  MGM  China  calculated  as
nonnegotiable  chips  purchased  plus  nonnegotiable  chips  exchanged  less  nonnegotiable  chips  returned.  Turnover  provides  a  basis  for  measuring  VIP
casino win percentage. Win for VIP gaming operations at MGM China is typically in the range of 2.6% to 3.3% of turnover; however, reduced gaming
volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic could cause volatility in MGM China’s hold percentages.
Results of Operations
The following discussion is based on our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Summary Operating Results
The following table summarizes our operating results:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Net revenues
$
9,680,140 
$
5,162,082 
$
12,899,672 
Operating income (loss)
2,278,699 
(642,434)
3,940,215
Net income (loss)
1,208,389 
(1,319,907)
2,214,380
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
1,254,370 
(1,032,724)
2,049,146
41

Our domestic properties were temporarily closed due to COVID-19 on the dates shown below:
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
Closure Date
Initial Re-opening Date
Bellagio
March 17, 2020
June 4, 2020
MGM Grand Las Vegas
March 17, 2020
June 4, 2020
New York-New York
March 17, 2020
June 4, 2020
Excalibur
March 17, 2020
June 11, 2020
Luxor
March 17, 2020
June 25, 2020
Mandalay Bay
March 17, 2020
July 1, 2020
The Mirage
March 17, 2020
August 27, 2020
Park MGM
March 17, 2020
September 30, 2020
Regional Operations
 
 
Gold Strike Tunica
March 17, 2020
May 25, 2020
Beau Rivage
March 17, 2020
June 1, 2020
MGM Northfield Park
March 14, 2020
June 20, 2020
MGM National Harbor
March 15, 2020
June 29, 2020
MGM Springfield
March 15, 2020
July 13, 2020
Borgata
March 16, 2020
July 26, 2020
MGM Grand Detroit
March 16, 2020
August 7, 2020
Empire City
March 14, 2020
September 21, 2020
(1)
Aria was excluded from the table above, as it was not consolidated during 2020.
(2)
Park MGM and Mandalay Bay’s hotel tower operations were closed midweek starting November 9, 2020 and November 30, 2020, respectively, and full week hotel tower operations
resumed on March 3, 2021.
(3)
The Mirage’s hotel tower operations were closed midweek beginning November 30, 2020. The entire property was closed midweek starting January 4, 2021, and re-opened on March
3, 2021.
(4)
MGM Springfield’s hotel was re-closed beginning November 2, 2020, and partial hotel operations resumed with midweek closures on March 5, 2021. Full hotel operations resumed
on December 13, 2021.
(5)
MGM Grand Detroit re-closed on November 17, 2020 and re-opened on December 23, 2020, with the hotel tower operations resuming February 9, 2021.
Consolidated net revenues were $9.7 billion in 2021 compared to $5.2 billion in 2020, an increase of 88%. The current year benefited from the inclusion of
the net revenues of Aria subsequent to consolidation in September 2021 and the removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions at our properties, as well
as an increase in travel, while the prior year was negatively affected by temporary property closures at certain of our Las Vegas Strip Resorts and Regional
Operations for a portion of the year due to the pandemic. At MGM China, the prior year was negatively affected by both property closures in the first quarter and
was also more significantly impacted by travel and entry restrictions in Macau than in the current year. These factors resulted in a 111% increase in net revenues at
our Las Vegas Strip Resorts, a 72% increase in net revenues at our Regional Operations, and an 84% increase in net revenues at MGM China.
Consolidated operating income was $2.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a loss of $642 million in 2020, due primarily to the
temporary property closures in the prior year as well as the inclusion of the operating income of Aria subsequent to consolidation in September 2021, as discussed
above. The current year included a gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net of $1.6 billion and the prior year included a $1.5 billion gain on REIT transactions, net
and $26 million in restructuring costs. In addition, corporate expense decreased $37 million compared to the prior year. Corporate expense in the current year
included $34 million in transaction costs, while the prior year included $44 million of CEO transition expense and $49 million of October 1 litigation settlement
expense. Included in the CEO transition expense is $20 million of stock compensation expense, of which approximately $13 million related to the modification and
accelerated vesting of outstanding stock compensation awards. Property transactions, net in the current year included a gain of $29 million related to a reduction in
the estimate of contingent consideration related to the Empire City acquisition, a gain of $76 million relating to the sale of art, and an other-than-temporary
impairment charge of $22 million related to an investment in an unconsolidated affiliate. Property transactions, net in the prior year included a $64 million other-
than-temporary non-cash impairment charge on an equity method investment and $17 million related to a loss on production show costs. Depreciation expense
decreased $60 million compared to the prior year primarily as a result of certain assets
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2)
(4)
(5)
42

becoming fully depreciated in the current year at MGM China, primarily at MGM Cotai. General and administrative expense increased $385 million compared to
the prior year due primarily to the prior year reflecting the temporary property closures, the inclusion of rent expense for the Aria lease, which commenced in
September 2021, and also due to a full period of rent expense for the MGM Grand Las Vegas and Mandalay Bay lease in the current year, partially offset by
realized benefits from our cost savings initiatives at our domestic properties.
Net Revenues by Segment
The following table presents a detail by segment of net revenues:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
 
 
 
Casino
$
1,549,419 
$
728,254 
$
1,296,170 
Rooms
1,402,712 
662,813 
1,863,521 
Food and beverage
1,015,366 
471,529 
1,517,745 
Entertainment, retail and other
769,688 
383,189 
1,153,615 
 
4,737,185 
2,245,785 
5,831,051 
Regional Operations
 
 
 
Casino
2,721,515 
1,569,193 
2,537,780 
Rooms
220,828 
130,945 
316,753 
Food and beverage
307,750 
184,153 
494,243 
Entertainment, retail and other
142,270 
82,880 
201,008 
 
3,392,363 
1,967,171 
3,549,784 
MGM China
 
 
 
Casino
1,057,962 
565,671 
2,609,806 
Rooms
66,498 
36,624 
142,306 
Food and beverage
68,489 
40,284 
127,152 
Entertainment, retail and other
17,812 
14,124 
26,158 
 
1,210,761 
656,703 
2,905,422 
Reportable segment net revenues
9,340,309 
4,869,659 
12,286,257 
Corporate and other
339,831 
292,423 
613,415 
 
$
9,680,140 
$
5,162,082 
$
12,899,672 
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
Las Vegas Strip Resorts casino revenue was $1.5 billion in 2021, compared to $728 million in 2020, an increase of 113%, due primarily to the temporary
property closures for a portion of 2020 and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions, as well as an increase in travel in the current year, and the
inclusion of the operating results of Aria subsequent to consolidation in September 2021.
43

The following table shows key gaming statistics for our Las Vegas Strip Resorts:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(Dollars in millions)
Table Games Drop
$
3,597 
$
2,001 
$
3,526 
Table Games Win
$
885 
$
470 
$
789 
Table Games Win %
24.6 %
23.5 %
22.4 %
Slots Handle
$
15,089 
$
6,904 
$
12,874 
Slots Win
$
1,417 
$
649 
$
1,194 
Slots Hold %
9.4 %
9.4 %
9.3 %
Las Vegas Strip Resorts rooms revenue was $1.4 billion in 2021, compared to $663 million in 2020, an increase of 112%, due primarily to the temporary
property closures for a portion of the prior year and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions, as well as an increase in travel in the current year,
and the inclusion of the operating results of Aria subsequent to consolidation in September 2021.
The following table shows key hotel statistics for our Las Vegas Strip Resorts:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Occupancy
74 %
55 %
91 %
Average Daily Rate (ADR)
$
173 
$
161 
$
167 
Revenue per Available Room (REVPAR)
$
128 
$
88 
$
153 
(1)
Rooms that were out of service, including full and midweek closures, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic were excluded from the
available room count when calculating hotel occupancy and REVPAR.
Las Vegas Strip Resorts food and beverage revenue was $1.0 billion in 2021, compared to $472 million in 2020, an increase of 115%, due primarily to the
temporary closures at certain properties and operational and capacity restrictions in the prior year and removal of those restrictions in the current year as well as an
increase in travel in the current year, and the inclusion of the operating results of Aria subsequent to consolidation in September 2021. However, not all outlets
were fully re-opened during the current year and the properties did not benefit from the removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions as well as an
increase in travel primarily until the latter part of the second quarter of the current year.
Las Vegas Strip Resorts entertainment, retail and other revenue was $770 million in 2021, compared to $383 million in 2020, an increase of 101%, due
primarily to the temporary property closures for a portion of the prior year and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions as well as an increase in
travel in the current year, and the inclusion of the operating results of Aria subsequent to consolidation in September 2021. However, venue re-openings and events
did not primarily occur until beginning in the latter part of the second quarter of the current year.
Regional Operations
Regional Operations casino revenue was $2.7 billion in 2021, compared to $1.6 billion in 2020, an increase of 73%, due primarily to the temporary property
closures in the prior year and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions and, to a lesser extent, increase in travel in the current year.
(1)
(1)
44

The following table shows key gaming statistics for our Regional Operations:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(Dollars in millions)
Table Games Drop
$
3,980 
$
2,422 
$
4,226 
Table Games Win
$
788 
$
488 
$
827 
Table Games Win %
19.8 %
20.1 %
19.6 %
Slots Handle
$
25,566 
$
14,527 
$
25,031 
Slots Win
$
2,462 
$
1,405 
$
2,363 
Slots Hold %
9.6 %
9.7 %
9.4 %
Regional Operations rooms revenue was $221 million in 2021, compared to $131 million in 2020, an increase of 69%, due primarily to the temporary
property closures in the prior year and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions and, to a lesser extent, increase in travel in the current year.
Regional Operations food and beverage revenue was $308 million in 2021, compared to $184 million in 2020, an increase of 67%, due primarily to the
temporary property closures in the prior year and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions beginning primarily in the second quarter of the
current year.
Regional Operations entertainment, retail and other revenue was $142 million in 2021, compared to $83 million in 2020, an increase of 72%, due primarily
to temporary property closures in the prior year and removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions beginning primarily in the second quarter of the
current year.
MGM China
The following table shows key gaming statistics for MGM China:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(Dollars in millions)
VIP Table Games Turnover
$
8,499 
$
7,015 
$
38,071 
VIP Table Games Win
$
272 
$
213 
$
1,237 
VIP Table Games Win %
3.2 %
3.0 %
3.2 %
Main Floor Table Games Drop
$
4,509 
$
2,037 
$
8,252 
Main Floor Table Games Win
$
966 
$
467 
$
1,907 
Main Floor Table Games Win %
21.4 %
22.9 %
23.1 %
MGM China net revenues were $1.2 billion in 2021, compared to $657 million in 2020, an increase of 84%. The prior year was negatively affected by both
property closures in February 2020 and was more significantly impacted by travel and entry restrictions in Macau than in the current year.
Corporate and other
Corporate and other revenue includes revenues from other corporate operations, management services and reimbursed costs revenue primarily related to our
CityCenter  management  agreement  (which  was  terminated  upon  the  acquisition  of  CityCenter  in  September  2021).  Reimbursed  costs  revenue  represents
reimbursement of costs, primarily payroll-related, incurred by us in connection with the provision of management services and was $226 million, $245 million and
$437 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Reimbursed costs revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased compared to the prior year due
primarily to the termination of the CityCenter management agreement as discussed above. See below for additional discussion of our share of operating results
from unconsolidated affiliates.
45

Adjusted Property EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR
The following table presents Adjusted Property EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR. Adjusted Property EBITDAR is our reportable segment generally
accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) measure, which we utilize as the primary profit measure for our reportable segments. See Note 17 to the accompanying
consolidated financial statements and “Reportable Segment GAAP measure” below for additional information.
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
$
1,738,211 
$
232,188 
$
1,643,122 
Regional Operations
1,217,814 
343,990 
969,866 
MGM China
25,367 
(193,832)
734,729 
Corporate and other
(560,309)
(530,843)
(331,621)
Adjusted EBITDAR
$
2,421,083 
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
Las Vegas Strip Resorts Adjusted Property EBITDAR was $1.7 billion in 2021 compared to $232 million in 2020. Las Vegas Strip Resorts Adjusted
Property EBITDAR margin increased to 36.7% in 2021 compared to 10.3% in 2020. The current year benefited from the increase in revenues, as discussed above,
as well as realized benefits from our cost savings initiatives.
Regional Operations
Regional Operations Adjusted Property EBITDAR was $1.2 billion in 2021 compared to $344 million in 2020. Regional Operations Adjusted Property
EBITDAR margin increased to 35.9% in 2021 compared to 17.5% in 2020 as the current year benefited from the increase in revenues, as discussed above, as well
as realized benefits from our cost saving initiatives.
MGM China
MGM China’s Adjusted Property EBITDAR was $25 million in 2021 compared to a loss of $194 million in 2020. The increase was due primarily to the
temporary property closures in the prior year as well as the prior year being more significantly impacted by travel and entry restrictions in Macau and other
operational restrictions related to the pandemic than in the current year. License fee expense was $21 million for 2021 and $11 million in the prior year.
Operating Results – Details of Certain Charges
Property transactions, net consisted of the following:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Loss related to sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land
$
— 
$
— 
$
220,294 
Other property transactions, net
(67,736)
93,567 
55,508 
 
$
(67,736)
$
93,567 
$
275,802 
See Note 16 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for discussion of property transactions, net.
46

Operating Results – Income from Unconsolidated Affiliates
The following table summarizes information related to our share of operating income from unconsolidated affiliates:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
CityCenter (through September 26, 2021)
$
128,127 
$
(29,753)
$
128,421 
MGP BREIT Venture
155,817 
136,755 
— 
BetMGM
(211,182)
(61,663)
(15,804)
Other
12,061 
(2,401)
6,904 
 
$
84,823 
$
42,938 
$
119,521 
In September 2021, we completed the acquisition of the 50% ownership interest in CityCenter held by Infinity World and now own 100% of the equity
interest in CityCenter. Accordingly, we no longer account for our interest in CityCenter under the equity method of accounting, and we now consolidate CityCenter
in our financial statements.
In June 2021, CityCenter closed the sale of its Harmon land for $80 million on which it recorded a $30 million gain. We recorded a $50 million gain, which
included $15 million of our 50% share of the gain recorded by CityCenter and $35 million representing the reversal of certain basis differences in 2021.
Our share of CityCenter’s operating income, including certain basis difference adjustments, was $128 million for the current year period through September
26, 2021 compared to our share of CityCenter's operating loss of $30 million in 2020, due primarily to the temporary property closures in the prior year and
removal of mandated operational and capacity restrictions, an increase in travel beginning primarily in the second quarter of the current year, and the gain related
to the sale of its Harmon land in the current year, as discussed above, partially offset by a shorter comparative period in the current year given that, as of September
2021, we no longer account for our interest in CityCenter under the equity method of accounting, as discussed above.
Non-operating Results
Interest expense. The following table summarizes information related to interest expense, net:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Total interest incurred
$
800,156 
$
679,251 
$
853,007 
Interest capitalized
(563)
(2,871)
(5,075)
 
$
799,593 
$
676,380 
$
847,932 
Gross interest expense was $800 million in 2021 compared to $679 million in 2020. The increase in gross interest expense was due primarily to an increase
in average debt outstanding related to senior notes due to the issuances by us, the Operating Partnership and MGM China in 2020 and 2021, partially offset by a
decrease in the weighted average interest rate of the senior notes. See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional discussion on
long-term debt and see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional discussion on issuances and repayments of long-term debt and other sources and uses of
cash.
Other, net. Other income, net was $66 million in 2021 compared to other expense, net of $89 million in 2020. The current year included a $28 million net
gain on change in fair value of an equity instrument, a $39 million gain on the Operating Partnership’s unhedged interest rate swaps, and $22 million of interest
income, partially offset by $13 million of foreign currency remeasurement losses primarily related to MGM China’s U.S. dollar-denominated senior notes. The
prior year included a $109 million loss incurred on the early retirement of debt related to our senior notes and the termination of our revolving facility, as well as
an $18 million loss incurred on the early retirement of debt related to the Operating Partnership’s repayment of its term loan A facility and its term loan B facility,
partially offset by $9 million of foreign currency remeasurement gains primarily related to MGM China’s U.S. dollar-denominated senior notes, and $32 million in
interest income.
47

Income taxes. The following table summarizes information related to our income taxes:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Income (loss) before income taxes
$
1,461,804 
$
(1,511,479)
$
2,846,725 
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
(253,416)
191,572 
(632,345)
Effective income tax rate
17.3 %
12.7 %
22.2 %
Federal, state and foreign income taxes paid, net of refunds
$
43,018 
$
8,543 
$
28,493 
Our effective rate for 2021 was favorably impacted by the permanent exclusion of a portion of the gain on consolidation of CityCenter partially offset by the
unfavorable impact of losses in Macau that we could not benefit. The effective rate for 2020 was unfavorably impacted by losses in Macau that we could not
benefit and adjustments to valuation allowances for Macau deferred tax assets and foreign tax credits, partially offset by tax benefit resulting from carrying back
net operating losses to tax years with a higher tax rate than is currently in effect.
Cash taxes paid increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in federal income taxes paid resulting from increased U.S. taxable income
following the recovery of the business from the impacts of COVID-19.
Reportable Segment GAAP measure
“Adjusted Property EBITDAR” is our reportable segment GAAP measure, which we utilize as the primary profit measure for our reportable segments and
underlying operating segments. Adjusted Property EBITDAR is a measure defined as earnings before interest and other non-operating income (expense), taxes,
depreciation and amortization, preopening and start-up expenses, gain on REIT transactions, net, restructuring costs (which represents costs related to severance,
accelerated stock compensation expense, and consulting fees directly related to the operating model component of the MGM 2020 Plan), rent expense associated
with triple-net operating and ground leases, income from unconsolidated affiliates related to investments in real estate ventures, property transactions, net, and also
excludes gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net, gain related to CityCenter's sale of Harmon land recorded within income from unconsolidated affiliates and
corporate expense (which includes CEO transition expense and October 1 litigation settlement) and stock compensation expense, which are not allocated to each
operating segment, and rent expense related to the master lease with MGP that eliminates in consolidation. We manage capital allocation, tax planning, stock
compensation, and financing decisions at the corporate level. “Adjusted Property EBITDAR margin” is Adjusted Property EBITDAR divided by related segment
net revenues.
Non-GAAP Measure
“Adjusted EBITDAR” is earnings before interest and other non-operating income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization, preopening and start-up
expenses,  property  transactions,  net,  gain  on  REIT  transactions,  net,  gain  on  consolidation  of  CityCenter,  net,  CEO  transition  expense,  October  1  litigation
settlement, restructuring costs (which represents costs related to severance, accelerated stock compensation expense, and consulting fees directly related to the
operating model component of the MGM 2020 Plan), rent expense associated with triple-net operating and ground leases, gain related to CityCenter's sale of
Harmon land recorded within income from unconsolidated affiliates, and income from unconsolidated affiliates related to investments in real estate ventures.
Adjusted EBITDAR information is a valuation metric, should not be used as an operating metric, and is presented solely as a supplemental disclosure to
reported GAAP measures because we believe this measure is widely used by analysts, lenders, financial institutions, and investors as a principal basis for the
valuation of gaming companies. We believe that while items excluded from Adjusted EBITDAR may be recurring in nature and should not be disregarded in
evaluation of our earnings performance, it is useful to exclude such items when analyzing current results and trends. Also, we believe excluded items may not
relate specifically to current trends or be indicative of future results. For example, preopening and start-up expenses will be significantly different in periods when
we are developing and constructing a major expansion project and will depend on where the current period lies within the development cycle, as well as the size
and scope of the project(s). Property transactions, net includes normal recurring disposals, gains and losses on sales of assets related to specific assets within our
resorts, but also includes gains or losses on sales of an entire operating resort or a group of resorts and impairment charges on entire asset groups or investments in
unconsolidated affiliates, which may not be comparable period over period. However, as discussed herein, Adjusted EBITDAR should not be viewed as a measure
of overall operating performance, considered in isolation, or as an alternative to net income, because this measure is not
48

presented on a GAAP basis and exclude certain expenses, including the rent expense associated with our triple-net operating and ground leases, and are provided
for the limited purposes discussed herein.
Adjusted EBITDAR should not be construed as an alternative to operating income or net income, as an indicator of our performance; or as an alternative to
cash flows from operating activities, as a measure of liquidity; or as any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. We have significant uses of cash
flows, including capital expenditures, interest payments, taxes, real estate triple-net lease and ground lease payments, and debt principal repayments, which are not
reflected  in  Adjusted  EBITDAR.  Also,  other  companies  in  the  gaming  and  hospitality  industries  that  report  Adjusted  EBITDAR  information  may  calculate
Adjusted EBITDAR in a different manner and such differences may be material.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income attributable to MGM Resorts International to Adjusted EBITDAR:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
$
1,254,370 
$
(1,032,724)
$
2,049,146 
Plus: Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests
(45,981)
(287,183)
165,234 
Net income (loss)
1,208,389 
(1,319,907)
2,214,380 
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
253,415 
(191,572)
632,345 
Income (loss) before income taxes
1,461,804 
(1,511,479)
2,846,725 
Non-operating (income) expense
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
799,593 
676,380 
847,932 
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
83,243 
103,304 
62,296 
Other, net
(65,941)
89,361 
183,262 
 
816,895 
869,045 
1,093,490 
Operating income (loss)
2,278,699 
(642,434)
3,940,215 
Preopening and start-up expenses
5,094 
84 
7,175 
Property transactions, net
(67,736)
93,567 
275,802 
Gain on REIT transactions, net
— 
(1,491,945)
(2,677,996)
Gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net
(1,562,329)
— 
— 
Depreciation and amortization
1,150,610 
1,210,556 
1,304,649 
CEO transition expense
— 
44,401 
— 
October 1 litigation settlement
— 
49,000 
— 
Restructuring
— 
26,025 
92,139 
Triple-net operating lease and ground lease rent expense
833,158 
710,683 
74,656 
Gain related to sale of Harmon land - unconsolidated affiliate
(49,755)
— 
— 
Income from unconsolidated affiliates related to real estate ventures
(166,658)
(148,434)
(544)
Adjusted EBITDAR
$
2,421,083 
Guarantor Financial Information
As of December 31, 2021, all of our principal debt arrangements are guaranteed by each of our wholly owned material domestic subsidiaries that guarantee
our senior credit facility. Our principal debt arrangements are not guaranteed by MGP, the Operating Partnership, MGM Grand Detroit, MGM National Harbor,
Blue Tarp reDevelopment, LLC (the entity that operates MGM Springfield), and each of their respective subsidiaries. Our foreign subsidiaries, including MGM
China and its subsidiaries, are also not guarantors of our principal debt arrangements. In the event that any subsidiary is no longer a guarantor of our credit facility
or  any of  our  future  capital  markets  indebtedness,  that  subsidiary  will  be  released  and  relieved  of  its  obligations  to  guarantee  our  existing  senior  notes.  The
indentures governing the senior notes further provide that in the event of a sale of all or substantially all of the assets of, or capital stock in a subsidiary guarantor
then such subsidiary guarantor will be released and relieved of any obligations under its subsidiary guarantee.
49

The guarantees provided by the subsidiary guarantors rank senior in right of payment to any future subordinated debt of ours or such subsidiary guarantors,
junior to any secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such debt and effectively subordinated to any indebtedness and other obligations
of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the senior notes. In addition, the obligations of each subsidiary guarantor under its guarantee is limited so as not to
constitute a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law, which may eliminate the subsidiary guarantor’s obligations or reduce such obligations to an amount that
effectively makes the subsidiary guarantee lack value.
The summarized financial information of us and our guarantor subsidiaries, on a combined basis, is presented below. Certain of our guarantor subsidiaries
collectively own Operating Partnership units and each subsidiary accounts for its respective investment under the equity method within the summarized financial
information presented below. These subsidiaries have also accounted for the MGP master lease as an operating lease, recording operating lease liabilities and
operating ROU assets with the related rent expense of guarantor subsidiaries reflected within the summarized financial information.
 
December 31,
 
2021
Balance Sheet
(In thousands)
Current assets
$
5,663,171 
Investment in the MGP Operating Partnership
2,284,222 
Intercompany accounts due from non-guarantor subsidiaries
— 
MGP master lease right-of-use asset, net
6,629,140 
Other long-term assets
17,025,933 
MGP master lease operating lease liabilities – current
154,287 
Other current liabilities
2,752,185 
Intercompany accounts due to non-guarantor subsidiaries
16,697 
MGP master lease operating lease liabilities – noncurrent
7,083,505 
Other long-term liabilities
18,472,138 
 
Year Ended
 
December 31,
 
2021
Income Statement
(In thousands)
Net revenues
$
6,841,788 
MGP master lease rent expense
(630,364)
Operating income
2,025,160 
Income from continuing operations
1,963,979 
Net income
1,702,096 
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts International
1,702,096 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows – Summary
Our cash flows consisted of the following:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
$
1,373,423 $
(1,493,043) $
1,810,401 
Net cash provided by investing activities
1,543,645 
2,159,304 
3,519,434 
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(2,814,095)
2,103,427 
(4,529,594)
50

Cash Flows
Operating activities. Trends in our operating cash flows tend to follow trends in operating income, excluding non-cash charges, but can be affected by
changes in working capital, the timing of significant interest payments, tax payments or refunds, and distributions from unconsolidated affiliates. Cash provided by
operating activities was $1.4 billion in 2021 compared to cash used in operating activities of $1.5 billion in 2020. The change from the prior year was due primarily
to the increase in Adjusted Property EBITDAR discussed within the results of operations section above, and due to the prior year being negatively affected by a
change in working capital related to gaming and non-gaming deposits, gaming taxes and other gaming liabilities, and payroll related liabilities as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in triple-net lease rent payments and cash paid for interest and taxes.
Investing activities. Our investing cash flows can fluctuate significantly from year to year depending on our decisions with respect to strategic capital
investments in new or existing resorts, business acquisitions or dispositions, and the timing of maintenance capital expenditures to maintain the quality of our
resorts. Capital expenditures related to regular investments in our existing resorts can also vary depending on timing of larger remodel projects related to our public
spaces and hotel rooms.
Cash provided by investing activities was $1.5 billion in 2021 compared to $2.2 billion in 2020. In 2021, we received $3.9 billion in net cash proceeds from
the sale of the real estate of Aria (including Vdara), received $107 million in net proceeds from the sale of property and equipment, primarily related to the sale of
art,  which  were  partially  offset  by  our  payments  of  $1.8  billion  to  acquire  CityCenter,  net  of  cash  acquired, $491  million in  capital  expenditures,  as  further
discussed below, and contributions of $225 million to BetMGM. In comparison, in the prior year we received $2.5 billion in net cash proceeds from the Mandalay
Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas real estate transaction, which were partially offset by $271 million in capital expenditures and $80 million in contributions to
BetMGM. In the prior year period, distributions from unconsolidated affiliates included $51 million related to our share of a distribution paid by CityCenter.
Capital Expenditures
In 2021, we made capital expenditures of $491 million, of which $68 million related to MGM China. Capital expenditures at MGM China included $49
million primarily related to construction of the Emerald Tower project at MGM Cotai and $19 million related to projects at MGM Macau. Capital expenditures at
our Las Vegas Strip Resorts, Regional Operations and corporate entities of $423 million primarily relate to expenditures in information technology and room
remodels.
In 2020, we made capital expenditures of $271 million, of which $108 million related to MGM China. Capital expenditures at MGM China included $95
million primarily related to construction close-out and projects at MGM Cotai and $13 million related to projects at MGM Macau. Capital expenditures at our Las
Vegas  Strip  Resorts,  Regional  Operations  and  corporate  entities  of  $162  million  included  expenditures  relating  to  information  technology,  health  and  safety
initiatives, and various room, restaurant, and entertainment venue remodels.
Financing activities. Cash used in financing activities was $2.8 billion in 2021 compared to cash provided by financing activities of $2.1 billion in 2020. In
2021, we had net repayments of debt of $1.3 billion, as further discussed below, distributed $324 million to noncontrolling interest owners, and we repurchased
$1.8 billion of our common stock, partially offset by net proceeds received of $793 million from the issuance of MGP's Class A shares. In comparison, in the prior
year period, we received net proceeds from the incurrence of the bridge loan facility in connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction of $1.3 billion, net
proceeds of $525 million from MGP’s Class A share issuances, net debt borrowings of $1.1 billion, as further discussed below, repurchased $354 million of our
common stock, distributed $286 million to noncontrolling interest owners, and paid $78 million in dividends to our shareholders.
Borrowings and Repayments of Long-term Debt
In 2021, we had net repayments of debt of $1.3 billion, which consisted of the repayment of the $1.7 billion outstanding on CityCenter's credit facility in
full,  which  was  assumed  in  the  acquisition,  using  cash  on  hand,  and  net  repayments  of  $407  million  on  MGM  China’s  first  revolving  credit  facility.  These
repayments were partially offset by MGM China’s March 2021 issuance of $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.75% senior notes due 2027 at an issue
price of 99.97% and net draws of $40 million on the Operating Partnership's revolving credit facility, of which $35 million was used in connection with MGP's
acquisition of MGM Springfield with the remainder used to fund the Operating Partnership's and MGP's distribution and dividend payments. The net proceeds
from MGM China’s 4.75% senior notes due 2027 issuance were used to partially repay amounts outstanding under the MGM China first revolving credit facility
and for general corporate purposes.
51

In 2020, we had net proceeds from the incurrence of the bridge loan facility in connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction of $1.3 billion and net
debt borrowings of $1.1 billion, which consisted of net borrowings on MGM China’s credit facility of $103 million, our issuance of $750 million of 4.75% senior
notes and $750 million of 6.75% senior notes, the Operating Partnership’s issuance of $750 million of 3.875% senior notes and $800 million of 4.625% senior
notes, and MGM China’s issuance of $500 million of 5.25% senior notes, partially offset by the tender of $750 million of our senior notes and the corresponding
$97 million of tender offer costs, and the net repayment of $1.7 billion on the Operating Partnership's senior credit facility consisting of the repayment of $1.3
billion of its term loan B facility in full using the proceeds of the $1.3 billion bridge loan facility, which was then assumed by MGP BREIT Venture, the repayment
of its $399 million term loan A facility in full using the net proceeds from MGP’s settlement of forward equity agreements, partially offset by a net draw of $10
million on its revolving credit facility.
In March 2020, with certain of the proceeds from the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, we completed cash tender offers for an aggregate amount of $750
million of our senior notes, comprised of $325 million principal amount of our outstanding 5.75% senior notes due 2025, $100 million principal amount of our
outstanding 4.625% senior notes due 2026, and $325 million principal amount of our outstanding 5.5% senior notes due 2027.
In May 2020, we issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.750% senior notes due 2025. The proceeds were used to further increase our
liquidity position.
In June 2020, the Operating Partnership issued $800 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior notes due 2025. The proceeds were used to
repay borrowings on the Operating Partnership’s senior credit facility, which were used to fund the May 2020 redemption of $700 million of Operating Partnership
units held by us.
In June 2020, MGM China issued $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.25% senior notes due 2025. The proceeds were used to partially repay
amounts outstanding under the MGM China credit facility and for general corporate purposes.
In October 2020, we issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.75% senior notes due 2028. The proceeds were used for general corporate
purposes.
In November 2020, the Operating Partnership issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.875% senior notes due 2029. The proceeds were used
for general corporate purposes, which included the December 2020 redemption of $700 million of the Operating Partnership units held by us.
Dividends, Distributions to Noncontrolling Interest Owners and Share Repurchases
In  2021,  we  repurchased  and  retired  $1.8  billion  of  our  common  stock  pursuant  to  our  May  2018  $2.0  billion  and  February  2020  $3.0  billion  stock
repurchase programs. As a result of those repurchases, we completed our May 2018 $2.0 billion stock repurchase program, and the remaining availability under the
February 2020 $3.0 billion stock repurchase program was $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2021. In 2020, we repurchased and retired $354 million of our common
stock pursuant to our May 2018 $2.0 billion stock repurchase program.
In March 2021, June 2021, September 2021, and December 2021, we paid dividends of $0.0025 per share, totaling $5 million for 2021. In March 2020, we
paid a dividend of $0.15 per share, and in June 2020, September 2020 and December 2020, we paid dividends of $0.0025 per share, totaling $78 million for 2020.
In 2020, MGM China paid the final dividend for 2019 of $41 million, of which we received $23 million and noncontrolling interests received $18 million.
The Operating Partnership paid the following distributions to its partnership unit holders during 2021 and 2020:
•
$545 million of distributions paid in 2021, of which we received $243 million and MGP received $302 million, which MGP concurrently paid as a
dividend to its Class A shareholders; and
•
$602 million of distributions paid in 2020, of which we received $358 million and MGP received $244 million, which MGP concurrently paid as a
dividend to its Class A shareholders.
Other Factors Affecting Liquidity and Anticipated Uses of Cash
As previously discussed, the spread of COVID-19 and developments surrounding the global pandemic have had a significant impact on our business,
financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows in 2020 and 2021 and may continue to impact our business in 2022 and thereafter. We require a certain
amount of cash on hand to operate our resorts.
52

In addition to required cash on hand for operations, we utilize corporate cash management procedures to minimize the amount of cash held on hand or in banks.
Funds are swept from the accounts at most of our domestic resorts daily into central bank accounts, and excess funds are invested overnight or are used to repay
amounts drawn under our revolving credit facility. In addition, from time to time we may use excess funds to repurchase our outstanding debt and equity securities
subject to limitations in our revolving credit facility and Delaware law, as applicable. We have significant outstanding debt, interest payments, rent payments, and
contractual  obligations  in  addition  to  planned  capital  expenditures  and  commitments,  including  acquiring  the  operations  of  The  Cosmopolitan  for  cash
consideration of $1.625 billion, as discussed further in Note 1.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $4.7 billion, of which MGM China held $399 million and the Operating Partnership held $8
million. In addition to our cash and cash equivalent balance, we have significant holdings: a 41.5% economic interest in MGP (refer to Note 1 for discussion on our
agreement entered into in August 2021 regarding the VICI Transaction) and an approximate 56% interest in MGM China.
At December 31, 2021, we had $12.9 billion in principal amount of indebtedness, including $360 million outstanding under the $1.25 billion MGM China
first revolving credit facility and $50 million outstanding under the $1.35 billion Operating Partnership revolving credit facility. No amounts were drawn on our
$1.675 billion revolving credit facility or the $400 million MGM China second revolving credit facility. We have $1.0 billion of debt maturing in the next twelve
months, which we expect to repay with cash on hand.
Due to the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, in February 2021, MGM China further amended each of its first revolving credit facility and its
second revolving credit facility to provide for waivers of the maximum leverage ratio and minimum interest coverage ratio through the fourth quarter of 2022. In
February 2022, MGM China further amended each of its first revolving credit facility and its second revolving credit facility to extend the financial covenant
waivers through maturity.
As of December 31, 2021, our expected cash interest  payments, excluding MGP and MGM China, for 2022, 2023, and 2024 are approximately  $300
million,  $225  million,  and  $190  million,  respectively,  and  our  expected  cash  interest  payments  on  a  consolidated  basis,  which  includes  MGP  if  the  VICI
Transaction does not close and MGM China, for 2022, 2023, and 2024, are approximately $715 million, $625 million, and $585 million, respectively. We are also
required as of December 31, 2021 to make annual cash rent payments of $1.6 billion, in the aggregate, under the triple-net lease agreements, which leases are also
subject to annual escalators and also require us to pay substantially all costs associated with the lease, including real estate taxes, ground lease payments, insurance,
utilities and routine maintenance, in addition to the annual cash rent.
We have planned capital expenditures in 2022 of approximately $775 million to $815 million domestically and approximately $110 million to $130 million
at MGM China, which is inclusive of the capital  expenditures required under the triple-net  lease agreements,  each of which requires us to spend a specified
percentage of net revenues, at the respective properties, on capital expenditures. We additionally have planned contributions to BetMGM in 2022 of approximately
$225 million.
We also expect to continue to repurchase shares pursuant to our February 2020 $3.0 billion share repurchase program. Subsequent to December 31, 2021,
we  repurchased  approximately 15  million shares  of  our  common  stock  at  an  average  price  of $43.88 per  share  for  an  aggregate  amount  of $670  million.
Repurchased shares were retired.
In January 2022, the Operating Partnership paid $141 million of distributions to its partnership unit holders, of which we received $59 million and MGP
received $82 million, which MGP concurrently paid as a dividend to its Class A shareholders.
On February 9, 2022, our Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.0025 per share. The dividend will be payable on March 15, 2022 to
holders of record on March 10, 2022. Future determinations regarding the declaration and payment of dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of our board of
directors and will depend on then-existing conditions, including our results of operations, financial condition, and other factors that our Board of Directors may
deem relevant.
As previously discussed, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and is continuing to cause, significant economic disruption both globally and in the United
States, and impacted our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows in 2020 and 2021 and may continue to impact our business in 2022 and
thereafter. As widespread vaccine distribution continues and operational restrictions have been removed, we have seen economic recovery in some of the market
segments  in  which  we  operate,  as  shown  in  our  Summary  Operating  Results.  However,  some  areas  continue  to  experience  renewed  outbreaks  and  surges  in
infection rates. As a result, our business segments continue to face many uncertainties and our operations remain vulnerable to reversal of these trends or other
continuing negative effects caused by
53

the pandemic. We cannot predict the degree, or duration, to which our operations will be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the effects could be material.
We continue to monitor the evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities
and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to further
adjust our operating plan, including the implementation or extension of new or existing restrictions, which may include the reinstatement of stay-at-home orders in
the jurisdictions in which we operate or additional restrictions on travel and/or our business operations. Because the situation is ongoing, and because the duration
and severity remain unclear, it is difficult to forecast any impacts on our future results.
For additional information related to our long-term obligations, refer to the maturities of long-term debt table in Note 9 and the lease liability maturity table
in Note 11.
Principal Debt Arrangements
See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding our debt agreements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our consolidated financial statements. To
prepare  our  consolidated  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America,  we  must  make
estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  amounts  reported  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements.  We  regularly  evaluate  these  estimates  and  assumptions,
particularly in areas we consider to be critical accounting estimates, where the estimates and assumptions involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and
have had or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations. However, by their nature, judgments are subject to an
inherent degree of uncertainty and therefore actual results can differ from our estimates.
Loss Reserve for Casino Accounts Receivable
Marker play represents a significant portion of the table games volume at certain of our Las Vegas resorts. Our other casinos do not emphasize marker play
to the same extent, although we offer markers to customers at those casinos as well. MGM China extends credit to certain in-house VIP gaming customers and,
historically, to gaming promoters. We maintain strict controls over the issuance of markers and aggressively pursue collection from our customers who fail to pay
their marker balances timely. These collection efforts are similar to those used by most large corporations when dealing with overdue customer accounts, including
the mailing of statements and delinquency notices, personal contacts, the use of outside collection agencies and civil litigation. Markers are generally legally
enforceable instruments in the United States and Macau. Markers are not legally enforceable instruments in some foreign countries, but the United States assets of
foreign customers may be reached to satisfy judgments entered in the United States. We consider the likelihood and difficulty of enforceability, among other
factors, when we issue credit to customers at our domestic resorts who are not residents of the United States. MGM China performs background checks and
investigates credit worthiness prior to issuing credit. Refer to Note 2 for further discussion of our casino receivables and those due from customers residing in
foreign countries.
We maintain a loss reserve for casino accounts at all of our operating casino resorts. The provision for doubtful accounts, an operating expense, increases
the loss reserve. We regularly evaluate the loss reserve for casino accounts. At domestic resorts where marker play is not significant, the loss reserve is generally
established by applying standard reserve percentages to aged account balances, which is supported by relevant historical analysis and any other known information
such as the current economic conditions that could drive losses. At domestic resorts where marker play is significant, we apply standard reserve percentages to
aged account balances under a specified dollar amount and specifically analyze the collectability of each account with a balance over the specified dollar amount,
based on the age of the account, the customer’s current and expected future financial condition, collection history and current and expected future economic
conditions. MGM China specifically analyzes the collectability of casino receivables on an individual basis taking into account the age of the account, the financial
condition and the collection history of the customer or, historically, the gaming promoter.
In addition to enforceability issues, the collectability of unpaid markers given by foreign customers at our domestic resorts is affected by a number of
factors, including changes in currency exchange rates and economic conditions in the customers’ home countries. Because individual customer account balances
can be significant, the loss reserve and the provision can change significantly between periods, as information about a certain customer becomes known or as
changes in a region’s economy occur.
54

The following table shows key statistics related to our casino receivables, net of discounts:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Casino receivables
$
380,907
$
260,998
Loss reserve for casino accounts receivable
117,539
107,723
Loss reserve as a percentage of casino accounts receivable
31 
%
41 
%
Approximately $63 million and $54 million of casino receivables and $31 million and $18 million of the loss reserve for casino accounts receivable relate to
MGM China at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The loss reserve as a percentage of casino accounts receivable decreased in the current year due to a
decrease in specific reserves at our domestic resorts, as well as the inclusion of Aria in the current year, which had a lower loss reserve compared to our other
domestic resorts due to the age of its outstanding receivables, partially offset by an increase in the loss reserve at MGM China primarily due to an increase in its
specific reserves. At December 31, 2021, a 100 basis-point change in the loss reserve as a percentage of casino accounts receivable would change income before
income taxes by $4 million.
Fixed Asset Capitalization and Depreciation Policies
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  cost.  A significant  amount  of  our  property  and  equipment  was  acquired  through  business  combinations  and  was
therefore recognized at fair value at the acquisition date. Maintenance and repairs that neither materially add to the value of the property nor appreciably prolong
its life are charged to expense as incurred. Depreciation and amortization are provided on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. When
we construct assets, we capitalize direct costs of the project, including fees paid to architects and contractors, property taxes, and certain costs of our design and
construction subsidiaries. In addition, interest cost associated with major development and construction projects is capitalized as part of the cost of the project.
Interest is typically capitalized on amounts expended on the project using the weighted average cost of our outstanding borrowings. Capitalization of interest starts
when construction activities begin and ceases when construction is substantially complete, or development activity is suspended for more than a brief period.
We must make estimates and assumptions when accounting for capital expenditures. Whether an expenditure is considered a maintenance expense, or a
capital asset is a matter of judgment. When constructing or purchasing assets, we must determine whether existing assets are being replaced or otherwise impaired,
which also may be a matter of judgment. In addition, our depreciation expense is highly dependent on the assumptions we make about our assets’ estimated useful
lives.  We  determine  the  estimated  useful  lives  based  on  our  experience  with  similar  assets,  engineering  studies,  and  our  estimate  of  the  usage  of  the  asset.
Whenever events or circumstances occur which change the estimated useful life of an asset, we account for the change prospectively.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets, Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We evaluate our property and equipment and other long-lived assets for impairment based on our classification as held for sale or to be held and used.
Several criteria must be met before an asset is classified as held for sale, including that management with the appropriate authority commits to a plan to sell the
asset at a reasonable price in relation to its fair value and is actively seeking a buyer. For assets classified as held for sale, we recognize the asset at the lower of
carrying value or fair market value less costs of disposal, as estimated based on comparable asset sales, offers received, or a discounted cash flow model. For assets
to be held and used, we review for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. We then compare the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an
undiscounted basis, to the carrying value of the asset. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted
cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, then an impairment is recorded based on the fair value of the asset. For operating assets, fair value is typically
measured using a discounted cash flow model whereby future cash flows are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital, developed using a standard
capital asset pricing model, based on guideline companies in our industry. If an asset is still under development, future cash flows include remaining construction
costs. All recognized impairment losses, whether for assets to be held for sale or assets to be held and used, are recorded as operating expenses.
There are several estimates, assumptions and decisions in measuring impairments of long-lived assets. First, management must determine the usage of the
asset. To the extent management decides that an asset will be sold, it is more likely that an impairment may be recognized. Assets must be tested at the lowest level
for which identifiable cash flows exist. This means that some assets must be grouped, and management has some discretion in the grouping of assets. Future cash
flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from our estimates.
55

On a quarterly basis, we review our major long-lived assets to determine if events have occurred or circumstances exist that indicate a potential impairment.
Potential factors which could trigger an impairment include underperformance compared to historical or projected operating results, negative industry or economic
factors, significant changes to our operating environment, or changes in intended use of the asset group. We estimate future cash flows using our internal budgets
and probability weight cash flows in certain circumstances to consider alternative outcomes associated with recoverability of the asset group, including potential
sale. Historically, undiscounted cash flows of our significant operating asset groups have exceeded their carrying values by a substantial margin. During 2019, we
recorded a non-cash impairment charge relating to the carrying value of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land. Refer to Note 16 for further discussion.
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets at least annually and between annual test dates in certain circumstances. We perform our annual impairment
test  for  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  each  fiscal  year.  Indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  consist  primarily  of  license  rights  and
trademarks.  For  our  2021  annual  impairment  tests,  we  utilized  the  option  to  perform  a  qualitative  (“step  zero”)  analysis  for  certain  of  our  indefinite-lived
intangibles and concluded it was more likely than not that the fair values of such intangibles exceeded their carrying values by a substantial margin. We elected to
perform a quantitative analysis for the MGM Northfield Park gaming license in 2021 primarily using the discounted cash flow approach, for which the fair value
exceeded its carrying value by a substantial margin. As discussed below, management makes significant judgments and estimates as part of these analyses. If
certain future operating results do not meet current expectations it could cause carrying values of the intangibles to exceed their fair values in future periods,
potentially resulting in an impairment charge.
We review goodwill at least annually and between annual test dates in certain circumstances. None of our reporting units incurred any goodwill impairment
charges in 2021. For our 2021 annual impairment tests, we utilized the option to perform a step zero analysis for certain of our reporting units and concluded it was
more likely than not that the fair values of such reporting units exceeded their carrying values by a substantial margin. As discussed below, management makes
significant judgments and estimates as part of these analyses. If future operating results of our reporting units do not meet current expectations it could cause
carrying values of our reporting units to exceed their fair values in future periods, potentially resulting in a goodwill impairment charge.
There are several estimates inherent in evaluating these assets for impairment. In particular, future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and
actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  our  estimates.  In  addition,  the  determination  of  multiples,  capitalization  rates  and  the  discount  rates  used  in  the
impairment tests are highly judgmental and dependent in large part on expectations of future market conditions.
See Note 2 and Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of goodwill and other intangible assets.
Impairment of Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates
See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for discussion of our evaluation of other-than-temporary impairment of investments in
unconsolidated affiliates. During 2021 and 2020, we recorded $22 million and $64 million, respectively, in other-than-temporary impairment charges on equity
method investments. Refer to Note 6 for further discussion. Our investments in unconsolidated affiliates had no material impairments in 2019.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various state and local jurisdictions, and foreign jurisdictions, although the income taxes paid
in foreign jurisdictions are not material.
We  recognize  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  related  to  net  operating  losses,  tax  credit  carryforwards  and  temporary  differences  with  future  tax
consequences.  We  reduce  the  carrying  amount  of  deferred  tax  assets  by  a  valuation  allowance  if  it  is  more  likely  than  not  such  assets  will  not  be  realized.
Accordingly, the need to establish valuation allowances for deferred tax assets is assessed at each reporting period based on such "more-likely-than-not" realization
threshold. This assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the
scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, and tax planning strategies.
We recorded a valuation allowance on the net deferred tax assets of our domestic jurisdictions of $2.7 billion as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, and a
valuation allowance on certain net deferred tax assets of foreign jurisdictions of $149 million and $156 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We reassess the realization of deferred tax assets each reporting period. In the event we were to determine that it is more likely than not that we will be unable to
56

realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and recognize a corresponding charge to earnings or other
comprehensive income in the period in which we make such a determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the
deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously recognized valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we
must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located.
Furthermore, we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that positions taken on our tax returns are
fully supported, but tax authorities may challenge these positions, which may not be fully sustained on examination by the relevant tax authorities. Accordingly,
our income tax provision includes amounts intended to satisfy assessments that may result from these challenges. Determining the income tax provision for these
potential assessments and recording the related effects requires management judgments and estimates. The amounts ultimately paid on resolution of an audit could
be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax provision and, therefore, could have a material impact on our income tax provision,
net income and cash flows.
Refer to Note 10 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion relating to income taxes.
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Market Risk
In addition to the inherent risks associated with our normal operations, we are also exposed to additional market risks. Market risk is the risk of loss arising
from adverse changes in market rates and prices, such as interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Our primary exposure to market risk is interest rate risk
associated with our variable rate long-term debt. We attempt to limit our exposure to interest rate risk by managing the mix of our long-term fixed rate borrowings
and short-term borrowings under our bank credit facilities and by utilizing interest rate swap agreements that provide for a fixed interest payment on the Operating
Partnership’s credit facility. A change in interest rates generally does not have an impact upon our future earnings and cash flow for fixed-rate debt instruments. As
fixed-rate debt matures, however, and if additional debt is acquired to fund the debt repayment, future earnings and cash flow may be affected by changes in
interest rates. This effect would be realized in the periods subsequent to the periods when the debt matures. We do not hold or issue financial instruments for
trading purposes and do not enter into derivative transactions that would be considered speculative positions.
As of December 31, 2021, variable rate borrowings represented approximately 3% of our total borrowings after giving effect on the Operating Partnership’s
borrowings for the currently effective interest rate swap agreements on which the Operating Partnership pays a weighted average of 1.783% on a total notional
amount of $700 million. Additionally, the Operating Partnership has $900 million of notional amount of forward starting swaps that are not currently effective. The
following  table  provides  additional  information  about  the  maturities  of  our  debt  subject  to  changes  in  interest  rates,  excluding  the  effect  of  the  Operating
Partnership interest rate swaps discussed above:
 
Debt maturing in
Fair Value
December 31, 2021
 
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Thereafter
Total
 
(In millions except interest rates)
Fixed-rate
$
1,000 
$
1,250 
$
1,800 
$
2,725 
$
1,650 
$
4,026 
$
12,451 
$
12,948 
Average interest rate
7.8 %
6.0 %
5.5 %
5.6 %
5.2 %
4.9 %
5.5 %
 
Variable rate
$
— 
$
50 
$
360 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
410 
$
410 
Average interest rate
N/A
1.9 %
3.0 %
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.8 %
 
In addition to the risk associated with our variable interest rate debt, we are also exposed to risks related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates,
mainly related to MGM China and to our operations at MGM Macau and MGM Cotai. While recent fluctuations in exchange rates have not been significant,
potential changes in policy by governments or fluctuations in the economies of the United States, China, Macau or Hong Kong could cause variability in these
exchange rates. We cannot assure you that the Hong Kong dollar will continue to be pegged to the U.S. dollar or the current peg rate for the Hong Kong dollar will
remain at the same level. The possible changes to the peg of the Hong Kong dollar may result in severe fluctuations in the exchange rate thereof. For U.S. dollar
denominated debt incurred by MGM China, fluctuations in the exchange rates of the Hong Kong dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar could have adverse effects on
our financial position and results of operations. As of December 31, 2021, a 1% weakening of the Hong Kong dollar (the functional currency of MGM China) to
the U.S. dollar would result in a foreign currency transaction loss of $28 million.
57

ITEM 8.    FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Financial Statements:
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID: 34)
59
Consolidated Balance Sheets — December 31, 2021 and 2020
62
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations
63
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)
64
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
65
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
66
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
67
Financial Statement Schedule:
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
107
 
 
The financial information included in the financial statement schedule should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements. All other
financial statement schedules have been omitted because they are not applicable, or the required information is included in the consolidated financial statements or
the notes thereto.
58

REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of MGM Resorts International
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021,
based  on  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  —  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission (COSO). In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021,
based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated
financial statements and financial statement schedule as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, of the Company and our report dated February 25, 2022,
expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of
internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  the  accompanying  Management’s  Annual  Report  on  Internal  Control  Over  Financial  Reporting.  Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered
with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding
of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit
provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Las Vegas, Nevada
February 25, 2022
59

REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of MGM Resorts International
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries (the "Company") as of December 31, 2021
and 2020, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income (loss), cash flows and stockholders' equity for each of the three years in the
period ended December 31, 2021, and the related notes and the financial statement schedule of Valuation and Qualifying Accounts included in Item 15(a)(2),
(collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021,
in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company's
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 25, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company's
internal control over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's financial
statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matter
The  critical  audit  matter  communicated  below  is  a  matter  arising  from  the  current-period  audit  of  the  financial  statements  that  was  communicated  or
required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our
especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the
accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Acquisition and Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Valuation of CityCenter — Refer to Notes 1 and 4 to the financial statements
On  September  27,  2021,  the  Company  completed  the  acquisition  of  the  50%  ownership  interest  in  CityCenter  Holdings,  LLC  (“CityCenter”)  held  by
Infinity World Development Corp for cash consideration  of $2.125 billion.  Prior to the acquisition,  the Company held a 50% ownership interest,  which was
accounted for under the equity method. The Company accounted for the acquisition under the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations, and the
fair value was allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, which included $180.0 million of trademarks and $1.4 billion of
goodwill. Management estimated the fair value of the trademarks using the relief from royalty method, which is a specific discounted cash flow method. Goodwill
was recognized as the excess of the cash consideration and the acquisition-date fair value of the Company’s equity method investment over the identifiable assets
acquired and liabilities assumed.
The  fair  value  determination  of  the  trademarks  required  management  to  make  significant  estimates  and  assumptions  around  expected  cash  flows  and
projected financial results, including forecasted revenues (collectively the “forecast”), as
60

well as the selection of discount rates. Changes to these assumptions and estimates could have a significant impact on the fair value of the trademarks and the
recognition of goodwill. Therefore, auditing the forecast and the selection of discount rates involved a higher degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity, as well
as an increased level of audit effort, including the involvement of fair value specialists.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to the forecast and selection of discount rates used by management to determine the fair value of the acquired intangible assets
and the reporting unit assigned goodwill included the following, among others:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over determining the fair value of the tradename, including those over management’s forecast and the selection of
discount rates.
•
We evaluated the assumptions and estimates included in the forecast by:
◦
Comparing  the  forecasts  to  information  included  in  the  Company’s  communications  to the  Board  of Directors,  earnings  and press  releases,
gaming industry reports, investor presentations, and analyst reports for the Company and certain of its peer companies;
◦
Comparing the forecasts to historical financial results;
◦
Conducting inquiries with management; and
◦
Evaluating whether the forecast was consistent with evidence obtained in other areas of the audit.
•
With the assistance of our fair value specialists, we evaluated the reasonableness of the discount rates by:
◦
Testing the market-based source information underlying the determination of the discount rates and the mathematical accuracy of the discount
rate calculations.
◦
Developing a range of independent estimates and comparing those to the discount rate selected by management.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Las Vegas, Nevada
February 25, 2022
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2002.
61

MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(In thousands, except share data)
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
ASSETS
Current assets
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
4,703,059 
$
5,101,637 
Restricted cash
500,000 
— 
Accounts receivable, net
583,915 
316,502 
Inventories
96,374 
88,323 
Income tax receivable
273,862 
243,415 
Prepaid expenses and other
258,972 
200,782 
Total current assets
6,416,182 
5,950,659 
 
Property and equipment, net
14,435,493 
14,632,091 
 
Other assets
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
967,044 
1,447,043 
Goodwill
3,480,997 
2,091,278 
Other intangible assets, net
3,616,385 
3,643,748 
Operating lease right-of-use assets, net
11,492,805 
8,286,694 
Other long-term assets, net
490,210 
443,421 
Total other assets
20,047,441 
15,912,184 
 
$
40,899,116 
$
36,494,934 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Current liabilities
 
 
Accounts payable
$
263,097 
$
142,523 
Construction payable
23,099
30,149
Current portion of long-term debt
1,000,000
— 
Accrued interest on long-term debt
172,624
138,832
Other accrued liabilities
1,983,444
1,545,079
Total current liabilities
3,442,264
1,856,583
 
Deferred income taxes, net
2,439,364
2,153,016
Long-term debt, net
11,770,797
12,376,684
Operating lease liabilities
11,802,464
8,390,117
Other long-term obligations
319,914
472,084
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
Redeemable noncontrolling interests
147,547
66,542
Stockholders' equity
Common stock, $0.01 par value: authorized 1,000,000,000 shares, issued and
 outstanding 453,803,759 and 494,317,865 shares
4,538
4,943
Capital in excess of par value
1,750,135
3,439,453
Retained earnings
4,340,588
3,091,007
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(24,616)
(30,677)
Total MGM Resorts International stockholders' equity
6,070,645
6,504,726
Noncontrolling interests
4,906,121
4,675,182
Total stockholders' equity
10,976,766
11,179,908
 
$
40,899,116 
$
36,494,934 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
62

MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(In thousands, except per share data)
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
 
 
 
Casino
$
5,362,912 $
2,871,720 $
6,517,759 
Rooms
1,690,037 
830,382 
2,322,579 
Food and beverage
1,391,605 
696,040 
2,145,247 
Entertainment, retail and other
1,009,503 
518,991 
1,477,200 
Reimbursed costs
226,083 
244,949 
436,887 
 
9,680,140 
5,162,082 
12,899,672 
Expenses
Casino
2,551,169 
1,701,783 
3,623,899 
Rooms
600,942 
419,156 
829,677 
Food and beverage
1,034,780 
674,118 
1,661,626 
Entertainment, retail and other
617,635 
412,705 
1,051,400 
Reimbursed costs
226,083 
244,949 
436,887 
General and administrative
2,507,239 
2,122,333 
2,101,217 
Corporate expense
422,777 
460,148 
464,642 
Preopening and start-up expenses
5,094 
84 
7,175 
Property transactions, net
(67,736)
93,567 
275,802 
Gain on REIT transactions, net
— 
(1,491,945)
(2,677,996)
Gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net
(1,562,329)
— 
— 
Depreciation and amortization
1,150,610 
1,210,556 
1,304,649 
 
7,486,264 
5,847,454 
9,078,978 
Income from unconsolidated affiliates
84,823 
42,938 
119,521 
Operating income (loss)
2,278,699 
(642,434)
3,940,215 
Non-operating income (expense)
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
(799,593)
(676,380)
(847,932)
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
(83,243)
(103,304)
(62,296)
Other, net
65,941 
(89,361)
(183,262)
 
(816,895)
(869,045)
(1,093,490)
Income (loss) before income taxes
1,461,804 
(1,511,479)
2,846,725 
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
(253,415)
191,572 
(632,345)
Net income (loss)
1,208,389 
(1,319,907)
2,214,380 
Less: Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
45,981 
287,183 
(165,234)
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
$
1,254,370 $
(1,032,724) $
2,049,146 
 
Earnings (loss) per share
Basic
$
2.44 $
(2.02) $
3.90 
Diluted
$
2.41 $
(2.02) $
3.88 
Weighted average common shares outstanding
Basic
481,930
494,152
524,173
Diluted
487,356
494,152
527,645
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
63

MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
(In thousands)
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Net income (loss)
$
1,208,389 $
(1,319,907) $
2,214,380 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(24,655)
27,762 
28,870 
Unrealized gain (loss) on cash flow hedges
34,788 
(79,365)
(29,505)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
10,133 
(51,603)
(635)
Comprehensive income (loss)
1,218,522 
(1,371,510)
2,213,745 
Less: Comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
35,700 
309,969 
(168,447)
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
$
1,254,222 $
(1,061,541) $
2,045,298 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
64

MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(In thousands)
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
 
Net income (loss)
$
1,208,389 
$
(1,319,907)
$
2,214,380 
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
1,150,610 
1,210,556 
1,304,649 
Amortization of debt discounts, premiums and issuance costs
40,328 
34,363 
38,972 
Loss on early retirement of debt
37 
126,462 
198,151 
Provision for credit losses
21,852 
71,422 
39,270 
Stock-based compensation
65,183 
106,956 
88,838 
Property transactions, net
(67,736)
93,567 
275,802 
Gain on REIT transactions, net
— 
(1,491,945)
(2,677,996)
Gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net
(1,562,329)
— 
— 
Noncash lease expense
188,917 
183,399 
71,784 
Other investment gains
(28,417)
— 
— 
Loss (income) from unconsolidated affiliates
(1,580)
60,366 
(57,225)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates
99,370 
86,584 
299 
Deferred income taxes
241,947 
18,347 
595,046 
Change in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
(236,182)
960,099 
(726,610)
Inventories
3,107 
14,705 
6,522 
Income taxes receivable and payable, net
(30,444)
(216,250)
1,259 
Prepaid expenses and other
(36,608)
(37)
7,567 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
442,626 
(1,382,980)
465,602 
Other
(125,647)
(48,750)
(35,909)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
1,373,423 
(1,493,043)
1,810,401 
Cash flows from investing activities
Capital expenditures
(490,697)
(270,579)
(739,006)
Dispositions of property and equipment
106,600 
6,136 
2,578 
Proceeds from real estate transactions
3,888,431 
2,455,839 
4,151,499 
Proceeds from sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land
— 
— 
652,333 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(1,789,604)
— 
(535,681)
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates
(226,889)
(96,925)
(81,877)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates
9,694 
63,960 
100,700 
Other
46,110 
873 
(31,112)
Net cash provided by investing activities
1,543,645 
2,159,304 
3,519,434 
Cash flows from financing activities
Net repayments under bank credit facilities – maturities of 90 days or less
(2,096,217)
(1,595,089)
(3,634,049)
Issuance of long-term debt
749,775 
3,550,000 
3,250,000 
Retirement of senior notes
— 
(846,815)
(3,764,167)
Debt issuance costs
(18,726)
(62,348)
(63,391)
Proceeds from issuance of bridge loan facility
— 
1,304,625 
— 
Issuance of MGM Growth Properties Class A shares, net
792,851 
524,704 
1,250,006 
Dividends paid to common shareholders
(4,789)
(77,606)
(271,288)
Distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
(324,190)
(286,385)
(223,303)
Purchases of common stock
(1,753,509)
(353,720)
(1,031,534)
Other
(159,290)
(53,939)
(41,868)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
(2,814,095)
2,103,427 
(4,529,594)
Effect of exchange rate on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash
(1,551)
2,345 
2,601 
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash
Net increase for the period
101,422 
2,772,033 
802,842 
Balance, beginning of period
5,101,637 
2,329,604 
1,526,762 
Balance, end of period
$
5,203,059 
$
5,101,637 
$
2,329,604 
Supplemental cash flow disclosures
Interest paid, net of amounts capitalized
$
705,680 
$
639,718 
$
826,970 
Federal, state and foreign income taxes paid, net
43,018 
8,543 
28,493 
Non-cash investing and financing activities
Note receivable related to sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land
$
— 
$
— 
$
133,689 
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates
— 
802,000 
62,133
MGP BREIT Venture assumption of bridge loan facility
— 
1,304,625 
— 

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
65

MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
For the Years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
(In thousands)
 
Common Stock
Capital in Excess
of Par Value
Retained Earnings
(Accumulated Deficit)
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
(Loss)
Total MGM Resorts
International Stockholders'
Equity
Noncontrolling
Interests
Total
Stockholders'
Equity
 
Shares
Par Value
Balances, January 1, 2019
527,480 
$
5,275 
$
4,092,085 
$
2,423,479 
$
(8,556)
$
6,512,283 
$
3,957,508 
$
10,469,791 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
2,049,146 
— 
2,049,146 
156,141 
2,205,287 
Currency translation adjustment
— 
— 
— 
— 
16,125 
16,125 
12,745 
28,870 
Cash flow hedges
— 
— 
— 
— 
(19,973)
(19,973)
(9,532)
(29,505)
Stock-based compensation
— 
— 
83,897 
— 
— 
83,897 
4,941 
88,838 
Issuance of common stock pursuant to stock-based
compensation awards
2,150 
20 
(25,985)
— 
— 
(25,965)
— 
(25,965)
Cash distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(181,816)
(181,816)
Dividends declared and paid to common shareholders
($0.52 per share)
— 
— 
— 
(271,288)
— 
(271,288)
— 
(271,288)
MGP dividend payable to Class A shareholders
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(53,489)
(53,489)
Issuance of restricted stock units
— 
— 
1,546 
— 
— 
1,546 
— 
1,546 
Repurchases of common stock
(35,854)
(358)
(1,031,176)
— 
— 
(1,031,534)
— 
(1,031,534)
Adjustment of redeemable noncontrolling interest to
redemption value
— 
— 
(2,714)
— 
— 
(2,714)
— 
(2,714)
Empire City acquisition
9,372 
94 
265,671 
— 
— 
265,765 
— 
265,765 
Empire City MGP transaction
— 
— 
(18,913)
— 
195 
(18,718)
23,745 
5,027 
MGP Class A share issuance
— 
— 
150,464 
— 
1,512 
151,976 
1,049,582 
1,201,558 
Park MGM Transaction
— 
— 
(1,984)
— 
16 
(1,968)
2,496 
528 
Northfield transaction
— 
— 
21,681 
— 
(2)
21,679 
(27,439)
(5,760)
Other
— 
— 
(3,473)
— 
481 
(2,992)
772 
(2,220)
Balances, December 31, 2019
503,148 
5,031 
3,531,099 
4,201,337 
(10,202)
7,727,265 
4,935,654 
12,662,919 
Net loss
— 
— 
— 
(1,032,724)
— 
(1,032,724)
(293,401)
(1,326,125)
Currency translation adjustment
— 
— 
— 
— 
15,711 
15,711 
12,051 
27,762 
Cash flow hedges
— 
— 
— 
— 
(44,528)
(44,528)
(34,837)
(79,365)
Stock-based compensation
— 
— 
100,907 
— 
— 
100,907 
6,049 
106,956 
Issuance of common stock pursuant to stock-based
compensation awards
2,031 
21 
(16,424)
— 
— 
(16,403)
— 
(16,403)
Cash distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(221,690)
(221,690)
Dividends declared and paid to common shareholders
($0.1575 per share)
— 
— 
— 
(77,606)
— 
(77,606)
— 
(77,606)
MGP dividend payable to Class A shareholders
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(64,086)
(64,086)
Issuance of restricted stock units
— 
— 
2,142 
— 
— 
2,142 
— 
2,142 
Repurchases of common stock
(10,861)
(109)
(353,611)
— 
— 
(353,720)
— 
(353,720)
Adjustment of redeemable noncontrolling interest to
redemption value
— 
— 
35,520 
— 
— 
35,520 
— 
35,520 
MGP Class A share issuances
— 
— 
64,188 
— 
646 
64,834 
442,717 
507,551 
MGP BREIT Venture Transaction
— 
— 
(6,503)
— 
(59)
(6,562)
8,287 
1,725 
Redemption of Operating Partnership units
— 
— 
83,859 
— 
8,773 
92,632 
(114,924)
(22,292)
Other
— 
— 
(1,724)
— 
(1,018)
(2,742)
(638)
(3,380)
Balances, December 31, 2020
494,318 
4,943 
3,439,453 
3,091,007 
(30,677)
6,504,726 
4,675,182 
11,179,908 
Net income (loss)
— 
— 
— 
1,254,370 
— 
1,254,370 
(55,793)
1,198,577 
Currency translation adjustment
— 
— 
— 
— 
(13,871)
(13,871)
(10,784)
(24,655)
Cash flow hedges
— 
— 
— 
— 
13,723 
13,723 
21,065 
34,788 
Stock-based compensation
— 
— 
59,492 
— 
— 
59,492 
5,691 
65,183 
Issuance of common stock pursuant to stock-based
compensation awards
2,574 
25 
(44,543)
— 
— 
(44,518)
— 
(44,518)
Cash distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(250,910)
(250,910)
Dividends declared and paid to common shareholders
($0.01 per share)
— 
— 
— 
(4,789)
— 
(4,789)
— 
(4,789)
MGP dividend payable to Class A shareholders
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(82,294)
(82,294)
Repurchases of common stock
(43,088)
(430)
(1,753,079)
— 
— 
(1,753,509)
— 
(1,753,509)
Adjustment of redeemable noncontrolling interest to
redemption value
— 
— 
(78,298)
— 
— 
(78,298)
— 
(78,298)
MGP Class A share issuances
— 
— 
99,934 
— 
3,240 
103,174 
656,361 
759,535 
Redemption of Operating Partnership units
— 
— 
171,332 
— 
5,327 
176,659 
(227,487)
(50,828)
MGM Springfield transaction
— 
— 
(133,844)
— 
— 
(133,844)
172,749 
38,905 
Other
— 
— 
(10,312)
— 
(2,358)
(12,670)
2,341 
(10,329)
Balances, December 31, 2021
453,804 
$
4,538 
$
1,750,135 
$
4,340,588 
$
(24,616)
$
6,070,645 
$
4,906,121 
$
10,976,766 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
66

MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 — ORGANIZATION
Organization. MGM Resorts International (together with its consolidated subsidiaries, unless otherwise indicated or unless the context requires otherwise,
the “Company”) is a Delaware corporation that acts largely as a holding company and, through subsidiaries, owns and operates casino resorts.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company operates the following integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resorts in Las Vegas, Nevada: Aria (including
Vdara), Bellagio, MGM Grand Las Vegas (including The Signature), The Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New York, Park MGM, and Excalibur. The
Company also operates MGM Grand Detroit in Detroit, Michigan, MGM National Harbor in Prince George’s County, Maryland, MGM Springfield in Springfield,
Massachusetts, Borgata in Atlantic City, New Jersey, Empire City in Yonkers, New York, MGM Northfield Park in Northfield Park, Ohio, and the following
resorts in Mississippi: Beau Rivage in Biloxi and Gold Strike Tunica in Tunica. Additionally, the Company operates The Park, a dining and entertainment district
located  between  New  York-New  York  and  Park  MGM,  and  the  Company  owns  and  operates  Shadow  Creek,  an  exclusive  world-class  golf  course  located
approximately ten miles north of its Las Vegas Strip Resorts and Fallen Oak golf course in Saucier, Mississippi.
MGM Growth Properties LLC (“MGP”), a consolidated subsidiary of the Company, is organized as an umbrella partnership REIT (commonly referred to as
an UPREIT) structure in which substantially all of its assets are owned by and substantially all of its business is conducted through MGM Growth Properties
Operating Partnership LP (the “Operating Partnership”). MGP has two classes of authorized and outstanding voting common shares (collectively, the “shares”):
Class A shares and a single Class B share. The Company owns MGP’s Class B share, which does not provide its holder any rights to profits or losses or any rights
to receive distributions from operations of MGP or upon liquidation or winding up of MGP. MGP’s Class A shareholders are entitled to one vote per share, while
the Company, as the owner of the Class B share, holds a controlling interest in MGP as it is entitled to an amount of votes representing a majority of the total
voting power of MGP’s shares so long as the Company and its controlled affiliates’ (excluding MGP) aggregate beneficial ownership of the combined economic
interests in MGP and the Operating Partnership does not fall below 30%. The Company and MGP each hold Operating Partnership units representing limited
partner interests in the Operating Partnership. The general partner of the Operating Partnership is a wholly owned subsidiary of MGP. The Operating Partnership
units held by the Company are exchangeable into Class A shares of MGP on a one-to-one basis, or cash at the Fair Market Value of a Class A share (as defined in
the Operating Partnership's partnership agreement). The determination of settlement method is at the option of MGP’s independent conflicts committee. As of
December 31, 2021, the Company owned 41.5% of the Operating Partnership units, and MGP held the remaining 58.5% ownership interest in the Operating
Partnership.
The Company leases the real estate assets of The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New York, Park MGM, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand
Detroit, Beau Rivage, Borgata, Empire City, MGM National Harbor, MGM Northfield Park, and MGM Springfield pursuant to a master lease agreement between a
subsidiary of the Company and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership. The Company leases the real estate assets of Bellagio pursuant to a lease agreement
between a subsidiary of the Company and a venture that is 5% owned by such subsidiary and 95% owned by a subsidiary of Blackstone Real Estate Income Trust,
Inc. (“BREIT”, and such venture, the “Bellagio BREIT Venture”). Additionally, the Company leases the real estate assets of Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las
Vegas, pursuant to a lease agreement between a subsidiary of the Company and a venture that is 50.1% owned by a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership and
49.9% by a subsidiary of BREIT (such venture, the “MGP BREIT Venture”). Further, the Company leases the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) pursuant
to a lease agreement between a subsidiary of the Company and funds managed by The Blackstone Group ("Blackstone"), as further discussed below. Refer to Note
11 for further discussion of the leases.
In January 2019, the Company acquired the real property and operations associated with the Empire City Casino's racetrack and casino ("Empire City").
Subsequently, MGP acquired the developed real property associated with Empire City from the Company and Empire City was added to the master lease between
the Company and MGP. Refer to Note 4 and Note 18 for additional information.
In March 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the master lease with respect to improvements made by the Company related to the rebranding
of the Park MGM and NoMad Las Vegas. Refer to Note 18 for additional information on this transaction, which eliminates in consolidation.
In  April  2019,  the  Company  acquired  the  membership  interests  of  Northfield  Park  Associates,  LLC  ("Northfield")  from  MGP  and  MGP  retained  the
associated real estate assets. The Company then rebranded the property to MGM
67

Northfield Park, and added it to the master lease between the Company and MGP. Refer to Note 18 for additional information.
On November 15, 2019, Bellagio BREIT Venture was formed, which acquired the Bellagio real estate assets from the Company and leased such assets back
to the Company pursuant to a lease agreement. In exchange for the contribution of the real estate assets, the Company received total consideration of $4.25 billion,
which consisted of a 5% equity interest in the venture and cash of approximately $4.2 billion. The Company recorded a gain of $2.7 billion related to sale of the
Bellagio real estate assets, recorded in “Gain on REIT transactions, net” in the consolidated statements of operations, which primarily reflects  the difference
between the carrying value of the real estate assets sold and the consideration received. The Company also provides a shortfall guarantee of the principal amount of
indebtedness of the debt of Bellagio BREIT Venture’s $3.01 billion of debt (and any interest accrued and unpaid thereon). Refer to Note 11 and Note 12 for
additional information relating to the lease and guarantee, respectively.
In December 2019, the Company completed the sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land. See Note 16 for additional information related to this
transaction.
On February 14, 2020, the Company completed a series of transactions (collectively the “MGP BREIT Venture Transaction”) pursuant to which the real
estate assets of MGM Grand Las Vegas and Mandalay Bay (including Mandalay Place) were contributed to the newly formed MGP BREIT Venture. In exchange
for the contribution of the real estate assets, the Company received total consideration of $4.6 billion, which was comprised of $2.5 billion of cash, $1.3 billion of
the  Operating  Partnership’s  secured  indebtedness  assumed  by  MGP  BREIT  Venture,  and  the  Operating  Partnership’s  50.1%  equity  interest  in  MGP  BREIT
Venture. In addition, the Operating Partnership issued approximately 3 million Operating Partnership units to the Company representing 5% of the equity value of
MGP BREIT Venture. The Company recorded the difference between consideration received of $2.5 billion and the carrying value of the MGM Grand Las Vegas
real  estate  assets  of  $733  million  and  selling  costs  of  $27  million  as  a  net  gain  on  sale  of  assets  of  $1.7  billion,  which  is  reflected  within  “Gain  on  REIT
transactions, net” in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company also recorded the difference between consideration received of $2.1 billion and the
carrying value of the Mandalay Bay real estate assets of $2.3 billion and selling costs of $10 million as a net loss on sale of assets of $252 million, which is
reflected  within  “Gain  on  REIT transactions,  net”  in  the  consolidated  statements  of  operations.  In  connection  with  the  transactions,  the  Company  provides  a
shortfall guarantee of the principal amount of indebtedness of MGP BREIT Venture (and any interest accrued and unpaid thereon) as further discussed in Note 12.
On the closing date, BREIT also purchased approximately 5 million MGP Class A shares for $150 million.
In connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, MGP BREIT Venture entered into a lease with a subsidiary of the Company for the real estate
assets of Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas as further discussed in Note 11. Additionally, the master lease with MGP was modified to remove the
Mandalay Bay property and the annual cash rent under the MGP master lease was reduced by $133 million, as further discussed in Note 18.
Also, on January 14, 2020, the Company, the Operating Partnership, and MGP entered into an agreement for the Operating Partnership to waive its right
following the closing of the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction to issue MGP Class A shares, in lieu of cash, to the Company in connection with the Company
exercising its right to require the Operating Partnership to redeem Operating Partnership units that the Company holds, at a price per unit equal to a 3% discount to
the ten day average closing price prior to the date of the notice of redemption. The waiver was effective upon closing of the transaction on February 14, 2020 and
was scheduled to terminate on the earlier of February 14, 2022 or upon the Company’s receipt of cash proceeds of $1.4 billion as consideration for the redemption
of the Company’s Operating Partnership units. On May 18, 2020, the Operating Partnership redeemed approximately 30 million Operating Partnership units that
the Company held for $700 million, or $23.10 per unit, and on December 2, 2020, the Operating Partnership redeemed approximately 24 million of the Operating
Partnership units that the Company held for the remaining $700 million, or $29.78 per unit. As a result, the waiver terminated in accordance with its terms.
On March 4, 2021, certain subsidiaries of the Company delivered a notice of redemption to MGP covering approximately 37 million Operating Partnership
units that they held, as further discussed in Note 13.
On August 4, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with VICI Properties, Inc. (“VICI”) and MGP whereby VICI will acquire MGP in a stock-for-
stock transaction (such transaction, the “VICI Transaction”). Pursuant to the agreement, MGP Class A shareholders will receive 1.366 shares of newly issued VICI
stock in exchange for each MGP Class A share outstanding and the Company will receive 1.366 units of the new VICI operating partnership (“VICI OP”) in
exchange for each Operating Partnership unit held by the Company. The fixed exchange ratio represents an agreed upon price of $43 per share of MGP Class A
share to the five-day volume weighted average price of VICI stock as of the close of business on July 30, 2021. In connection with the exchange, VICI OP will
redeem the majority of the Company’s VICI OP units for cash consideration of $4.4 billion, with the Company retaining an approximate $370 million ownership
68

interest in the VICI OP (based upon the close price of VICI stock as of August 3, 2021). MGP’s Class B share that is held by the Company will be cancelled. As
part of the transaction, the Company will enter into an amended and restated master lease with VICI. The new master lease will have an initial term of 25 years,
with three 10-year renewals, and initial annual rent of $860 million, escalating annually at a rate of 2% per annum for the first 10 years and thereafter equal to the
greater of 2% and the CPI increase during the prior year subject to a cap of 3%. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2022, subject to customary
closing conditions, regulatory approvals, and approval by VICI stockholders (which was obtained on October 29, 2021).
On September 26, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire the operations of The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas ("The Cosmopolitan") for
cash consideration of $1.625 billion, subject to customary working capital adjustments. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company is obligated to use its reasonable
best efforts to obtain the requisite antitrust and gaming regulatory approvals. The agreement may be terminated by either party if the transaction has not closed on
or before June 26, 2022, which date may be extended by either party to a date on or prior to September 26, 2022 under certain circumstances. The agreement
contemplates a reverse termination fee of $500 million that is payable by the Company in the event that the parties are unable to obtain antitrust or gaming
regulatory approval. Additionally, the Company will enter into a lease agreement for the real estate assets of The Cosmopolitan. The Cosmopolitan lease will have
an initial term of 30 years with three subsequent 10-year renewal periods, exercisable at the Company’s option. The initial term of the lease provides for an initial
annual cash rent of $200 million with a fixed 2% escalator for the first 15 years, and thereafter, an escalator equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase during
the prior year, subject to a cap of 3%. Additionally, the lease will require the Company to spend a specified percentage of net revenues over a rolling 5-year period
at the property on capital expenditures and for the Company to comply with certain financial covenants, which, if not met, would require the Company to maintain
cash security or one or more letters of credit in favor of the landlord in an amount equal to rent for the succeeding 1-year period. The transaction is expected to
close in the first half of 2022, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions.
On September 27, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of the 50% ownership interest in CityCenter Holdings, LLC ("CityCenter") held by Infinity
World Development Corp ("Infinity World"), a wholly owned subsidiary of Dubai World, a Dubai, United Arab Emirates government decree entity. CityCenter is
located between Bellagio and Park MGM and consists of Aria, an integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resort; and Vdara, a luxury condominium-hotel. Refer
to Note 4 for additional information on this acquisition.
On September 28, 2021, the Company sold the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) to funds managed by The Blackstone Group Inc. ("Blackstone")
for cash consideration of $3.89 billion and entered into a lease through which the real property is leased back to a subsidiary of the Company, as further discussed
in Note 11.
On October 29, 2021, MGP acquired the real estate assets of MGM Springfield from the Company and MGM Springfield was added to the MGP master
lease between the Company and MGP through which MGP leases back the real property to a subsidiary of the Company. Transactions with MGP, including
transactions under the MGP master lease, have been eliminated in the Company’s consolidation of MGP. Refer to Note 18 for additional information.
On December 13, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to sell the operations of The Mirage to an affiliate of Seminole Hard Rock Entertainment,
Inc. ("Hard Rock") for cash consideration of $1.075 billion, subject to certain purchase price adjustments. Pursuant to the agreement, Hard Rock is obligated to use
its reasonable best efforts to obtain the requisite antitrust and gaming regulatory approvals. The agreement may be terminated by either party if the closing has not
occurred  on  or  before  December  13,  2022,  which  date  may  be  extended  by  either  party  to  March  13,  2023  under  certain  circumstances.  The  agreement
contemplates a reverse termination fee of $322.5 million that is payable by Hard Rock to the Company in the event that the parties are unable to obtain antitrust or
gaming regulatory approval. Upon closing, the master lease between the Company and VICI (or MGP in the event that the VICI Transaction is terminated) will be
amended and restated to reflect a $90 million reduction in annual cash rent. The transaction is expected to close during the second half of 2022, subject to certain
closing conditions, including, but not limited to, the consummation or termination of the VICI Transaction and receipt of regulatory approvals.
The Company has an approximate 56% controlling interest in MGM China Holdings Limited (together with its subsidiaries, “MGM China”), which owns
MGM Grand Paradise, S.A. (“MGM Grand Paradise”). MGM Grand Paradise owns and operates the MGM Macau and MGM Cotai, two integrated casino, hotel
and entertainment resorts in Macau, as well as the related gaming subconcession and land concessions.
Gaming  in  Macau  is  currently  administered  by  the  Macau  Government  through  concessions  awarded  to  three  different  concessionaires  and  three
subconcessionaires, of which a subsidiary of MGM China, MGM Grand Paradise, is a subconcessionaire. In 2019, the expiration  of MGM Grand Paradise’s
subconcession term was extended from March 31, 2020 to June 26, 2022, consistent with the expiration of the other concessionaires and subconcessionaires.
Pursuant to the
69

Macau gaming law, upon reaching the maximum duration of 20 years, the term of the concessions may be extended one or more times by order of the Chief
Executive, which period may not exceed, in total, 5 years. On January 14, 2022, the Macau Government disclosed the content of a bill to amend Macau gaming
law, which followed a 45-day public consultation process regarding draft amendment proposals that were issued in September 2021. Under the bill the existing
subconcessions will be discontinued and a maximum of six concessions will be awarded for a term to be specified in the concession contract that may not exceed
10 years and which may be extended by three years under certain circumstances. The bill is subject to debate and approval by the Macau Legislative Assembly.
The approval of the new gaming law bill will precede the public tender for the awarding of new gaming concessions and to date the Macau Government has
provided no indication as to whether the public tender will take place before expiry of the existing gaming concessions and subconcessions but acknowledged that
it could consider the extension of the existing concessions and subconcessions beyond their current term if the public tender is held at a later date. Unless MGM
Grand Paradise's gaming subconcession is extended or legislation with regard to reversion of casino premises is amended the casino area premises and gaming-
related equipment subject to reversion will automatically be transferred to the Macau Government upon expiration, and MGM China will cease to generate any
revenues  from  such  gaming  operations.  In  addition,  certain  events  relating  to  the  loss,  termination,  rescission,  revocation  or  modification  of  MGM  Grand
Paradise’s  gaming  subconcession  in  Macau,  where  such  events  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the  financial  condition,  business,  properties,  or  results  of
operations of MGM China, taken as a whole, may result in a special put option triggering event under MGM China’s senior notes and in an event of default under
MGM China’s revolving credit facilities. MGM China continues to closely monitor developments regarding the retendering process or concession extensions
including the issuance of guidance by the Macau Government. MGM China intends to respond proactively to all relevant Macau Government requirements when
known relating to the process. Management cannot provide any assurance that the gaming subconcession will be extended beyond the current term or that it will be
able  to  obtain  a  gaming  concession  in  a  public  tender;  however,  management  believes  that  MGM  Grand  Paradise  will  be  successful  in  obtaining  a  gaming
concession when a public tender is held.
The Company owns 50% of BetMGM, LLC (“BetMGM”), which provides online sports betting and iGaming in certain jurisdictions in the United States.
The other 50% of BetMGM is owned by Entain plc.
The Company has three reportable segments: Las Vegas Strip Resorts, Regional Operations and MGM China. See Note 17 for additional information about
the Company’s segments.
Financial Impact of COVID-19. The spread of the novel 2019 coronavirus (“COVID-19”) and developments surrounding the global pandemic have had a
significant  impact  on  the  Company’s  business,  financial  condition,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows  in  2020  and  2021  and  may  continue  to  impact  the
Company's  business  in  2022  and  thereafter.  In  March  2020,  all  of  the  Company’s  domestic  properties  were  temporarily  closed  pursuant  to  state  and  local
government  restrictions  imposed  as  a  result  of  COVID-19.  Throughout  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  2020,  all  of  the  Company’s  properties  that  were
temporarily closed re-opened to the public, with temporary re-closures and re-openings occurring for certain of the Company’s properties or portions thereof into
the  first  quarter  of  2021.  Upon  re-opening,  the  properties  continued  to  operate  without  certain  amenities  and  subject  to  certain  occupancy  limitations,  with
restrictions varying by jurisdiction. Beginning in the latter part of the first quarter of 2021 and continuing into the second quarter of 2021, the Company’s domestic
jurisdictions eased and removed prior operating restrictions, including capacity and occupancy limits, as well as social distancing policies.
Although all of the Company’s properties have re-opened, in light of the unpredictable nature of the pandemic, including the emergence and spread of
COVID-19 variants, the properties may be subject to new operating restrictions and/or temporary, complete, or partial shutdowns in the future. At this time, the
Company cannot predict whether jurisdictions, states or the federal government will adopt similar or more restrictive measures in the future than in the past,
including stay-at-home orders or the temporary closure of all or a portion of the Company’s properties as a result of the pandemic.
In Macau, following a temporary closure of the Company’s properties on February 5, 2020, operations resumed on February 20, 2020, subject to certain
health safeguards, such as limiting the number of seats available at each table game, slot machine spacing, reduced operating hours at a number of restaurants and
bars, temperature checks, and mask protection. Although the issuance of tourist visas (including the individual visit scheme) for residents of Zhuhai, Guangdong
Province and all other provinces in mainland China to travel to Macau resumed on August 12, 2020, August 26, 2020 and September 23, 2020, respectively,
several travel and entry restrictions in Macau, Hong Kong and mainland China remain in place (including the temporary suspension of ferry services between
Hong Kong and Macau, the negative nucleic acid test result certificate, and mandatory quarantine requirements for returning residents, for visitors from Hong
Kong, Taiwan, and certain regions in mainland China, and bans on entry on other visitors), which significantly impacted visitation to the Company’s Macau
properties. In the third and fourth quarters of 2021, local COVID-19 cases were identified in Macau. Upon such occurrences, a state of immediate prevention was
declared and mass mandatory nucleic acid testing was imposed in Macau, the validity period of negative test results for re-entry into mainland China was shortened
and quarantine requirements were imposed, certain events were cancelled or suspended, and in some instances,
70

certain  entertainment  and  leisure  facilities  were  closed  throughout  Macau.  Although  gaming  and  hotel  operations  have  remained  open  during  these  states  of
immediate prevention, such measures have had a negative effect on the Company's operations and it is uncertain whether further closures, including the closure of
the Company’s properties, or travel restrictions to Macau will be implemented if additional local COVID-19 cases are identified.
NOTE 2 — BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of consolidation. The Company evaluates entities for which control is achieved through means other than voting rights to determine if it is the
primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity (“VIE”). A VIE is an entity in which either (i) the equity investors as a group, if any, lack the power through voting
or similar rights to direct the activities of such entity that most significantly impact such entity’s economic performance or (ii) the equity investment at risk is
insufficient to finance that entity’s activities without additional subordinated financial support. The Company identifies the primary beneficiary of a VIE as the
enterprise that has both of the following characteristics: (i) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the entity’s economic
performance; and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses or receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the entity. The Company consolidates its
investment in a VIE when it determines that it is its primary beneficiary. For these VIEs, the Company records a noncontrolling interest in the consolidated balance
sheets. The Company may change its original assessment of a VIE upon subsequent events such as the modification of contractual arrangements that affect the
characteristics or adequacy of the entity’s equity investments at risk and the disposition of all or a portion of an interest held by the primary beneficiary. The
Company performs this analysis on an ongoing basis.
Management has determined that MGP is a VIE because the Class A equity investors as a group lack the power through voting or similar rights to direct the
activities of such entity that most significantly impact such entity’s economic performance. The Company has determined that it is the primary beneficiary of MGP
and consolidates MGP because (i) its ownership of MGP’s single Class B share entitles it to a majority of the total voting power of MGP’s shares, and (ii) the
exchangeable nature of the Operating Partnership units owned provide the Company the right to receive benefits from MGP that could potentially be significant to
MGP. The Company has recorded MGP’s ownership interest in the Operating Partnership as noncontrolling interest in the Company’s consolidated financial
statements. As of December 31, 2021, on a consolidated basis MGP had total assets of $10.4 billion, primarily related to its real estate investments, and total
liabilities of $5.1 billion, primarily related to its indebtedness.
Management has determined that Bellagio BREIT Venture is a VIE because the equity holders as a group lack the power through voting or similar rights to
direct the activities of such entity that most significantly impact such entity’s economic performance. The Company has determined that it is not the primary
beneficiary of Bellagio BREIT Venture and, accordingly, does not consolidate the venture, because the Company does not have power to direct the activities that
could potentially be significant to the venture; BREIT, as the managing member, has such power. The Company has recorded its 5% ownership interest in Bellagio
BREIT Venture as an investment in unconsolidated affiliates in the Company’s consolidated financial statements, for which such amount was $58 million as of
December 31, 2021. The Company’s maximum exposure to loss as a result of its involvement with Bellagio BREIT Venture is equal to the carrying value of its
investment, assuming no future capital funding requirements, plus the exposure to loss resulting from the Company’s guarantee of the debt of Bellagio BREIT
Venture, which guarantee is immaterial as of December 31, 2021, as further discussed in Note 12.
For entities determined not to be a VIE, the Company consolidates such entities in which the Company owns 100% of the equity. For entities in which the
Company owns less than 100% of the equity interest, the Company consolidates the entity under the voting interest model if it has a controlling financial interest
based upon the terms of the respective entities’ ownership agreements, such as MGM China. For these entities, the Company records a noncontrolling interest in
the consolidated balance sheets and all intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated in consolidation. If the entity does not qualify for consolidation
under the voting interest model and the Company has significant influence over the operating and financial decisions of the entity, the Company accounts for the
entity under the equity method, such as the Company’s investments in MGP BREIT Venture and BetMGM, which do not qualify for consolidation as the Company
has joint control, given the entities are structured with substantive participating rights whereby both owners participate in the decision making process, which
prevents the Company from exerting a controlling financial interest in such entities, as defined in ASC 810.
For equity interests in entities in which the Company does not have significant influence, the Company records its equity investment under ASC 321 and
reflects such investments within “Other long-term assets, net” on the consolidated balance sheets. The fair value of such equity investments was $66 million as of
December 31, 2021.
Reclassifications. Certain reclassifications have been made to conform the prior period presentation.
71

Management’s use of estimates. The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America. These principles require the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets
and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair value measurements. Fair value measurements affect the Company’s accounting and impairment assessments of its long-lived assets, investments in
unconsolidated  affiliates  or  equity  interests,  assets  acquired,  and  liabilities  assumed  in  an  acquisition,  and  goodwill  and  other  intangible  assets.  Fair  value
measurements also affect the Company’s accounting for certain of its financial assets and liabilities. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell
an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and is measured according to a hierarchy that
includes: Level 1 inputs, such as quoted prices in an active market; Level 2 inputs, which are observable inputs for similar assets; or Level 3 inputs, which are
unobservable inputs. The Company used the following inputs in its fair value measurements:
•
Level 1 inputs when measuring its equity investments under ASC 321;
•
Level 1 and Level 2 inputs for its long-term debt fair value disclosures. See Note 9;
•
Level 2 inputs when measuring the Operating Partnership’s fair value of its interest rate swaps. See Note 9;
•
Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 inputs when assessing the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the CityCenter acquisition. See Note 4; and
•
Level 2 and Level 3 inputs when assessing the fair value of the note receivable relating to the Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land sale. See Note
16.
Cash and cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand, investments and interest-bearing instruments with maturities of 90 days or
less at the date of acquisition. Such investments are carried at cost, which approximates market value. Book overdraft balances resulting from the Company’s cash
management program are recorded as “Accounts payable” or “Construction payable” as applicable.
Restricted  cash. Restricted  cash  reflects  cash  held  in  an  escrow  account  related  to  the  reverse  termination  fee  that  was  contractually  required  to  be
prefunded for The Cosmopolitan acquisition and is reflected as "Restricted Cash" on the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021. "Restricted Cash"
and  "Cash  and  cash  equivalents"  on  the  consolidated  balance  sheets  as  of  December  31,  2021  equal  "Cash,  cash  equivalents,  and  restricted  cash"  on  the
consolidated statements of cash flows.
Accounts receivable and credit risk. Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of casino
accounts  receivable.  The  Company  issues  credit  following  background  checks  and  investigations  of  creditworthiness.  At  December  31,  2021  and  2020,
approximately 43% and 52%, respectively, of the Company’s gross casino accounts receivable were owed by customers from foreign countries, primarily within
Asia. Business or economic conditions or other significant events in these countries could affect the collectability of such receivables.
Accounts receivable are typically non-interest bearing and are initially recorded at cost. Accounts are written off when management deems the account to be
uncollectible.  Recoveries  of  accounts  previously  written  off  are  recorded  when  received.  An  estimated  loss  reserve  is  maintained  to  reduce  the  Company’s
receivables to their net carrying amount, which approximates fair value. The loss reserve is estimated based on both a specific review of customer accounts as well
as historical collection experience and current and expected future economic and business conditions. Management believes that as of December 31, 2021, no
significant concentrations of credit risk existed for which a loss reserve had not already been recorded.
Inventories. Inventories  consist  primarily  of  food  and  beverage,  retail  merchandise  and  operating  supplies,  and  are  stated  at  the  lower  of  cost  or  net
realizable  value.  Cost  is  determined  primarily  using  the  average  cost  method  for  food  and  beverage  and  operating  supplies.  Cost  for  retail  merchandise  is
determined using the cost method.
Property and equipment. Property and equipment are stated at cost. A significant amount of the Company’s property and equipment was acquired through
business combinations and therefore recognized at fair value at the acquisition date. Gains or losses on dispositions of property and equipment are included in the
determination of income or loss. Maintenance costs are expensed as incurred.
72

Property and equipment are generally depreciated over the following estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis:
Buildings and improvements
15 to 40 years
Land improvements
10 to 20 years
Furniture and fixtures
3 to 20 years
Equipment
3 to 15 years
The Company evaluates its property and equipment and other long-lived assets for impairment based on its classification as held for sale or to be held and
used. Several criteria must be met before an asset is classified as held for sale, including that management with the appropriate authority commits to a plan to sell
the asset at a reasonable price in relation to its fair value and is actively seeking a buyer. For assets held for sale, the Company recognizes the asset at the lower of
carrying value or fair market value less costs to sell, as estimated based on comparable asset sales, offers received, or a discounted cash flow model. For assets to
be held and used, the Company reviews for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. The Company then compares the estimated future cash flows of
the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to the carrying value of the asset. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the
undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, then an impairment charge is recorded based on the fair value of the asset, typically measured using a
discounted cash flow model. If an asset is still under development, future cash flows include remaining construction costs. All recognized impairment losses,
whether for assets held for sale or assets to be held and used, are recorded as operating expenses. Refer to Note 16 for discussion on the impairment loss recorded
on Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land in 2019.
Capitalized interest. The interest cost associated with major development and construction projects is capitalized and included in the cost of the project.
When no debt is incurred specifically for a project, interest is capitalized on amounts expended on the project using the weighted average cost of the Company’s
outstanding borrowings. Capitalization of interest ceases when the project is substantially complete, or development activity is suspended for more than a brief
period.
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates. The Company has investments in unconsolidated affiliates accounted for under the equity
method.  Under  the  equity  method,  carrying  value  is  adjusted  for  the  Company’s  share  of  the  investees’  earnings  and  losses,  amortization  of  certain  basis
differences, as well as capital contributions to and distributions from these companies. Distributions in excess of equity method earnings are recognized as a return
of investment and recorded as investing cash inflows in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows. The Company classifies operating income and
losses as well as gains and impairments related to its investments in unconsolidated affiliates as a component of operating income or loss and classifies non-
operating income or losses related to its investments in unconsolidated affiliates as a component of non-operating income or loss, as the Company’s investments in
such unconsolidated affiliates are an extension of the Company’s core business operations.
The Company evaluates its investments in unconsolidated affiliates for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying
value of its investment may have experienced an other-than-temporary decline in value. If such conditions exist, the Company compares the estimated fair value of
the investment to its carrying value to determine if an impairment is indicated and determines whether the impairment is “other-than-temporary” based on its
assessment of all relevant factors, including consideration of the Company’s intent and ability to retain its investment. The Company estimates fair value using a
discounted cash flow analysis based on estimated future results of the investee and market indicators of terminal year capitalization rates, and a market approach
that utilizes business enterprise value multiples based on a range of multiples from the Company’s peer group.
Goodwill  and  other  intangible  assets. Goodwill  represents  the  excess  of  purchase  price  over  fair  market  value  of  net  assets  acquired  in  business
combinations.  Goodwill  and  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  must  be  reviewed  for  impairment  at  least  annually  and  between  annual  test  dates  in  certain
circumstances. The Company performs its annual impairment tests in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. No material impairments were indicated or recorded as
a result of the annual impairment review for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Accounting guidance provides entities the option to perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets (commonly referred
to  as  “step  zero”)  in  order  to  determine  whether  further  impairment  testing  is  necessary.  In  performing  the  step  zero  analysis  the  Company  considers
macroeconomic  conditions,  industry  and  market  considerations,  current  and  forecasted  financial  performance,  entity-specific  events,  and  changes  in  the
composition or carrying amount of net assets of reporting units for goodwill. In addition, the Company takes into consideration the amount of excess of fair value
over carrying value determined in the last quantitative analysis that was performed, as well as the
73

period of time that has passed since the last quantitative analysis. If the step zero analysis indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its
carrying amount, the entity would proceed to a quantitative analysis.
Under the quantitative analysis, goodwill for relevant reporting units is tested for impairment using a discounted cash flow analysis based on the estimated
future results of the Company’s reporting units discounted using market discount rates and market indicators of terminal year capitalization rates, and a market
approach that utilizes business enterprise value multiples based on a range of multiples from the Company’s peer group. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less
than its carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized equal to the difference. Under the quantitative analysis, license rights are tested for impairment using a
discounted cash flow approach, and trademarks are tested for impairment using the relief-from-royalty method. If the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible
asset is less than its carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference.
Revenue recognition. The Company’s revenue from contracts with customers consists of casino wagers transactions, hotel room sales, food and beverage
transactions, entertainment shows, and retail transactions.
The transaction price for a casino wager is the difference between gaming wins and losses (“net win”). In certain  circumstances,  the Company offers
discounts on markers, which is estimated based upon historical business practice, and recorded as a reduction of casino revenue. Commissions rebated to gaming
promoters and VIP players at MGM China are also recorded as a reduction of casino revenue. The Company accounts for casino revenue on a portfolio basis given
the similar characteristics of wagers by recognizing net win per gaming day versus on an individual wager basis.
For casino wager transactions that include other goods and services provided by the Company to gaming patrons on a discretionary basis to incentivize
gaming,  the  Company  allocates  revenue  from  the  casino  wager  transaction  to  the  good  or  service  delivered  based  upon  standalone  selling  price  (“SSP”).
Discretionary goods and services provided by the Company and supplied by third parties are recognized as an operating expense.
For casino wager transactions that include incentives earned by customers under the Company’s loyalty programs, the Company allocates a portion of net
win  based  upon  the  SSP  of  such  incentive  (less  estimated  breakage).  This  allocation  is  deferred  and  recognized  as  revenue  when  the  customer  redeems  the
incentive. When redeemed, revenue is recognized in the department that provides the goods or service. Redemption of loyalty incentives at third-party outlets are
deducted from the loyalty liability and amounts owed are paid to the third party, with any discount received recorded as other revenue. After allocating revenue to
other goods and services provided as part of casino wager transactions, the Company records the residual amount to casino revenue.
The transaction price of rooms, food and beverage, and retail contracts is the net amount collected from the customer for such goods and services. The
transaction price for such contracts is recorded as revenue when the good or service is transferred to the customer over their stay at the hotel or when the delivery is
made for the food & beverage and retail & other contracts. Sales and usage-based taxes are excluded from revenues. For some arrangements, the Company acts as
an agent in that it arranges for another party to transfer goods and services and the Company is not the controlling entity, which primarily include certain of the
Company’s entertainment shows and, in certain jurisdictions, the Company’s arrangement with BetMGM for online sports betting and iGaming.
The Company also has other contracts that include multiple goods and services, such as packages that bundle food, beverage, or entertainment offerings
with hotel stays and convention services. For such arrangements, the Company allocates revenue to each good or service based on its relative SSP. The Company
primarily determines the SSP of rooms, food and beverage, entertainment, and retail goods and services based on the amount that the Company charges when sold
separately in similar circumstances to similar customers.
Contract and Contract-Related Liabilities. There may be a difference between the timing of cash receipts from the customer and the recognition of revenue,
resulting in a contract or contract-related liability. The Company generally has three types of liabilities related to contracts with customers: (1) outstanding chip
liability, which represents the amounts owed in exchange for gaming chips held by a customer, (2) loyalty program obligations, which represents the deferred
allocation of revenue relating to loyalty program incentives earned, as discussed above, and (3) customer advances and other, which is primarily funds deposited by
customers before gaming play occurs (“casino front money”) and advance payments on goods and services yet to be provided such as advance ticket sales and
deposits on rooms and convention space or for unpaid wagers. These liabilities are generally expected to be recognized as revenue within one year of being
purchased, earned, or deposited and are recorded within “Other accrued liabilities” on the consolidated balance sheets.
74

The following table summarizes the activity related to contract and contract-related liabilities:
 
Outstanding Chip Liability
Loyalty Program
Customer Advances and Other
 
2021
 
2020
2021
2020
2021
2020
 
(in thousands)
Balance at January 1
$
212,671 
$
314,570 
$
139,756 $
126,966 
$
382,287 
$
481,095 
Balance at December 31
176,219 
212,671 
144,465 
139,756 
640,001 
382,287 
Increase / (decrease)
$
(36,452)
$
(101,899)
$
4,709 $
12,790 
$
257,714 
$
(98,808)
Reimbursed cost. Costs reimbursed pursuant to management services are recognized as revenue in the period it incurs the costs as this reflects when the
Company performs its related performance obligation and is entitled to reimbursement. Reimbursed costs related primarily to the Company’s management of
CityCenter (such management agreement was terminated upon the acquisition of CityCenter in September 2021).
Revenue by source. The Company presents the revenue earned disaggregated by the type or nature of the good or service (casino, room, food and beverage,
and entertainment, retail and other) and by relevant geographic region within Note 17.
Leases. The Company determines if an arrangement is or contains a lease at inception or modification of the arrangement. An arrangement is or contains a
lease if there are identified assets and the right to control the use of an identified asset is conveyed for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Control over
the use of the identified asset means the lessee has both the right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from the use of the asset and the right to direct
the use of the asset.
The Company classifies a lease with terms greater than twelve months as either operating or finance. At commencement date, the right-of-use (“ROU”)
assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. The initial measurement of the
operating lease ROU assets also includes any prepaid lease payments and are reduced by any previously accrued deferred rent. When available, such as for the
Company’s triple-net operating leases for which the lessor has provided its implicit rate or provided the assumptions required for the Company to readily determine
the rate implicit in the lease, the Company uses the rate implicit in the lease to discount lease payments to present value. However, for most of the Company’s
leases, such as its equipment leases, the Company cannot readily determine the implicit rate. Accordingly, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate to
discount the lease payments for such leases based on the information available at the commencement date. Lease terms include options to extend or terminate the
lease when it is reasonably certain that such option will be exercised. The Company’s triple-net operating leases each contain renewal periods at the Company’s
option, each of which are not considered to be reasonably certain of being exercised. Many of the Company’s leases include fixed rental escalation clauses that are
factored into the determination of lease payments. For operating leases, lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
expected lease term. For finance leases, the ROU asset depreciates on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the lease term or useful life of the ROU asset and the
lease liability accretes interest based on the interest method using the discount rate determined at lease commencement.
Refer to Note 11 for discussion of leases under which the Company is a lessee. The master lease agreement with MGP is eliminated in consolidation; refer
to Note 18 for further discussion of the master lease with MGP.
The Company is a lessor under certain other lease arrangements. Lease revenues earned by the Company from third parties are classified within the line
item corresponding to the type or nature of the tenant’s good or service. Lease revenues from third-party tenants include $43 million, $24 million and $53 million
recorded within food and beverage revenue for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $85 million, $60 million and $89 million recorded within entertainment,
retail,  and  other  revenue  for  the  same  such  periods,  respectively.  Lease  revenues  from  the  rental  of  hotel  rooms  are  recorded  as  rooms  revenues  within  the
consolidated statements of operations.
Advertising. The  Company  expenses  advertising  costs  as  incurred.  Advertising  expense  that  primarily  relates  to  media  placement  costs  and  which  is
generally included in general and administrative expenses, was $121 million, $88 million and $195 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Corporate expense. Corporate expense represents unallocated payroll, professional fees and various other expenses not directly related to the Company’s
casino resort operations. In addition, corporate expense includes the costs associated with the Company’s evaluation and pursuit of new business opportunities,
which are expensed as incurred.
75

Preopening and start-up expenses. Preopening and start-up costs, including organizational costs, are expensed as incurred. Costs classified as preopening
and start-up expenses include payroll, outside services, advertising, and other expenses related to new or start-up operations.
Property transactions, net. The Company classifies transactions such as write-downs and impairments, demolition costs, and normal gains and losses on
the sale of assets as “Property transactions, net.” See Note 16 for a detailed discussion of these amounts.
Redeemable noncontrolling interest. Certain noncontrolling interest parties have non-voting economic interests in MGM National Harbor which provide
for annual preferred distributions by MGM National Harbor to the noncontrolling interest parties based on a percentage of its annual net gaming revenue (as
defined in the MGM National Harbor operating agreement). Such distributions are accrued each quarter and are paid 90 days after the end of each fiscal year. The
noncontrolling interest parties each have the ability to require MGM National Harbor to purchase all or a portion of their interests for a purchase price based on a
contractually agreed upon formula.
The Company has recorded the interests as “Redeemable noncontrolling interests” in the mezzanine section of the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets and not stockholders’ equity because their redemption is not exclusively in the Company’s control. The interests were initially accounted for at fair value.
Subsequently, the Company recognizes changes in the redemption value as they occur and adjusts the carrying amount of the redeemable noncontrolling interests
to equal the maximum redemption value, provided such amount does not fall below the initial carrying value, at the end of each reporting period. The Company
records any changes caused by such an adjustment in capital in excess of par value. Additionally, the carrying amount of the redeemable noncontrolling interests is
adjusted for accrued annual preferred distributions, with changes caused by such adjustments recorded within net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling
interests.
Income per share of common stock. The table below reconciles basic and diluted income per share of common stock. Diluted net income attributable to
common stockholders includes adjustments for redeemable noncontrolling interests. Diluted weighted average common and common equivalent shares include
adjustments for potential dilution of share-based awards outstanding under the Company’s stock compensation plan.
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Numerator:
(In thousands)
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
$
1,254,370 
$
(1,032,724)
$
2,049,146 
Adjustment related to redeemable noncontrolling interests
(78,298)
35,520 
(2,713)
Net income (loss) available to common stockholders - basic
1,176,072 
(997,204)
2,046,433 
Other
— 
— 
(194)
Net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders - diluted
$
1,176,072 
$
(997,204)
$
2,046,239 
Denominator:
Weighted average common shares outstanding basic
481,930 
494,152 
524,173 
Potential dilution from share-based awards
5,426 
— 
3,472 
Weighted average common and common equivalent shares - diluted
487,356 
494,152 
527,645 
Antidilutive share-based awards excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share
198 
9,493 
1,617 
Currency translation. The Company translates the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries that are not denominated in U.S. dollars. Balance sheet
accounts are translated at the exchange rate in effect at each balance sheet date. Income statement accounts are translated at the average rate of exchange prevailing
during the period. Translation adjustments resulting from this process are recorded to other comprehensive income (loss). Gains or losses from foreign currency
remeasurements are recorded to other non-operating income (expense).
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Comprehensive income (loss) includes net income (loss) and all other non-stockholder changes in
equity,  or  other  comprehensive  income  (loss).  Elements  of  the  Company’s  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  (loss)  are  reported  in  the  consolidated
statements of stockholders’ equity.
76

NOTE 3 — ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE, NET
Accounts receivable, net consisted of the following:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Casino
$
380,907 
$
260,998 
Hotel
180,098 
46,288 
Other
151,258 
135,805 
 
712,263 
443,091 
Less: Loss reserves
(128,348)
(126,589)
 
$
583,915 
$
316,502 
NOTE 4 — ACQUISITIONS
CityCenter
On  September  27,  2021,  the  Company  completed  the  acquisition  of  Infinity  World's  50%  ownership  interest  in  CityCenter  for  cash  consideration  of
$2.125 billion.
Through the acquisition, the Company obtained 100% of the equity interests in CityCenter and therefore consolidated CityCenter as of September 27, 2021.
Prior to the acquisition, the Company held a 50% ownership interest, which was accounted for under the equity method. The fair value of the equity interests of
CityCenter was determined by the transaction price and equaled $4.25 billion. The carrying value of the Company's equity method investment was less than its
share of the fair value of CityCenter at the acquisition date, resulting in a net gain of $1.6 billion upon consolidation, which is recognized as "Gain on consolidation
of CityCenter, net" on the consolidated statements of operations.
On September 28, 2021, the Company sold the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) for cash consideration of $3.89 billion and entered into a lease
agreement pursuant to which the Company leases back the real property. The Company classified the real estate assets as held for sale as of the acquisition date and
accordingly measured the real estate assets at fair value less costs to sell, as reflected in the table below. See Note 11 for additional information regarding the lease.
The Company recognized 100% of the assets and liabilities of CityCenter at fair value at the date of the acquisition. Under the acquisition method, the fair
value was allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction. The Company estimated fair value using level 1 inputs, level 2 inputs, and level
3 inputs.
The following table sets forth the purchase price allocation (in thousands):
Fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed:
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
335,396 
Receivables and other current assets
106,417 
Property and equipment - real estate assets held for sale
3,888,431 
Property and equipment
323,093 
Trademarks
180,000 
Goodwill
1,397,338 
Other long-term assets
13,923 
Accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and other current liabilities
(201,093)
Debt
(1,729,451)
Other long-term liabilities
(64,054)
 
$
4,250,000 
The  Company  recognized  the  identifiable  intangible  assets  of  CityCenter  at  fair  value,  which  consisted  of  indefinite-lived  trade  names,  which  was
determined using methodologies under the relief from royalty method based on significant
77

inputs that were not observable. The goodwill is primarily attributable to the profitability of CityCenter in excess of identifiable assets, of which approximately
50% of the goodwill is deductible for income tax purposes. All of the goodwill was assigned to the Company’s Las Vegas Strip Resorts segment.
Results. CityCenter’s net revenue for the period from September 27, 2021 through December 31, 2021 was $367 million and operating income and net
income were $69 million and $68 million, respectively.
Unaudited pro forma information. The operating results for CityCenter are included in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations from the
date of acquisition. The following unaudited pro forma consolidated financial information for the Company has been prepared assuming the Company’s acquisition
of its controlling interest had occurred as of January 1, 2020 and excludes the gain on consolidation discussed above. The pro forma information does not reflect
transactions  that  occurred  subsequent  to  acquisition,  such  as  the  subsequent  sale-leaseback  transaction  or  the  repayment  of  CityCenter's  assumed  debt.  The
unaudited pro forma financial information below is not necessarily indicative of either future results of operations or results that might have been achieved had the
acquisition been consummated as of January 1, 2020.
Year Ended December 31,
2021
2020
(In thousands)
Net Revenues
$
10,153,603 $
5,456,763 
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts International
137,773 
(1,041,271)
Empire City
On  January  29,  2019,  the  Company  acquired  the  real  property  and  operations  associated  with  Empire  City  for  total  consideration  of  approximately
$865 million, plus customary working capital and other adjustments. The fair value of consideration paid included the issuance of approximately $266 million of
the Company’s common stock, the incurrence of a new bridge facility, and the remaining balance in cash. If Empire City is awarded a license for live table games
on or prior to December 31, 2022 and the Company accepts such license by December 31, 2024, the Company will pay additional consideration of $50 million.
The acquisition expands the Company’s presence in the northeast region and greater New York City market. Subsequent to the Company’s acquisition, MGP
acquired the developed real property associated with Empire City from the Company and Empire City was added to the master lease between the Company and
MGP. See Note 18 for additional information.
For the period from January 29, 2019 through December 31, 2019, Empire City’s net revenue was $193 million, operating income was $12 million and net
income was $36 million. Pro forma results of operations for the acquisition  have not been presented because it is not material to the consolidated results of
operations.
Northfield
In  April  2019,  the  Company  acquired  the  membership  interests  of  Northfield  from  MGP,  and  MGP  retained  the  associated  real  estate  assets.  MGM
Northfield Park was then added to the master lease between the Company and MGP. Refer to Note 18 for additional information.
78

NOTE 5 — PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
Property and equipment, net consisted of the following:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Land
$
4,082,842 
$
4,081,029 
Buildings, building improvements and land improvements
12,236,042 
12,053,422 
Furniture, fixtures and equipment
5,722,565 
5,600,579 
Construction in progress
421,445 
170,957 
 
22,462,894 
21,905,987 
Less: Accumulated depreciation
(8,179,310)
(7,474,876)
Finance lease ROU assets, net
151,909 
200,980 
 
$
14,435,493 
$
14,632,091 
NOTE 6 — INVESTMENTS IN AND ADVANCES TO UNCONSOLIDATED AFFILIATES
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates consisted of the following:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
CityCenter (50% as of December 31, 2020)
$
— 
$
441,893 
MGP BREIT Venture (50.1% owned by the Operating Partnership)
816,756 
810,066 
BetMGM (50%)
41,060 
27,310 
Other
109,228 
167,774 
 
$
967,044 
$
1,447,043 
The Company recorded its share of income (loss) from unconsolidated affiliates, including adjustments for basis differences, as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Income from unconsolidated affiliates
$
84,823 
$
42,938 
$
119,521 
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
(83,243)
(103,304)
(62,296)
 
$
1,580 
$
(60,366)
$
57,225 
The following table summarizes further information related to the Company’s share of operating income (loss) from unconsolidated affiliates:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
CityCenter (through September 26, 2021)
$
128,127 
$
(29,753)
$
128,421 
MGP BREIT Venture
155,817 
136,755 
— 
BetMGM
(211,182)
(61,663)
(15,804)
Other
12,061 
(2,401)
6,904 
 
$
84,823 
$
42,938 
$
119,521 
MGP BREIT Venture distributions. During  the  years  ended  December  31, 2021 and  2020, the  Operating  Partnership  received  $94 million  and $81
million, respectively, in distributions from MGP BREIT Venture.
79

BetMGM contributions. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company contributed $225 million and $80 million to BetMGM,
respectively.
CityCenter acquisition. The Company obtained 100% of the equity interests in CityCenter and therefore consolidated CityCenter as of September 27,
2021. Prior to the acquisition, the Company held a 50% ownership interest, which was accounted for under the equity method. Refer to Note 4.
CityCenter distributions. During the year ended December 31, 2020, CityCenter paid $101 million in distributions, of which the Company received its
50%  share,  or  approximately  $51  million.  During  the  year  ended  December  31,  2019,  CityCenter  paid  $180  million  in  distributions,  of  which  the  Company
received its 50% share, or approximately $90 million.
CityCenter sale of Harmon land. In June 2021, CityCenter closed the sale of its Harmon land for $80 million on which it recorded a $30 million gain. The
Company recorded a $50 million gain, which included $15 million of its 50% share of the gain recorded by CityCenter and $35 million representing the reversal of
certain basis differences in 2021.
Other. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized other-than-temporary impairment charges of $22 million and $64
million, respectively, within “Property transactions, net” in the consolidated statements of operations related to investments in unconsolidated affiliates previously
classified within “Other” in the “Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates” table above.
Unconsolidated Affiliate Financial Information – CityCenter (as of December 31, 2020 and through September 26, 2021) & MGP BREIT Venture
Summarized balance sheet information is as follows:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Cash and cash equivalents
$
16 
$
96,758 
Property and equipment, net
4,439,851 
10,237,004 
Other assets, net
193,184 
256,813 
Debt, net
2,994,782 
4,715,997 
Other liabilities
8,018 
270,583 
Summarized results of operations are as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Net revenues
$
1,084,503 
$
869,638 
$
1,294,861 
Net income (loss)
294,797 
(43,749)
69,143 
Basis Differences
The Company’s investments in unconsolidated affiliates do not equal the Company’s share of venture-level equity due to various basis differences. Basis
differences related to depreciable assets are being amortized based on the useful lives of the related assets and liabilities, and basis differences related to non–
depreciable  assets,  such  as  land  and  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets,  are  not  being  amortized.  Basis  differences  relating  to  the  Company's  investment  in
CityCenter were resolved in connection with the consolidation of CityCenter in 2021.
80

Differences between the Company’s share of venture-level equity and investment balances are as follows:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Venture-level equity attributable to the Company
$
961,787 
$
2,981,550 
Adjustment to CityCenter equity upon contribution of net assets by MGM Resorts International
— 
(504,171)
CityCenter capitalized interest
— 
168,966 
CityCenter completion guarantee
— 
248,730 
CityCenter deferred gain
— 
(208,204)
CityCenter capitalized interest on sponsor notes
— 
(33,010)
Other-than-temporary impairments of CityCenter investment
— 
(1,256,516)
Other adjustments
5,257 
49,698 
 
$
967,044 
$
1,447,043 
(1)
Primarily related to land and fixed assets.
(2)
Related to interest capitalized on the Company’s investment balance during development and construction stages.
(3)
Created by contributions to CityCenter under the completion guarantee recognized as equity contributions by CityCenter split between the members.
(4)
Related to a deferred gain on assets contributed to CityCenter upon formation of CityCenter.
(5)
Related to interest on the sponsor notes capitalized by CityCenter during development. Such sponsor notes were converted to equity in 2013.
(6)
The impairment of the Company’s CityCenter investment included $352 million of impairments allocated to land.
NOTE 7 — GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Goodwill and other intangible assets consisted of the following:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Goodwill
$
3,480,997 
$
2,091,278 
 
Indefinite-lived intangible assets:
Detroit development rights
$
98,098 
$
98,098 
MGM Northfield Park and Empire City racing and gaming licenses
280,000 
280,000 
Trademarks and other
479,238 
299,238 
Total indefinite-lived intangible assets
857,336 
677,336 
Finite-lived intangible assets:
MGM Grand Paradise gaming subconcession
4,516,532 
4,541,990 
Less: Accumulated amortization
(1,865,219)
(1,697,481)
 
2,651,313 
2,844,509 
MGM National Harbor and MGM Springfield gaming licenses
106,600 
106,600 
Less: Accumulated amortization
(26,209)
(19,102)
 
80,391 
87,498 
Other finite-lived intangible assets
65,207 
60,649 
Less: Accumulated amortization
(37,862)
(26,244)
 
27,345 
34,405 
Total finite-lived intangible assets, net
2,759,049 
2,966,412 
Total other intangible assets, net
$
3,616,385 
$
3,643,748 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
81

Goodwill. A summary of changes in the Company’s goodwill by reportable segment is as follows:
 
2021
 
Balance at January 1
Acquisitions
Currency exchange
Balance at December
31
 
(In thousands)
Goodwill, net by segment:
 
 
 
 
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
$
30,452 
$
1,397,338 
$
— 
$
1,427,790 
Regional Operations
701,463 
— 
— 
701,463 
MGM China
1,359,363 
— 
(7,619)
1,351,744 
 
$
2,091,278 
$
1,397,338 
$
(7,619)
$
3,480,997 
 
2020
 
Balance at January 1
Acquisitions
Currency exchange
Balance at December
31
 
(In thousands)
Goodwill, net by segment:
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
$
30,452 
$
— 
$
— 
$
30,452 
Regional Operations
701,463 
— 
— 
701,463 
MGM China
1,352,649 
— 
6,714 
1,359,363 
 
$
2,084,564 
$
— 
$
6,714 
$
2,091,278 
Goodwill was recognized in 2021 related to the acquisition of the 50% ownership interest in CityCenter, which is included in Las Vegas Strip Resorts, as
further discussed in Note 4.
MGM Grand Paradise gaming subconcession. Pursuant to the agreement dated April 19, 2005 between MGM Grand Paradise and SJM Resorts S.A.
("SJMSA", formerly Sociedade de Jogos de Macau, S.A.), a gaming subconcession was acquired by MGM Grand Paradise for the right to operate casino games of
chance and other casino games for a period commencing on April 20, 2005 through March 31, 2020. In March 2019, MGM Grand Paradise and SJMSA entered
into  a  Subconcession  Extension  Contract  (the  “Extension  Agreement”),  pursuant  to  which  the  gaming  subconcession  was  extended  to  June  26,  2022,  which
coincides with the current expiration of all the other concessions and subconcessions. MGM Grand Paradise paid the government of Macau approximately $25
million and paid SJMSA approximately $2 million as a contract premium for such extension. The Company cannot provide any assurance that MGM Grand
Paradise will be awarded a gaming concession subsequent to the expiration of its gaming subconcession; however, as further discussed in Note 1, management
believes that MGM Grand Paradise will be successful in obtaining a gaming concession when a public tender is held. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and
2020, the Company amortizes the gaming subconcession intangible asset on a straight-line basis over the initial term of the Cotai land concession through January
2038.
MGM National Harbor and MGM Springfield gaming licenses. The license fee paid to the State of Maryland of $22 million is considered a finite-lived
intangible asset that is amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of its initial term of 15 years, beginning in December 2016, when MGM National Harbor
started operations. The license fee paid to the State of Massachusetts of $85 million is considered a finite-lived intangible asset that is amortized over a period of
15 years, beginning in August 2018, when MGM Springfield started operations.
82

Total amortization expense related to intangible assets was $197 million, $194 million and $192 million for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of
December 31, 2021, estimated future amortization is as follows:
Years ending December 31,
(In thousands)
2022
$
190,257 
2023
177,982 
2024
175,995 
2025
174,210 
2026
172,424 
Thereafter
1,868,181 
 
$
2,759,049 
NOTE 8 — OTHER ACCRUED LIABILITIES
Other accrued liabilities consisted of the following:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
(In thousands)
Contract and contract-related liabilities:
 Outstanding chip liability
$
176,219 
$
212,671 
 Loyalty program obligations
144,465 
139,756 
 Casino front money
206,244 
133,114 
 Advance deposits and ticket sales
283,188 
123,079 
 Unpaid wagers and other
150,569 
126,094 
Other accrued liabilities:
 Payroll and related
429,797 
327,644 
 Taxes, other than income taxes
195,973 
109,100 
 Operating Partnership interest rate swaps - current
14,071 
32,155 
 MGP dividend
82,294 
64,086 
 Operating lease liabilities - current (Refer to Note 11)
31,706 
31,843 
 Finance lease liabilities - current (Refer to Note 11)
87,665 
80,193 
 Other
181,253 
165,344 
$
1,983,444 
$
1,545,079 
83

NOTE 9 — LONG-TERM DEBT
Long-term debt consisted of the following:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
 
 
(In thousands)
Operating Partnership senior credit facility
$
50,000 $
10,000 
MGM China first revolving credit facility
360,414 
770,034 
7.75% senior notes, due 2022
1,000,000 
1,000,000 
6% senior notes, due 2023
1,250,000 
1,250,000 
5.625% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2024
1,050,000 
1,050,000 
5.375% MGM China senior notes, due 2024
750,000 
750,000 
6.75% senior notes, due 2025
750,000 
750,000 
5.75% senior notes, due 2025
675,000 
675,000 
4.625% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2025
800,000 
800,000 
5.25% MGM China senior notes, due 2025
500,000 
500,000 
5.875% MGM China senior notes, due 2026
750,000 
750,000 
4.5% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2026
500,000 
500,000 
4.625% senior notes, due 2026
400,000 
400,000 
5.75% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2027
750,000 
750,000 
5.5% senior notes, due 2027
675,000 
675,000 
4.75% MGM China senior notes, due 2027
750,000 
— 
4.5% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2028
350,000 
350,000 
4.75% senior notes, due 2028
750,000 
750,000 
3.875% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2029
750,000 
750,000 
7% debentures, due 2036
552 
552 
 
12,860,966 
12,480,586 
Less: Premiums, discounts, and unamortized debt issuance costs, net
(90,169)
(103,902)
 
12,770,797 
12,376,684 
Less: Current portion
(1,000,000)
— 
$
11,770,797 $
12,376,684 
Interest expense, net consisted of the following:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
Total interest incurred
$
800,156 
$
679,251 
$
853,007 
Interest capitalized
(563)
(2,871)
(5,075)
 
$
799,593 
$
676,380 
$
847,932 
Senior credit facility. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s senior credit facility consisted of a $1.675 billion revolving facility of which no amounts
were drawn.
On February 14, 2020, in connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, the Company used proceeds from the transaction to repay and terminate
the $1.5 billion outstanding on its then existing revolving facility in full and entered into an unsecured credit agreement, comprised of a $1.5 billion unsecured
revolving facility that would mature in February 2025. As a result, the Company incurred a $4 million loss on early retirement of debt recorded in “Other, net” in
the consolidated statements of operations.
84

In April 2020 and then in February 2021, the Company amended its credit facility to provide it with certain relief from the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, including certain financial maintenance covenant waivers, agreeing to liquidity tests, and pledging the Operating Partnership units held by loan parties
to the lenders as collateral. In November 2021, the Company terminated its existing revolving facility and entered into a new $1.675 billion secured revolving
credit facility that matures in November 2026. The revolving credit facility bears interest of SOFR plus 1.50% to 2.25% determined by reference to a rent adjusted
total net leverage ratio pricing grid.
The Company's senior revolving credit facility is, subject to gaming approval, guaranteed by each of the Company's existing direct and indirect wholly-
owned material domestic restricted subsidiaries, subject to certain exclusions. The senior revolving credit facility is secured by a pledge of the equity in certain of
the Company's domestic operating properties. Mandatory prepayments will be required upon the occurrence of certain events, including sales of certain assets,
subject to certain exceptions. The Company’s senior revolving credit facility also contains customary representations and warranties, events of default and positive
and negative covenants. The Company was in compliance with its applicable covenants at December 31, 2021.
Operating  Partnership  senior  credit  facility  and  bridge  facility. At  December  31,  2021,  the  Operating  Partnership’s  senior  secured  credit  facility
consisted of a $1.35 billion revolving credit facility. The revolving facility bears interest of LIBOR plus 1.75% to 2.25% determined by reference to a total net
leverage ratio pricing grid and will mature in June 2023. At December 31, 2021, $50 million was drawn on the revolving credit facility and the interest rate on the
revolving credit facility was 1.85%.
In February 2020, in connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, the Operating Partnership amended its senior secured credit facility to, among
other things, allow for the transaction to occur, permit the incurrence by the Operating Partnership of a nonrecourse guarantee relating to the debt of MGP BREIT
Venture (refer to Note 12 for description of such guarantee), and permit the incurrence of the bridge loan facility. As a result of the transaction and the amendment,
the Operating Partnership repaid its $1.3 billion outstanding term loan B facility in full with the proceeds of a bridge facility, which was then assumed by MGP
BREIT Venture as partial consideration for the Operating Partnership’s contribution. Additionally, the Operating Partnership used the proceeds from the settlement
of the forward equity issuances to pay off the outstanding balance of $399 million on its term loan A facility in full. As a result, the Operating Partnership incurred
an $18 million loss on early retirement of debt recorded in “Other, net” in the consolidated statements of operations.
The  Operating  Partnership  is  party  to  interest  rate  swaps  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  interest  rate  volatility  inherent  in  its  variable  rate  debt  as  well  as
forecasted debt issuances. As of December 31, 2021, the Operating Partnership has currently effective interest rate swap agreements on which it pays a weighted
average fixed rate of 1.783% on total notional amount of $700 million. The Operating Partnership has an additional $900 million total notional amount of forward
starting interest rate swaps that are not currently effective. The fair value of interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges was $25 million, with $5 million
recorded as a current liability and $20 million recorded as a long-term liability as of December 31, 2021, and $41 million, with $1 million recorded as a current
liability and $40 million recorded as a long-term liability, as of December 31, 2020. The fair value of interest rate swaps not designated as cash flow hedges was
$27 million, with $8 million recorded as a current liability and $19 million recorded as a long-term liability as of December 31, 2021, and $78 million, with
$31 million recorded as a current liability and $47 million recorded as a long-term liability, as of December 31, 2020. Interest rate swaps in a current liability
position  are  recorded  within  “Other  accrued  expenses,”  and  those  in  a  long-term  liability  position  are  recorded  within  “Other  long-term  obligations”  on  the
consolidated balance sheets.
The  Operating  Partnership  credit  facility  contains  customary  representations  and  warranties,  events  of  default  and  positive  and  negative  covenants,
including that the Operating Partnership maintain compliance with a maximum senior secured net debt to adjusted total assets ratio, a maximum total net debt to
adjusted assets ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. The Operating Partnership was in compliance with its credit facility covenants at December 31, 2021.
The Operating Partnership senior credit facility is guaranteed by each of the Operating Partnership’s existing and subsequently acquired direct and indirect
wholly owned material domestic restricted subsidiaries, except for MGM Springfield reDevelopment, which owns the real estate assets of MGM Springfield, and
secured  by  a  first  priority  lien  security  interest  on  substantially  all  of  the  Operating  Partnership’s  and  such  restricted  subsidiaries’  material  assets,  including
mortgages  on  its  real  estate,  excluding  the  real  estate  assets  of  MGM  National  Harbor,  Empire  City,  and  MGM  Springfield  and  subject  to  other  customary
exclusions.
MGM China first revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2021, the MGM China first revolving credit facility consisted of a $1.25 billion unsecured
revolving credit facility. The MGM China first revolving credit facility bears interest at a fluctuating rate per annum based on Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rate
(“HIBOR”) plus 1.625% to 2.75%, as
85

determined by MGM China’s leverage ratio and will mature in May 2024. At December 31, 2021, $360 million was drawn on the MGM China first revolving
credit facility and the weighted average interest rate was 2.95%.
The MGM China first revolving credit facility contains customary representations and warranties, events of default, and positive, negative and financial
covenants, including that MGM China maintains compliance with a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. In February 2021, MGM
China amended its credit agreement to provide for a waiver of its maximum leverage ratio and its minimum interest coverage ratio through the fourth quarter of
2022. MGM China was in compliance with its applicable MGM China credit facility covenants at December 31, 2021. In February 2022, MGM China further
amended its first revolving credit facility to extend the financial covenant waivers through maturity.
MGM  China  second  revolving  credit  facility. At  December  31,  2021, the  MGM  China  second  revolving  credit  facility  consisted  of  a  $400  million
unsecured revolving credit facility with an option to increase the amount of the facility up to $500 million, subject to certain conditions. The MGM China second
credit facility bears interest at a fluctuating rate per annum based on HIBOR plus 1.625% to 2.75%, as determined by MGM China’s leverage ratio and will mature
in May 2024. Draws will be subject to satisfaction of certain conditions precedent, including evidence that the MGM China first revolving credit facility has been
fully drawn. At December 31, 2021, no amounts were drawn on the MGM China second revolving credit facility.
The MGM China second credit facility contains customary representations and warranties, events of default, and positive, negative and financial covenants,
including that MGM China maintains compliance with a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio beginning in the third quarter of 2021. In
February 2021, MGM China further amended its second credit facility agreement to provide for a waiver of its maximum leverage ratio and its minimum interest
coverage  ratio  through  the  fourth  quarter  of  2022. MGM  China  was  in  compliance  with  its  applicable  MGM  China  second  credit  facility  covenants  at
December 31, 2021. In February 2022, MGM China further amended its second revolving credit facility to extend the financial covenant waivers through maturity.
Senior Notes. In October 2020, the Company issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.75% senior notes due 2028.
In May 2020, the Company issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.75% senior notes due 2025.
In March 2020, the Company completed cash tender offers for an aggregate amount of $750 million of its senior notes, comprised of $325 million principal
amount of its outstanding 5.75% senior notes due 2025, $100 million principal amount of its outstanding 4.625% senior notes due 2026, and $325 million principal
amount of its outstanding 5.5% senior notes due 2027. As a result, the Company incurred a $105 million loss on early retirement of debt recorded in “Other, net” in
the consolidated statements of operations.
In December 2019, the Company used a portion of the net proceeds from the Bellagio transaction to redeem for cash all $267 million principal amount of its
outstanding 5.250% senior notes due 2020, all $361 million principal amount of its outstanding 6.750% senior notes due 2020, and all $1.25 billion principal
amount of its outstanding 6.625% senior notes due 2021. The Company incurred a $171 million loss on the early retirement of such notes recorded in “Other, net”
in the consolidated statements of operations.
In  April  2019,  the  Company  issued  $1.0 billion  in  aggregate  principal  amount  of  5.50%  senior  notes  due  2027.  The  Company  primarily  used  the  net
proceeds from the offering to fund the purchase of $639 million in aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 6.75% senior notes due 2020 and $233 million in
aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 5.25% senior notes due 2020 through cash tender offers.
In February 2019, the Company repaid its $850 million 8.625% senior notes due 2019.
Operating Partnership senior notes. In November 2020, the Operating Partnership issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.875% senior
notes due 2029.
In June 2020, the Operating Partnership issued $800 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior notes due 2025.
In January 2019, the Operating Partnership issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.75% senior notes due 2027.
86

Each  series  of  the  Operating  Partnership's  senior  notes  are  fully  and  unconditionally  guaranteed,  jointly  and  severally,  on  a  senior  basis  by  all  of  the
Operating Partnership’s subsidiaries that guarantee the Operating Partnership’s credit facilities, other than MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., which is a co-issuer of the
senior notes. The Operating Partnership may redeem all or part of the senior notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the senior notes
plus, to the extent the Operating Partnership is redeeming senior notes prior to the date that is three months prior to their maturity date, an applicable make whole
premium, plus, in each case, accrued and unpaid interest. The indentures governing the senior notes contain customary covenants and events of default. These
covenants are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the applicable indentures governing the senior notes, including, with
respect to the restricted payments covenants, the ability to make unlimited restricted payments to maintain the REIT status of MGP.
MGM China senior notes. In March 2021, MGM China issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.75% senior notes due 2027 at an issue
price of 99.97%.
In June 2020, MGM China issued $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.25% senior notes due 2025.
In May 2019, MGM China issued $750 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes due 2024 and $750 million in aggregate principal
amount of 5.875% senior notes due 2026. The Company primarily used the net proceeds from the offering to pay down outstanding borrowings under the MGM
China first revolving credit facility. MGM China incurred a $16 million loss on the debt retirement recorded in “Other, net” in the consolidated statements of
operations.
CityCenter senior credit facility. In connection with the CityCenter acquisition, the Company assumed $1.7 billion of CityCenter's indebtedness, which
was repaid and extinguished in September 2021 with cash on hand.
Maturities of long-term debt. The maturities of the principal amount of the Company’s long-term debt as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
Years ending December 31,
(In thousands)
2022
$
1,000,000 
2023
1,300,000 
2024
2,160,414 
2025
2,725,000 
2026
1,650,000 
Thereafter
4,025,552 
 
$
12,860,966 
Fair value of long-term debt. The estimated fair value of the Company’s long-term debt was $13.4 billion and $13.2 billion at December 31, 2021 and
2020, respectively. Fair value was estimated using quoted market prices for the Company’s senior notes and credit facilities.
NOTE 10 — INCOME TAXES
The  Company  recognizes  deferred  income  tax  assets,  net  of  applicable  reserves,  related  to  net  operating  losses,  tax  credit  carryforwards  and  certain
temporary differences. The Company recognizes future tax benefits to the extent that realization of such benefit is more likely than not. Otherwise, a valuation
allowance is applied.
Income (loss) before income taxes for domestic and foreign operations consisted of the following:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Domestic operations
$
2,094,324 
$
(665,376)
$
2,717,756 
Foreign operations
(632,520)
(846,103)
128,969 
 
$
1,461,804 
$
(1,511,479)
$
2,846,725 
87

The benefit (provision) for income taxes attributable to income (loss) before income taxes is as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Federal:
(In thousands)
Current
$
(8,984)
$
207,544 
$
(4,928)
Deferred (excluding separate components)
(189,657)
19,852 
(537,993)
Deferred – valuation allowance
(14,967)
(42,109)
(20,175)
Other noncurrent
(14,262)
4,922 
(5,745)
Benefit (provision) for federal income taxes
(227,870)
190,209 
(568,841)
State:
Current
5 
(816)
(22,685)
Deferred (excluding separate components)
(28,068)
(33,087)
(32,793)
Deferred – operating loss carryforward
(27,936)
47,728 
(5,241)
Deferred – valuation allowance
(601)
(3,375)
(191)
Other noncurrent
13,260 
(946)
(1,401)
Benefit (provision) for state income taxes
(43,340)
9,504 
(62,311)
Foreign:
Current
(3,717)
(828)
(2,454)
Deferred (excluding separate components)
8,943 
4,206 
44,374 
Deferred – operating loss carryforward
5,793 
39,920 
32,915 
Deferred – valuation allowance
6,776 
(51,439)
(76,028)
Benefit (provision) for foreign income taxes
17,795 
(8,141)
(1,193)
 
$
(253,415)
$
191,572 
$
(632,345)
A reconciliation of the federal income tax statutory rate and the Company’s effective tax rate is as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Federal income tax statutory rate
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
Net operating loss carryback rate differential
— 
5.5 
— 
Noncontrolling interest
(3.2)
1.6 
(0.8)
Foreign jurisdiction income/losses taxed at other than U.S. statutory rate
8.2 
(12.5)
(0.5)
Federal valuation allowance
1.0 
(2.8)
0.7 
State taxes, net
2.3 
0.5 
1.7 
Gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net
(10.1)
— 
— 
Permanent and other items
(1.9)
(0.6)
0.1 
 
17.3 %
12.7 %
22.2 %
88

The tax-effected components of the Company’s net deferred tax liability are as follows:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
Deferred tax assets – federal and state:
(In thousands)
Net operating loss carryforward
$
35,350 $
57,419 
Accruals, reserves and other
39,163 
167,553 
Lease liabilities
2,714,308 
1,972,343 
Tax credits
3,060,733 
3,095,856 
 
5,849,554 
5,293,171 
Less: Valuation allowance
(2,735,451)
(2,720,008)
 
3,114,103 
2,573,163 
Deferred tax assets – foreign:
Net operating loss carryforward
185,936 
180,143 
Accruals, reserves and other
15,228 
17,083 
Property and equipment
27,366 
17,890 
Lease liabilities
1,458 
1,368 
 
229,988 
216,484 
Less: Valuation allowance
(148,811)
(155,587)
 
81,177 
60,897 
Total deferred tax assets
$
3,195,280 $
2,634,060 
Deferred tax liabilities – federal and state:
Property and equipment
$
(1,361,356) $
(1,349,355)
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates
(1,252,816)
(1,158,342)
ROU assets
(2,570,620)
(1,860,195)
Intangibles
(141,934)
(108,728)
 
(5,326,726)
(4,476,620)
Deferred tax liabilities – foreign:
Intangibles
(307,522)
(309,256)
ROU Assets
(396)
(1,200)
 
(307,918)
(310,456)
Total deferred tax liability
$
(5,634,644) $
(4,787,076)
Net deferred tax liability
$
(2,439,364) $
(2,153,016)
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law. The CARES Act contains certain income
tax provisions that are beneficial to the Company; namely, the relaxation of the interest expense deduction limitation for the 2019 and 2020 tax years and the
allowance of a 5-year carryback of net operating losses (“NOLs”) incurred during tax years 2018 through 2020. The Company has recorded a federal income tax
receivable of $226 million to reflect the carryback of its 2020 NOL. Furthermore, since the NOL was carried back to tax years when the federal income tax rate
was 35%, compared to the 21% rate currently in effect, the Company realized $90 million more income tax benefit than if it would have only been able to carry the
NOL forward.
The Company has recorded a valuation allowance of $2.7 billion on its foreign tax credit (“FTC”) carryover of $3.1 billion as of December 31, 2021,
resulting in an FTC net deferred tax asset of $332 million. The FTCs are attributable to the Macau Special Gaming Tax, which is 35% of gross gaming revenue in
Macau. Because MGM Grand Paradise is presently exempt from the Macau 12% complementary tax on gaming profits, the Company believes that payment of the
Macau Special Gaming Tax qualifies as a tax paid in lieu of an income tax that is creditable against U.S. taxes. While the Company generally does not expect to
generate new FTC carryovers after the year ended December 31, 2017, it will be able to utilize its existing FTC carryovers to the extent that it has active foreign
source income during the 10-year FTC carryforward period. Such foreign source income includes the recapture, to the extent of 50% of U.S. taxable income each
year, of overall domestic losses that totaled $1.3 billion at December 31, 2021. The Company relies on future U.S. source
89

operating income in assessing utilization of the overall domestic losses and, by extension, future FTC realization during the 10-year FTC carryover period. The
FTC carryovers will expire if not utilized as follows: $297 million in 2022; $976 million in 2023; $780 million in 2024; $674 million in 2025; $134 million in
2026; and $200 million in 2027.
The Company’s assessment of the realization of its FTC deferred tax asset is based on available evidence, including assumptions concerning future U.S.
operating profits and foreign source income. As a result, significant judgment is required in assessing the possible need for a valuation allowance and changes to
such  assumptions  could  result  in  a  material  change  in  the  valuation  allowance  with  a  corresponding  impact  on  the  provision  for  income  taxes  in  the  period
including such change.
On March 30, 2020, MGM Grand Paradise was granted an extension of its exemption from the Macau 12% complementary tax on gaming profits through
June 26, 2022, concurrent with the end of the term of its current gaming subconcession. Absent the exemption from complementary tax on gaming profits, “Net
income attributable to MGM Resorts International” would have decreased by $10 million in 2021 and increased by $4 million in 2020 and diluted earnings per
share would have decreased by $0.02 in 2021 and increased by $0.01 in 2020. The Company continues to assume that MGM Grand Paradise will pay the Macau
12% complementary tax on gaming profits for all periods beyond June 26, 2022 and has factored that assumption into the measurement of Macau deferred tax
assets and liabilities.
Non-gaming operations remain subject to the Macau complementary tax. At December 31, 2021, MGM Grand Paradise had a complementary tax NOL
carryforward of $1.5 billion resulting from non-gaming operations that will expire if not utilized in years 2022 through 2024.
MGM Grand Paradise’s exemption from the 12% complementary tax on gaming profits does not apply to dividend distributions of such profits to MGM
China. On July 26, 2021, MGM Grand Paradise extended its agreement with the Macau government to settle the 12% complementary tax that would otherwise be
due by its shareholder, MGM China, on distributions of its gaming profits by paying a flat annual payment regardless of the amount of distributable dividends. The
extension covers distributions of gaming profits earned for the period April 1, 2020 through June 26, 2022. The agreement requires payments of approximately
$1 million for the period April 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, $2 million for January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021, and $1 million for the period
January 1, 2022 through June 26, 2022. The Company recorded $3 million of income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 under the extension.
The Company has NOLs in certain of the states in which it operates that total $536 million as of December 31, 2021, which equates to deferred tax assets of
$35 million after federal tax effect and before valuation allowance. The majority of these NOL carryforwards will expire if not utilized by 2025 through 2040 with
the  remaining  being  carried  forward  indefinitely.  The  Company  has  provided  a  valuation  allowance  of  $6  million  on  certain  of  its  state  deferred  tax  assets,
including a portion of NOLs described above.
In addition, there is a valuation allowance of $146 million on certain Macau deferred tax assets, and a valuation allowance of $3 million on Hong Kong
NOLs because the Company believes these assets do not meet the “more likely than not” criteria for recognition.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amounts of gross unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
 
2019
 
(In thousands)
Gross unrecognized tax benefits at January 1
$
35,617 
$
33,298 
$
24,464 
Gross increases - prior period tax positions
12,949 
3,717 
8,960 
Gross decreases - prior period tax positions
(13,388)
(1,398)
(1,006)
Gross increases - current period tax positions
654 
— 
880 
     Settlements with Taxing Authorities
(16,264)
— 
— 
Gross unrecognized tax benefits at December 31
$
19,568 
$
35,617 
$
33,298 
The total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate was $11 million and $9 million at December 31, 2021
and 2020, respectively.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense, which were not material for each of the periods
presented.
90

The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various state and local jurisdictions, and foreign jurisdictions, although the income
taxes paid in foreign jurisdictions are not material. As of December 31, 2021, the IRS can generally no longer assess tax with respect to years ended prior to 2016.
During  the  twelve  months  ended  December  31,  2021,  the  Company  reached  a  settlement  with  the  IRS  Appeals  Office  on  the  examination  of  its  2014  U.S.
consolidated federal income tax return. No cash tax payments were due as a result of the settlement.
As of December 31, 2021, other than adjustments resulting from the federal and state income tax audits discussed herein, the various state and local tax
jurisdictions  in  which  the  Company  files  tax  returns  can  no  longer  assess  tax  with  respect  to  years  ended  prior  to  2016.  However,  such  state  and  local  tax
jurisdictions may adjust NOLs generated in such years that are utilized in subsequent years. During 2021, an examination of income tax returns filed in New Jersey
for tax years 2015 through 2018 closed with no change and an examination of income tax returns filed in Massachusetts for tax years 2017 and 2018 closed with no
material adjustments. Additionally, the Company's income tax returns filed in New York City for the tax years 2017 through 2019 are currently under examination.
The Company does not anticipate any material adjustments upon resolution of this audit.
The Company received a final audit determination with respect to the examination of income tax returns filed in the state of Michigan for tax years 2014
through 2018. The Company had an informal conference with the Michigan Department of Treasury Hearings Division to contest the findings of the audit. The
Hearings Division issued its decision and order and now the Company is determining its next course of action. Any final adjustments upon resolution of this matter
are not expected to be material.
The Company believes that it is reasonably possible that the total amounts of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2021 may decrease by up to
$13 million within the next twelve months on the expectation of resolution of a tax accounting method related to its customer loyalty program.
NOTE 11 – LEASES
The Company leases the land underlying certain of its properties, real estate, and various equipment under operating and, to a lesser extent, finance lease
arrangements. The MGP master lease, which is further discussed in Note 18, eliminates in consolidation and, accordingly, is not included within the disclosures
below.
Land. The Company, through MGP, is a lessee of land underlying MGM National Harbor and a portion of the land underlying Borgata and Beau Rivage.
MGP is obligated to make lease payments through the non-cancelable term of the ground leases, which is through 2051 for Beau Rivage, through 2070 for Borgata,
and through 2082 for MGM National Harbor. Additionally, MGM Grand Paradise has MGM Macau and MGM Cotai land concession contracts, each with an
initial 25-year contract term ending in April 2031 and January 2038, respectively. The land leases are classified as operating leases.
Real Estate Assets. The Company leases the real estate assets of Bellagio, Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas, and Aria (including Vdara) pursuant
to triple-net lease agreements, which are classified as operating leases. Each of the leases obligates the Company to spend a specified percentage of net revenues at
the properties on capital expenditures and that the Company comply with certain financial covenants, which, if not met, would require the Company to maintain
cash security or provide one or more letters of credit in favor of the landlord in an amount equal to 1 year of rent under the Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand lease
and Aria lease and 2 years of rent under the Bellagio lease. The Company was in compliance with its applicable covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Bellagio lease. The Company leases the real estate assets of Bellagio from Bellagio BREIT Venture. The Bellagio lease has an initial term of 30 years with
two 10-year renewal periods, exercisable at the Company’s option, with a fixed 2% rent escalator for the first 10 years and, thereafter, an escalator equal to the
greater of 2% and the CPI increase during the prior year, subject to a cap of 3% during the 11th through 20th years and 4% thereafter. Annual cash rent payments
for the third lease year that commenced on December 1, 2021 increased to $255 million as a result of the second 2% fixed annual escalator.
Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas lease. The Company leases the real estate assets of Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas from MGP
BREIT  Venture.  The  Mandalay  Bay  and  MGM  Grand  Las  Vegas  lease  has  an  initial  term  of  30  years  with  two  10-year  renewal  periods,  exercisable  at  the
Company’s option, with a fixed 2% rent escalator for the first 15 years and, thereafter, an escalator equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase during the prior
year, subject to a cap of 3%. Annual cash rent payments for the second lease year that commenced on March 1, 2021 increased to $298 million as a result of the
first 2% fixed annual escalator.
91

Aria lease. The Company leases the real estate assets of Aria (including Vdara) from funds managed by Blackstone. The Aria lease has an initial term of 30
years with three 10-year renewal periods, exercisable at the Company's option, with a fixed 2% rent escalator for the first 15 years, and thereafter, an escalator
equal to the greater of 2% and the CPI increase during the prior year, subject to a cap of 3%. Annual cash rent payments for the first lease year that commenced on
September 28, 2021 was $215 million.
Other information. Components of lease costs and other information related to the Company’s leases was:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Operating lease cost, primarily classified within "General and administrative"
$
870,779 
$
751,002 $
143,954 
 
Finance lease costs
Interest expense
$
2,354 
$
(21,320) $
1,164 
Amortization expense
73,475 
70,476 
13,341 
Total finance lease costs
$
75,829 
$
49,156 $
14,505 
(1)
The Bellagio lease and the Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas lease are held with related parties, as further discussed in Note 18. Operating lease cost includes $331 million for
each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and $42 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to the Bellagio lease. Operating lease cost includes $395 million,
$347 million, and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively, related to the Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas lease.
(2)
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, interest expense includes the effect of COVID-19 related rent concessions, which was recognized as negative variable rent expense.
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
Supplemental balance sheet information
(In thousands)
Operating leases
 
 
Operating lease right-of-use assets, net
$
11,492,805
$
8,286,694
Operating lease liabilities - current, classified within "Other accrued liabilities"
$
31,706
$
31,843
Operating lease liabilities - long-term
11,802,464
8,390,117
Total operating lease liabilities
$
11,834,170
$
8,421,960
 
Finance leases
Finance lease right-of-use assets, net, classified within "Property and equipment, net"
$
151,909
$
200,980
Finance lease liabilities - current, classified within "Other accrued liabilities"
$
87,665
$
80,193
Finance lease liabilities - long-term, classified within "Other long-term obligations"
75,560
134,287
Total finance lease liabilities
$
163,225
$
214,480
 
Weighted average remaining lease term (years)
Operating leases
29
30
Finance leases
2
3
 
Weighted average discount rate (%)
Operating leases
7 
8 
Finance leases
3 
3 
(1)
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, operating lease right-of-use assets, net included $3.6 billion and $3.7 billion related to the Bellagio lease, respectively and $4.0 billion related to the
Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas lease for each of the respective periods.
(2)
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, operating lease liabilities – long-term included $3.8 billion related to the Bellagio lease for each of the respective periods, and $4.2 billion and
$4.1 billion related to the Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas lease, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
92

 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
 
2020
2019
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities
(In thousands)
Operating cash outflows from operating leases
$
669,681 
$
572,186 $
117,072 
Operating cash outflows from finance leases
4,761 
2,956 
1,164 
Financing cash outflows from finance leases
73,257 
34,494 
10,311 
 
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new lease liabilities
Operating leases
$
3,388,120 
$
4,120,955 $
3,814,115 
Finance leases
24,433 
177,085 
84,934 
(1)
Included within “Other” within cash flows from financing activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Maturities of lease liabilities were as follows:
 
Operating Leases  
Finance Leases
Year ending December 31,
(In thousands)
2022
$
838,062 
$
90,633 
2023
850,305 
73,568 
2024
862,796 
1,747 
2025
876,046 
1,253 
2026
885,863 
24 
Thereafter
26,660,145 
— 
Total future minimum lease payments
30,973,217 
167,225 
Less: Amount of lease payments representing interest
(19,139,047)
(4,000)
Present value of future minimum lease payments
11,834,170 
163,225 
Less: Current portion
(31,706)
(87,665)
Long-term portion of lease liabilities
$
11,802,464 
$
75,560 
NOTE 12 – COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Litigation. The Company is a party to various legal proceedings, most of which relate to routine matters incidental to its business. Management does not
believe that the outcome of such proceedings will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Other  guarantees. The  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  are  party  to  various  guarantee  contracts  in  the  normal  course  of  business,  which  are  generally
supported by letters of credit issued by financial institutions. The Company’s senior credit facility limits the amount of letters of credit that can be issued to
$1.35 billion. At December 31, 2021, $33 million in letters of credit were outstanding under the Company’s senior credit facility. The Operating Partnership’s
senior credit facility limits the amount of letters of credit that can be issued to $75 million. No letters of credit were outstanding under the Operating Partnership’s
senior credit facility at December 31, 2021. The amount of available borrowings under each of the credit facilities is reduced by any outstanding letters of credit.
MGM China bank guarantee. In connection with the extension of the expiration of the gaming subconcession to June 2022, MGM Grand Paradise provided
a bank guarantee to the government of Macau in May 2019 to warrant the fulfillment of an existing commitment of labor liabilities upon expiration of the gaming
subconcession in June 2022. The amount of the bank guarantee was approximately $102 million as of December 31, 2021 when giving effect to foreign currency
exchange rate fluctuations.
Bellagio BREIT Venture shortfall guarantee. The Company provides a shortfall guarantee of the $3.01 billion principal amount of indebtedness (and any
interest accrued and unpaid thereon) of Bellagio BREIT Venture, which matures in 2029. The terms of the shortfall guarantee provide that after the lenders have
exhausted certain remedies to collect on the
(1)
93

obligations under the indebtedness, the Company would then be responsible for any shortfall between the value of the collateral, which is the real estate assets of
Bellagio owned by Bellagio BREIT Venture, and the debt obligation. This guarantee is accounted for under ASC 460 at fair value; such value is immaterial.
MGP BREIT Venture shortfall guarantee. The Company provides a shortfall guarantee of the $3.0 billion principal amount of indebtedness (and any interest
accrued and unpaid thereon) of MGP BREIT Venture, which has an initial term of 12 years, maturing in 2032, with an anticipated repayment date of March 2030.
The  terms  of  the  shortfall  guarantee  provide  that  after  the  lenders  have  exhausted  certain  remedies  to  collect  on  the  obligations  under  the  indebtedness,  the
Company would then be responsible for any shortfall between the value of the collateral, which is the real estate assets of Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las
Vegas, owned by MGP BREIT Venture, and the debt obligation. This guarantee is accounted for under ASC 460 at fair value; such value is immaterial.
MGP BREIT Venture bad acts guarantee. The Operating Partnership provides a guarantee for the losses incurred by the lenders of the indebtedness of MGP
BREIT Venture arising out of certain bad acts by the Operating Partnership, its venture partner, or the venture, such as fraud or willful misconduct, based on the
party’s percentage ownership of MGP BREIT Venture. This guarantee is capped at 10% of the principal amount outstanding at the time of the loss. The Operating
Partnership and its venture partner have separately indemnified each other for the other party’s share of the overall liability exposure, if at fault. The guarantee is
accounted for under ASC 460 at fair value; such value is immaterial.
94

NOTE 13 — STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss attributable to MGM Resorts International are as follows:
 
Currency Translation
Adjustments
Cash Flow Hedges
Other
Total
 
(In thousands)
Balances, January 1, 2019
$
(18,872)
$
9,144 
$
1,172 
$
(8,556)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
28,870 
(28,783)
— 
87 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss to interest expense
— 
(5,599)
— 
(5,599)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss related to de-
designation of interest rate swaps to "Other, net"
— 
4,877 
— 
4,877 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
28,870 
(29,505)
— 
(635)
Other changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss:
Empire City MGP transaction
— 
— 
195 
195 
MGP Class A share issuances
— 
— 
1,512 
1,512 
Park MGM Transaction
— 
— 
16 
16 
Northfield transaction
— 
— 
(2)
(2)
Other
— 
— 
481 
481 
Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss
28,870 
(29,505)
2,202 
1,567 
Other comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
(12,745)
9,532 
— 
(3,213)
Balances, December 31, 2019
(2,747)
(10,829)
3,374 
(10,202)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
27,762 
(94,740)
— 
(66,978)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss to interest expense
— 
17,922 
— 
17,922 
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss to "Other, net"
— 
(2,547)
— 
(2,547)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
27,762 
(79,365)
— 
(51,603)
Other changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss:
MGP Class A share issuances
— 
— 
646 
646 
MGP BREIT Venture Transaction
— 
— 
(59)
(59)
Redemption of Operating Partnership units
— 
— 
8,773 
8,773 
Other
— 
— 
(1,018)
(1,018)
Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss
27,762 
(79,365)
8,342 
(43,261)
Other comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
(12,051)
34,837 
— 
22,786 
Balances, December 31, 2020
12,964 
(55,357)
11,716 
(30,677)
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
(24,655)
12,588 
— 
(12,067)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss to interest expense
— 
22,200 
— 
22,200 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
(24,655)
34,788 
— 
10,133 
Other changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss
MGP Class A share issuances
— 
— 
3,240 
3,240 
Redemption of Operating Partnership units
— 
— 
5,327 
5,327 
Other
— 
— 
(2,358)
(2,358)
Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss
(24,655)
34,788 
6,209 
16,342 
Other comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
10,784 
(21,065)
— 
(10,281)
Balances, December 31, 2021
$
(907)
$
(41,634)
$
17,925 
$
(24,616)
At December 31, 2021, the estimated amount currently recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss that will be recognized in earnings over the next
12 months is not material.
95

Noncontrolling interest
The following is a summary of net income attributable to MGM Resorts International and transfers to noncontrolling interest, which shows the effects of
changes in the Company’s ownership interest in a subsidiary on the equity attributable to the Company:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
$
1,254,370 
$
(1,032,724)
$
2,049,146 
Transfers from/(to) noncontrolling interest:
Empire City MGP transaction
— 
— 
(18,718)
MGP Class A share issuances
103,174 
64,834 
151,976 
Park MGM Transaction
— 
— 
(1,968)
Northfield transaction
— 
— 
21,679 
MGP BREIT Venture Transaction
— 
(6,562)
— 
Redemption of Operating Partnership units
176,659 
92,632 
— 
Other
(5,062)
(1,759)
(935)
Net transfers from noncontrolling interest
274,771 
149,145 
152,034 
Change from net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International and transfers to
noncontrolling interest
$
1,529,141 
$
(883,579)
$
2,201,180 
Noncontrolling interest ownership transactions
Empire City MGP transaction. As further discussed in Note 18, on January 29, 2019, MGP acquired the developed real property associated with Empire
City from the Company for consideration that included the issuance of approximately 13 million Operating Partnership units to a subsidiary of the Company. The
Company  adjusted  the  carrying  value  of  the  noncontrolling  interests  for  the  change  in  noncontrolling  interests’  ownership  percentage  of  the  Operating
Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the Empire City
MGP transaction, the Company indirectly owned 74.6% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance – January 2019. On January 31, 2019, MGP completed an offering of approximately 20 million of its Class A shares. In
connection with the offering, the Operating Partnership issued an equal amount of Operating Partnership units to MGP. The Company adjusted the carrying value
of the noncontrolling interests as a result of MGP’s Class A share issuance to adjust for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the
Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the
issuance, the Company indirectly owned 69.7% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
Park MGM Transaction. As further discussed in Note 18, on March 7, 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the MGP master lease with
respect to improvements made by the Company related to the rebranding of the Park MGM and NoMad Las Vegas property (the “Park MGM Transaction”) for
which consideration included the issuance of approximately 1 million Operating Partnership units to a subsidiary of the Company. The Company adjusted the
carrying value of the noncontrolling interests for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with
offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the issuance, the Company indirectly owned
69.8% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
Northfield transaction. As further discussed in Note 18, in April 2019, the Company acquired the membership interests of Northfield from MGP for
consideration of approximately 9 million Operating Partnership units that were ultimately redeemed by the Operating Partnership and MGP retained the real estate
assets. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling interests for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating
Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the transaction,
the Company indirectly owned 68.8% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
96

MGP Class A share issuances – At-the-Market (“ATM”) program. During the year ended December 31, 2019, MGP issued approximately 5 million
Class A shares under its ATM program. In connection with the issuances, the Operating Partnership issued an equal amount of Operating Partnership units to MGP
during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling interests for the change in noncontrolling interests’
ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive
income. Subsequent to the collective issuances, the Company indirectly owned 67.6% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance – November 2019. On November 22, 2019, MGP completed an offering of 30 million of its Class A shares. The offering
consisted of 18 million shares sold directly to the underwriters at closing and 12 million shares sold to forward purchasers under forward sale agreements. In
connection with the offering, the Operating Partnership issued 18 million Operating Partnership units to MGP. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the
noncontrolling interests as a result of MGP’s Class A share issuance to adjust for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating
Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the issuance, the
Company indirectly owned 63.7% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance – Forward settlements. On February 11, 2020 through February 13, 2020, MGP settled approximately 13 million Class A
shares issued under forward sales agreements from MGP's November 2019 offering and under MGP's ATM program. In connection with the settlements, the
Operating Partnership issued an equal amount of Operating Partnership units to MGP. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling interests for
the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value
and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the settlements, the Company indirectly owned 61.2% of the partnership units in the Operating
Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance – BREIT. On February 14, 2020, in connection with MGP’s registered sale of approximately 5 million Class A shares to
BREIT, the Operating Partnership issued an equal amount of Operating Partnership units to MGP. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling
interests for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess
of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the issuance, the Company indirectly owned 60.3% of the partnership units in the
Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance – MGP BREIT Venture Transaction. In February 2020, in connection with the MGP BREIT Venture Transaction, the
Operating Partnership issued approximately 3 million Operating Partnership units to the Company as discussed in Note 1. The Company adjusted the carrying
value of the noncontrolling interests for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting
adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the issuance, the Company indirectly owned 60.6% of
the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
Redemption of Operating Partnership units. On May 18, 2020, the Operating Partnership redeemed approximately 30 million Operating Partnership
units from the Company for $700 million pursuant to the waiver agreement discussed in Note 1. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling
interests for the change in noncontrolling interests ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess
of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the redemption, the Company indirectly owned 56.7% of the partnership units in the
Operating  Partnership.  Further,  on  December  2,  2020,  the  Operating  Partnership  redeemed  approximately  24  million  Operating  Partnership  units  from  the
Company for $700 million pursuant to the waiver agreement discussed in Note 1. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling interests for the
change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and
accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the redemption and as of December 31, 2020, the Company indirectly owned 53.0% of the partnership
units in the Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance – March 2021. On March 15, 2021, MGP completed an offering of 22 million of its Class A shares, the proceeds of which
were used to partially satisfy MGP’s obligations pursuant to the notice of redemption delivered by certain MGM subsidiaries, discussed below. Subsequent to
MGP’s Class A share issuance and the redemption of Operating Partnership units, discussed below, the Company indirectly owned 42.1% of the partnership units
in the Operating Partnership.
Redemption of Operating Partnership units – March 2021. In March 2021, subsidiaries of the Company delivered a notice of redemption to MGP
covering approximately 37 million Operating Partnership units that they held in accordance with the terms of the Operating Partnership’s partnership agreement.
Upon receipt of the notice of redemption, MGP formed a conflicts committee to determine the mix of consideration that it would provide for the Operating
97

Partnership  units.  The  conflicts  committee  determined  that  MGP  would  redeem  approximately  15  million  Operating  Partnership  units  for  cash  (with  such
Operating Partnership units retired upon redemption) and would satisfy its remaining obligation under that notice covering the remaining 22 million Operating
Partnership units using the proceeds, net of the underwriters’ discount, of MGP’s Class A offering, for aggregate cash proceeds received by the Company of
approximately  $1.2  billion.  The  Company  adjusted  the  carrying  value  of  the  noncontrolling  interests  for  the  change  in  noncontrolling  interests’  ownership
percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Subsequent to the collective transactions, the Company indirectly owned 42.1% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuances – ATM program. During the year ended December 31, 2021, MGP issued approximately 3 million Class A shares under its
ATM program, which completed its ATM program. In connection with the issuances, the Operating Partnership issued an equal amount of Operating Partnership
units to MGP. The Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling interests for the change in noncontrolling interests’ ownership percentage of the
Operating Partnership’s net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive loss. Subsequent to the
collective issuances, the Company indirectly owned 41.6% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
Other equity activity
MGM Resorts International dividends. On February 9, 2022 the Company’s Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.0025 per share that
will be payable on March 15, 2022 to holders of record on March 10, 2022.
MGM Resorts International stock repurchase program. In February 2020, upon substantial completion of the May 2018 $2.0 billion stock repurchase
program,  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  authorized  a  $3.0  billion  stock  repurchase  program.  Under  the  stock  repurchase  program,  the  Company  may
repurchase shares from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated agreements. Repurchases of common stock may also be made under a Rule 10b5-
1 plan, which would permit common stock to be repurchased when the Company might otherwise be precluded from doing so under insider trading laws. The
timing, volume and nature of stock repurchases will be at the sole discretion of management, dependent on market conditions, applicable securities laws, and other
factors, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company repurchased approximately 36 million shares of its common stock at an average purchase price of
$28.77 per share for an aggregate amount of $1.0 billion. Repurchased shares were retired.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased approximately 11 million shares of its common stock at an average purchase price of
$32.57 per share for an aggregate amount of $354 million. Repurchased shares were retired.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased approximately 43 million shares of its common stock at an average price of $40.70
per share for an aggregate amount of $1.8 billion. Repurchased shares were retired. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company completed its May
2018 $2.0 billion stock repurchase program and the remaining availability under the February 2020 $3.0 billion stock repurchase program was $1.3 billion as of
December 31, 2021.
Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased approximately 15 million shares of its common stock at an average price of
$43.88 per share for an aggregate amount of $670 million, which included the February 2022 repurchase of 4.5 million shares at a price of $45.00 per share for an
aggregate amount of $202.5 million from funds managed by Corvex Management LP, a related party. Repurchased shares were retired.
NOTE 14 — STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
MGM  Resorts  2005  Omnibus  Incentive  Plan. The  Company’s  omnibus  incentive  plan,  as  amended  (the  “Omnibus  Plan”),  allows  it  to  grant  up  to
45 million  shares  or  share-based  awards,  such  as  stock  options,  stock  appreciation  rights  (“SARs”),  restricted  stock  units  (“RSUs”),  performance  share  units
(“PSUs”) and other stock-based awards to eligible directors, officers and employees of the Company and its subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an aggregate of approximately 20 million shares of common stock available for grant as share-based awards
under the Omnibus Plan. Additionally,  as of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately  1 million  aggregate  SARs outstanding and approximately
6 million aggregate RSUs and PSUs outstanding, including deferred share units and dividend equivalent units related to RSUs and PSUs.
98

As of December 31, 2021, there was $85 million of unamortized compensation related to SARs, RSUs, and PSUs, which is expected to be recognized over a
weighted average period of 1.6 years.
MGM Growth Properties 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan and MGM China Share Option Plan. The Company’s subsidiaries, MGP and MGM China,
each adopted their own equity award plans for the issuance of share-based awards to each subsidiary’s eligible recipients.
Recognition of compensation cost. Compensation cost was recognized as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Compensation cost:
(In thousands)
Omnibus Plan
$
53,683 
$
93,096 
$
76,995 
MGM Growth Properties Omnibus Incentive Plan
4,827 
2,854 
2,277 
MGM China Share Option Plan
6,673 
11,006 
9,566 
Total compensation cost
65,183 
106,956 
88,838 
Less: Reimbursed costs and capitalized cost
(1,198)
(2,118)
(3,487)
Compensation cost after reimbursed costs and capitalized cost
63,985 
104,838 
85,351 
Less: Related tax benefit
(12,982)
(20,605)
(16,752)
Compensation cost, net of tax benefit
$
51,003 
$
84,233 
$
68,599 
NOTE 15 — EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
Multiemployer benefit plans. The Company currently participates in multiemployer pension plans in which the risks of participating differs from single-
employer plans in the following aspects:
 
a)
Assets contributed to the multiemployer plan by one employer may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers;
 
b)
If  a  participating  employer  stops  contributing  to  the  plan,  the  unfunded  obligations  of  the  plan  may  be  borne  by  the  remaining  participating
employers;
 
c)
If an entity chooses to stop participating in some of its multiemployer plans, the entity may be required to pay those plans an amount based on the
underfunded status of the plan, referred to as a withdrawal liability; and
 
d)
If the plan is terminated by withdrawal of all employers and if the value of the nonforfeitable benefits exceeds plan assets and withdrawal liability
payments, employers are required by law to make up the insufficient difference.
The Company’s participation in these plans is presented below.
 
EIN/Pension
Pension Protection
Act Zone Status 
FIP/RP
Contributions by the Company
(in thousands)
Surcharge
Expiration Dates of
Collective
Bargaining
Pension Fund
Plan Number
2020
2019
Status 
2021
2020
2019
Imposed
Agreements
Southern Nevada Culinary and
Bartenders Pension Plan
88-6016617/001
Green
Green
No
$
37,242 
$
24,610 
$
52,218 
No
05/31/2023 ;
05/31/2024
The Legacy Plan of the UNITE
HERE Retirement Fund (UHF)
82-0994119/001
Red
Red
Implemented
$
7,683 
$
5,151 
$
10,151 
No
5/31/2022
(1)
The Company was listed in the plan's Form 5500 as providing more than 5% of the total contributions for the plan years 2020 and 2019 for both plans. At the date the financial statements
were issued, Form 5500 was not available for the plan year 2021.
(2)
The zone status is based on information that the Company received from the plan and is certified by the plan's actuary. Plans in the red zone are generally less than 65% funded (critical
status) and plans in the green zone are at least 80% funded.
(3)
Indicates plans for which a Financial Improvement Plan (FIP) or a Rehabilitation Plan (RP) is either pending or has been implemented.
(4)
There have been no significant changes that affect the comparability of contributions.
(5)
The Company is party to eleven collective bargaining agreements (CBA) that require contributions with the Local Joint Executive Board of Las Vegas, which is made up of the Culinary
Workers Union and Bartenders  Union. The  agreements between Aria, Bellagio,  Mandalay  Bay,  and MGM Grand Las Vegas are the  most significant  because  more  than  half  of the
Company’s employee participants in this plan are covered by those four agreements.
Multiemployer benefit plans other than pensions. Pursuant to its collective bargaining agreements referenced above, the Company also contributes to
UNITE HERE Health (the “Health Fund”), which provides healthcare benefits to
(2)
(4)
(1)
(3)
(5)
(5)
99

its active and retired members. The Company contributed $143 million, $138 million, and $206 million to the Health Fund in the years ended December 31, 2021,
2020, and 2019, respectively.
NOTE 16 — PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS, NET
Property transactions, net consisted of the following:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Loss related to sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land
$
— 
$
— 
$
220,294 
Other property transactions, net
(67,736)
93,567 
55,508 
 
$
(67,736)
$
93,567 
$
275,802 
Circus Circus Las Vegas and adjacent land. In December 2019, the Company completed the sale of Circus Circus Las Vegas and the adjacent land for
$825 million, which consisted of $663 million paid in cash and a secured note due 2024 with a face value of $163 million and fair value of $134 million. The note
has a stated interest rate of 3% for the first two years, 4% for following two years, and 4.5% for the fifth year and is secured by the borrower with the land adjacent
to Circus Circus Las Vegas as collateral with an effective interest rate of 7.31%. The interest on the note, which is comprised of the stated interest and the discount
on the note, amortizes into interest income using the effective interest method over the length of the agreement. The carrying value of the note receivable was
$155 million and $144 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and was recorded within “Other long-term assets, net” in the consolidated balance
sheets.
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $219 million, which reflects the amount by which the assets’
carrying value exceeds the assets’ fair value (expected selling price). The Company further recognized a loss of $2 million during the fourth quarter of 2019
primarily relating to selling costs. The assets and liabilities  of Circus Circus Las Vegas and the adjacent land of $810 million and $14 million, respectively,
primarily consisted of property and equipment, net of $785 million. Circus Circus Las Vegas was not classified as discontinued operations for the year ended
December 31, 2019 because the Company concluded that the sale is not a strategic shift that has a major effect on the Company’s operations or its financial results
and it does not represent a major geographic segment or product line.
Other. Other property transactions, net in 2021 includes a gain of $76 million relating to the sale of art and a gain of $29 million related to a reduction in
the estimate of contingent consideration related to the Empire City acquisition, partially offset by an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $22 million
related to an investment in an unconsolidated affiliate, as discussed in Note 6, as well as miscellaneous asset disposals and write-downs.
Other property transactions, net in 2020 includes other-than-temporary impairment charges of $64 million related to an investment in an unconsolidated
affiliate, as discussed in Note 6, a loss of $17 million related to production show costs, as well as miscellaneous asset disposals and write-downs.
Other property transactions, net for 2019 includes miscellaneous asset disposals and demolition costs.
100

NOTE 17 — SEGMENT INFORMATION
The Company’s management views each of its casino resorts as an operating segment. Operating segments are aggregated based on their similar economic
characteristics, types of customers, types of services and products provided, the regulatory environments in which they operate and their management and reporting
structure. The Company has aggregated its operating segments into the following reportable segments: Las Vegas Strip Resorts, Regional Operations and MGM
China.
Las Vegas Strip Resorts. Las Vegas Strip Resorts consists of the following casino resorts: Aria (including Vdara) (upon acquisition in September 2021),
Bellagio, MGM Grand Las Vegas (including The Signature), Mandalay Bay (including Delano and Four Seasons), The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New York
(including The Park), Excalibur, Park MGM (including NoMad Las Vegas) and Circus Circus Las Vegas (until the sale of such property in December 2019).
Regional Operations. Regional Operations consists of the following casino resorts: MGM Grand Detroit in Detroit, Michigan; Beau Rivage in Biloxi,
Mississippi; Gold Strike Tunica in Tunica, Mississippi; Borgata in Atlantic City, New Jersey; MGM National Harbor in Prince George’s County, Maryland; MGM
Springfield in Springfield, Massachusetts; Empire City in Yonkers, New York (upon acquisition in January 2019); and MGM Northfield Park in Northfield Park,
Ohio (upon MGM’s acquisition of the operations from MGP in April 2019).
MGM China. MGM China consists of MGM Macau and MGM Cotai.
The Company’s operations related to investments in unconsolidated affiliates, MGM Northfield Park (prior to April 1, 2019 as the operations were owned
by MGP until that date), and certain other corporate operations and management services have not been identified as separate reportable segments; therefore, these
operations are included in “Corporate and other” in the following segment disclosures to reconcile to consolidated results.
Adjusted  Property  EBITDAR  is  the  Company’s  reportable  segment  GAAP  measure,  which  management  utilizes  as  the  primary  profit  measure  for  its
reportable segments and underlying operating segments. Adjusted Property EBITDAR is a measure defined as earnings before interest and other non-operating
income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization, preopening and start-up expenses, gain on REIT transactions, net, restructuring costs (which represents
costs related to severance, accelerated stock compensation expense, and consulting fees directly related to the operating model component of the MGM 2020 Plan),
rent expense associated with triple-net operating and ground leases, income from unconsolidated affiliates related to investments in real estate ventures, property
transactions,  net,  and  excludes  gain  on  consolidation  of  CityCenter,  net,  gain  related  to  CityCenter's  sale  of  Harmon  land  recorded  within  income  from
unconsolidated affiliates, and corporate expense (which includes CEO transition expense and October 1 litigation settlement) and stock compensation expense,
which are not allocated to each operating segment, and rent expense related to the master lease with MGP that eliminates in consolidation.
101

The following tables present the Company’s segment information:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
 
(In thousands)
Net revenue
 
 
 
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
 
 
 
Casino
$
1,549,419 
$
728,254 
$
1,296,170 
Rooms
1,402,712 
662,813 
1,863,521 
Food and beverage
1,015,366 
471,529 
1,517,745 
Entertainment, retail and other
769,688 
383,189 
1,153,615 
 
4,737,185 
2,245,785 
5,831,051 
Regional Operations
Casino
2,721,515 
1,569,193 
2,537,780 
Rooms
220,828 
130,945 
316,753 
Food and beverage
307,750 
184,153 
494,243 
Entertainment, retail and other
142,270 
82,880 
201,008 
 
3,392,363 
1,967,171 
3,549,784 
MGM China
Casino
1,057,962 
565,671 
2,609,806 
Rooms
66,498 
36,624 
142,306 
Food and beverage
68,489 
40,284 
127,152 
Entertainment, retail and other
17,812 
14,124 
26,158 
 
1,210,761 
656,703 
2,905,422 
Reportable segment net revenues
9,340,309 
4,869,659 
12,286,257 
Corporate and other
339,831 
292,423 
613,415 
 
$
9,680,140 
$
5,162,082 
$
12,899,672 
Adjusted Property EBITDAR
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
$
1,738,211 
$
232,188 
$
1,643,122 
Regional Operations
1,217,814 
343,990 
969,866 
MGM China
25,367 
(193,832)
734,729 
Reportable segment Adjusted Property EBITDAR
2,981,392 
382,346 
3,347,717 
 
Other operating income (expense)
Corporate and other, net
(560,309)
(530,843)
(331,621)
Preopening and start-up expenses
(5,094)
(84)
(7,175)
Property transactions, net
67,736 
(93,567)
(275,802)
Depreciation and amortization
(1,150,610)
(1,210,556)
(1,304,649)
Gain on REIT transactions, net
— 
1,491,945 
2,677,996 
Gain on consolidation of CityCenter, net
1,562,329 
— 
— 
CEO transition expense
— 
(44,401)
— 
October 1 litigation settlement
— 
(49,000)
— 
Restructuring
— 
(26,025)
(92,139)
Triple-net operating lease and ground lease rent expense
(833,158)
(710,683)
(74,656)
Gain related to sale of Harmon land - unconsolidated affiliate
49,755 
— 
— 
Income from unconsolidated affiliates related to real estate ventures
166,658 
148,434 
544 
Operating income (loss)
2,278,699 
(642,434)
3,940,215 
Non-operating income (expense)
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
(799,593)
(676,380)
(847,932)
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
(83,243)
(103,304)
(62,296)
Other, net
65,941 
(89,361)
(183,262)
 
(816,895)
(869,045)
(1,093,490)
Income (loss) before income taxes
1,461,804 
(1,511,479)
2,846,725 
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
(253,415)
191,572 
(632,345)
Net income (loss)
1,208,389 
(1,319,907)
2,214,380 
Less: Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
45,981 
287,183 
(165,234)
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
$
1,254,370 
$
(1,032,724)
$
2,049,146 
102

 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Capital expenditures:
(In thousands)
Las Vegas Strip Resorts
$
266,944 
$
87,511 
$
285,863 
Regional Operations
77,406 
41,456 
187,489 
MGM China
67,989 
108,352 
145,634 
Reportable segment capital expenditures
412,339 
237,319 
618,986 
Corporate and other
78,358 
33,260 
120,020 
 
$
490,697 
$
270,579 
$
739,006 
Total assets are not allocated to segments for internal reporting presentations or when determining the allocation of resources and, accordingly, are not
presented.
Long-lived assets, which includes property and equipment, net, operating and finance lease right-of-use assets, net, goodwill, and other intangible assets,
net, presented by geographic region in which the Company holds assets are presented below:
 
December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Long-lived assets:
(In thousands)
United States
$
25,848,917 $
21,035,992 $
20,582,055 
China and all other foreign countries
7,176,763 
7,617,819 
8,007,449 
 
$
33,025,680 $
28,653,811 $
28,589,504 
NOTE 18 — RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
CityCenter
Management  agreements. Until  the  Company's  acquisition  of  CityCenter  in  September  2021,  the  Company  was  party  to  a  management  agreement
pursuant to which it managed the operations of CityCenter for a fee of 2% of revenue and 5% of EBITDA (as defined within the management agreement) for Aria
and Vdara. The Company earned fees of $29 million, $16 million and $48 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The
Company incurred costs reimbursable by CityCenter, primarily for employee compensation and certain allocated costs in performing the Company's management
services, of $187 million, $212 million and $420 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020,
CityCenter owed the Company $39 million for management services and reimbursable costs recorded in “Accounts receivable, net” on the consolidated balance
sheets. The management agreement was terminated in connection with the Company's acquisition of CityCenter, as discussed in Note 4.
MGM China
Ms. Ho, Pansy Catilina Chiu King (“Ms. Ho”) is the Co-Chairperson of the Board of Directors of, and holds a minority ownership interest in, MGM China.
Ms. Ho is also the managing director of Shun Tak Holdings Limited (together with its subsidiaries “Shun Tak”), a leading conglomerate in Hong Kong with core
businesses in transportation, property, hospitality and investments. Shun Tak provides various services and products, including ferry tickets, travel products, rental
of hotel rooms, laundry services and property cleaning services to MGM China. In addition, MGM China leases transportation equipment and office space from
Shun Tak. MGM China incurred expenses relating to Shun Tak of $7 million, $7 million and $16 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019,
respectively.
In addition, Ms. Ho indirectly holds a 50% interest in an entity that provides, along with its subsidiary, marketing and public relations consulting services,
including for the retendering of MGM China's gaming subconcession, to MGM China, which totaled $4 million, $1 million, and $4 million for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Grand  Paradise  Macau  deferred  cash  payment. On  September  1,  2016,  the  Company  purchased  188.1  million  common  shares  of  its  MGM  China
subsidiary from Grand Paradise Macau (“GPM”), an entity controlled by Ms. Ho. As
103

part of the consideration for the purchase, the Company agreed to pay GPM or its nominee a deferred cash payment of $50 million. The payments included
amounts equal to the ordinary dividends received on such shares, with a final lump sum payment due on the fifth anniversary of the closing date of the transaction,
which was made in September 2021. Such amounts were paid to Expert Angels Limited, an entity controlled by an immediate family member of Ms. Ho. As of
December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a remaining liability on a discounted basis of $33 million in “Other accrued liabilities” on the consolidated balance
sheets.
MGM Branding and Development Holdings, Ltd. (together with its subsidiary MGM Development Services, Ltd., “MGM Branding and Development”), an
entity included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements in which Ms. Ho indirectly holds a noncontrolling interest, is party to a brand license agreement
and a development services agreement with MGM China, for which the related amounts are eliminated in consolidation. An entity owned by Ms. Ho received
distributions of $8 million, $5 million and $20 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, in connection with the ownership of a
noncontrolling interest in MGM Branding and Development Holdings, Ltd.
MGP
As further described in Note 1, pursuant to the master lease with MGP, the Company leases the real estate assets of The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New
York, Park MGM, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit, Beau Rivage, Borgata, Empire City, MGM National Harbor, MGM Northfield
Park, and MGM Springfield from MGP.
MGP master lease. The MGP master lease has an initial lease term of 10 years that began on April 25, 2016 (other than with respect to MGM National
Harbor, as described below) with the potential to extend the term for four additional 5-year terms thereafter at the option of the Company (with additional renewal
options with respect to MGM Springfield, as described below). The MGP master lease provides that any extension of its term must apply to all of the real estate
under the master lease at the time of the extension. The MGP master lease provides that the initial term with respect to MGM National Harbor ends on April 31,
2024. Thereafter, the initial term of the MGP master lease with respect to MGM National Harbor may be renewed at the option of the Company for an initial
renewal period lasting until the earlier of the end of the then-current term of the master lease or the next renewal term (depending on whether the Company elects
to renew the other properties under the master lease in connection with the expiration of the initial 10-year term). If, however, the Company chooses not to renew
the lease with respect to MGM National Harbor after the initial MGM National Harbor term under the master lease, the Company would also lose the right to
renew the MGP master lease with respect to the rest of the properties when the initial 10-year lease term ends related to the rest of the properties in 2026. In
addition to the four 5-year renewal terms, the term of the lease with respect to MGM Springfield may be extended for an additional four 5-year renewal terms. The
MGP master lease has a triple-net structure, which requires the Company to pay substantially all costs associated with the lease, including real estate taxes, ground
lease payments, insurance, utilities and routine maintenance, in addition to the base rent. Additionally, the master lease provides MGP with a right of first offer
with respect to any further gaming development by the Company on the undeveloped land adjacent to Empire City, which MGP may exercise should the Company
elect to sell this property in the future.
Rent under the MGP master lease consists of a base rent component and a percentage rent component. As of December 31, 2021, the base rent represents
approximately 91% of the rent payments due and the percentage rent represents approximately 9% of the rent payments due under the MGP master lease. The
MGP master lease also provides for fixed annual escalators of 2% on the base rent through the sixth lease year and the possibility for additional 2% increases
thereafter subject to the tenant and operating subsidiary sublessee, collectively, meeting an adjusted net revenue to rent ratio, as well as potential increases in
percentage rent in year six and every five years thereafter  based on a percentage of average actual annual net revenue during the preceding five year period
calculated in accordance with the terms under the master lease. With respect to the additional renewal terms for MGM Springfield, for the first two additional
renewal terms, base rent will include a fixed annual rent escalator of 2.0%, subject to the adjusted net revenue to rent ratio, as discussed above. For each lease year
subsequent  to  the  first  two  additional  renewal  terms,  the  base  rent  shall  be  the  Fair  Market  Rent  (as  defined  in  the  MGP  master  lease)  in  respect  of  MGM
Springfield. The MGP master lease also contains customary events of default and financial covenants; provided that the tenant will not be in default of the financial
covenants in the event there is an unavoidable delay (as such term is defined in the lease). The Company was in compliance with all applicable covenants as of
December 31, 2021.
Subsequent to the Company completing its acquisition of Empire City in January 2019, MGP acquired the developed real property associated with Empire
City  from  the  Company  for  consideration  of  approximately  $634  million,  which  included  the  assumption  of  debt  of  approximately  $246  million,  which  was
immediately repaid, and the remainder in issuance of Operating Partnership units. The real estate assets of Empire City were then leased to the Company pursuant
to an amendment to the MGP master lease, increasing the annual rent payment to MGP by $50 million, prorated for the remainder of the lease year. Consistent
with the MGP master lease terms, 90% of this rent will be fixed and contractually
104

grow at 2% per year until 2022. As disclosed above, the master lease provides MGP with a right of first offer with respect to certain undeveloped land adjacent to
the property to the extent the Company develops additional gaming facilities, which MGP may exercise should the Company elect to sell this property in the
future.
On March 7, 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the existing MGP master lease with respect to the Park MGM Transaction. In connection
with the transaction, the Company received consideration of $638 million, of which approximately $606 million was paid in cash and the remainder in issuance of
Operating Partnership units. Additionally, the annual rent payment to MGP was increased by $50 million, prorated for the remainder of the lease year. Consistent
with the master lease terms, 90% of this rent will be fixed and contractually grow at 2% per year until 2022.
Additionally, on April 1, 2019, the Company acquired the membership interests of Northfield from MGP, which held the operations of Northfield, for fair
value of consideration of approximately $305 million consisting primarily of approximately 9 million Operating Partnership units that were ultimately redeemed
by the Operating Partnership, and MGP retained the associated real estate assets. The Company then rebranded the property to MGM Northfield Park, which was
then added to the existing MGP master lease with MGP, increasing the annual rent payment to MGP by $60 million. Consistent with the master lease terms, 90%
of this rent will be fixed and contractually grow at 2% per year until 2022.
The annual rent payments under the MGP master lease for the fourth lease year, which commenced on April 1, 2019, increased to $946 million from
$770 million at the start of the third lease year. The increase was a result of the $50 million in additional rent for each of the Park MGM Transaction and the
addition of Empire City in the beginning of 2019, the $60 million of additional rent for MGM Northfield Park, which entered the Master Lease on April 1, 2019, as
well as the third 2% fixed annual rent escalator that went into effect on April 1, 2019.
On February 14, 2020, the Company amended the MGP master lease to remove Mandalay Bay from such master lease and the annual rent under the MGP
master lease was reduced by $133 million to $813 million.
The annual cash rent payments under the MGP master lease for the fifth lease year, which commenced on April 1, 2020, increased to $828 million from
$813 million, as a result of the fourth 2% fixed annual rent escalator that went into effect on April 1, 2020.
The annual cash rent payments under the MGP master lease for the sixth lease year, which commenced on April 1, 2021, increased to $843 million from
$828 million, as a result of the fifth 2% fixed annual rent escalator that went into effect on April 1, 2021.
In October 2021, MGP acquired the real estate assets of MGM Springfield from the Company for $400 million of cash consideration, which was accounted
for as a transaction between entities under common control. The Company adjusted the carrying value of noncontrolling interests to adjust for its share of the
difference between the carrying value of the net assets transferred and the consideration received, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value.
MGM Springfield was added to the master lease between the Company and MGP. Following the closing of the transaction, the annual rent payment to MGP
increased from $843 million to $873 million, reflecting the addition of MGM Springfield, which increased the annual rent payment by $30 million, $27 million of
which will be fixed and contractually grow at 2% per year with escalators subject to the adjusted net revenue to rent ratio, as further described above. Final
regulatory approvals, which were not necessary for the transaction to close, are expected to be received within nine to twelve months following the close of the
transaction. Until final regulatory approvals are obtained, the parties will be subject to a trust agreement, which provides for the property to go into a trust (or, at
the Company’s option, be returned to the Company) during the interim period in the event that the regulator finds reasonable cause to believe that MGP may not be
found suitable. The property will then remain in trust until a final determination regarding MGP’s suitability is made.
Additionally, refer to Note 1 for discussion relating to the waiver agreement with MGP and the Operating Partnership units redeemed in 2020 thereunder.
All intercompany transactions, including transactions under the MGP master lease, have been eliminated in the Company’s consolidation of MGP. The
public ownership of MGP’s Class A shares is recognized as noncontrolling interests in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
As further described in Note 1, in August 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with VICI and MGP whereby VICI will acquire MGP in a stock-
for-stock transaction. As part of the transaction, the Company will enter into an amended and restated master lease with VICI. The transaction is expected to close
in the first half of 2022, subject to customary closing conditions, regulatory approvals, and approval by VICI stockholders (which was obtained on October 29,
2021).
105

Bellagio BREIT Venture
The Company has a 5% ownership interest in Bellagio BREIT Venture, which owns the real estate assets of Bellagio and leases such assets to a subsidiary
of the Company pursuant to a lease agreement. Refer to Note 11 for further information related to the Bellagio lease.
MGP BREIT Venture
MGP has a 50.1% ownership interest in MGP BREIT Venture, which owns the real estate assets of Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand Las Vegas and leases
such assets to a subsidiary of the Company pursuant to a lease agreement. Refer to Note 11 for further information related to the Mandalay Bay and MGM Grand
Las Vegas lease.
106

SCHEDULE II — VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
(In thousands)
 
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Expected Credit
Losses
Write-offs, Net of
Recoveries
Balance at End of
Period
Loss reserve:
 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2021
$
126,589 
$
21,852 
$
(20,093)
$
128,348 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
94,561 
71,422 
(39,394)
126,589 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
90,775 
39,270 
(35,484)
94,561 
 
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Increase
Decrease
Balance at End of
Period
Deferred income tax valuation allowance:
 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2021
$
2,875,595 $
8,667 $
— 
$
2,884,262 
Year Ended December 31, 2020
2,574,056 
301,539 
— 
2,875,595 
Year Ended December 31, 2019
2,477,703 
96,353 
— 
2,574,056 
107

ITEM 9.    CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A.    CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our  Chief  Executive  Officer  (principal  executive  officer)  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  (principal  financial  officer)  have  concluded  that  our  disclosure
controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e)  under  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended  (“the  Exchange  Act”))  were
effective as of December 31, 2021 to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed in the Company’s reports under the Exchange Act is
recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  reported  within  the  time  periods  specified  in  the  SEC  rules  and  regulations  and  to  provide  that  such  information  is
accumulated and communicated to management to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures. This conclusion is based on an evaluation as required by
Rules 13a-15(b) and 15d-15(b) under the Exchange Act conducted under the supervision and participation of the principal executive officer and principal financial
officer along with company management.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
During  the  quarter  ended  December  31,  2021,  there  were  no  changes  in  our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  that  materially  affected,  or  are
reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management’s Responsibilities
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Sections 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f) of the Exchange Act) for MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries (the “Company”).
Objective of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In establishing adequate internal control over financial reporting, management has developed and maintained a system of internal control, policies and
procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance that information contained in the accompanying consolidated financial statements and other information
presented in this annual report is reliable, does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact, and fairly presents in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the Company as of and for the periods presented in this annual report. These include
controls  and  procedures  designed  to  ensure  that  this  information  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  the  Company’s  management,  including  its  principal
executive  officer  and  principal  financial  officer,  as  appropriate  for  all  timely  decisions  regarding  required  disclosure.  Significant  elements  of  the  Company’s
internal control over financial reporting include, for example:
•
Hiring skilled accounting personnel and training them appropriately;
•
Written accounting policies;
•
Written documentation of accounting systems and procedures;
•
Segregation of incompatible duties;
•
Internal audit function to monitor the effectiveness of the system of internal control; and
•
Oversight by an independent Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Management’s Evaluation
Management, with the participation of the Company’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer, has evaluated the Company’s internal
control  over  financial  reporting  using  the  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
Based  on  its  evaluation  as  of  December  31,  2021,  management  believes  that  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  is  effective  in
achieving the objectives described above.
108

The Company’s independent registered public accounting firm’s report on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting appears herein.
ITEM 9B.    OTHER INFORMATION
None.
ITEM 9C.    DISCLOSURE REGARDING FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS THAT PREVENT INSPECTIONS
Not applicable.
109

PART III
ITEM 10.    DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Information about our Executive Officers” in Item 1 of this Form 10-K and under “Election
of Directors” and “Corporate Governance” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which we expect to file with the SEC
within 120 days after December 31, 2021 (the “Proxy Statement”).
ITEM 11.    EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Director Compensation” and “Executive Compensation” and “Corporate Governance —
Human  Capital  and  Compensation  Committee  Interlocks  and  Insider  Participation”  and  “Human  Capital  and  Compensation  Committee  Report”  in  the  Proxy
Statement.
ITEM 12.    SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Principal Stockholders” and “Election of Directors” in the Proxy Statement.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
The following table includes information about our equity compensation plans at December 31, 2021:
 
Securities to be issued
upon exercise of
outstanding options,
warrants and rights
Weighted average
exercise price of
outstanding options,
warrants and rights
Securities available for
future issuance under equity
compensation plans
 
(In thousands, except per share data)
Equity compensation plans approved by security holders 
6,539 $
24.33 
20,080
Equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
—
—
—
(1)
As of December 31, 2021, we had 4.0 million restricted stock units and 1.7 million performance share units outstanding that do not have an exercise price; therefore, the weighted
average per share exercise price only relates to outstanding stock appreciation rights. The amount included in the securities outstanding above for performance share units assumes that
each target price is achieved.
ITEM 13.    CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTORS, INDEPENDENCE
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Transactions with Related Persons” and “Corporate Governance” in the Proxy Statement.
ITEM 14.    PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Ratification of Selection of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” in the Proxy
Statement.
(1)
110

PART IV
ITEM 15.    EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
(a)(1).    Financial Statements. The following consolidated financial statements of the Company are filed as part of this report under Item 8 – “Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
59
Consolidated Balance Sheets — December 31, 2021 and 2020
62
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Consolidated Statements of Operations
63
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)
64
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
65
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
66
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
67
(a)(2).    Financial Statement Schedule. The following financial statement schedule of the Company is filed as part of this report under Item 8 – “Financial
Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
 
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
107
The financial information included in the financial statement schedule should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements. All other
financial statement schedules have been omitted because they are not applicable, or the required information is included in the consolidated financial statements or
the notes thereto.
(a)(3).    Exhibits.
Exhibit
Number
Description
2.1
Equity Purchase Agreement by and between MGM CC Holdings, Inc., Infinity World Development Corp. and, solely for purposes of Article
X thereof, MGM Resorts International, dated as of June 30, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 of the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on July 1, 2021).
2.2
Master Transaction Agreement by and among MGM Resorts International, CityCenter Land, LLC and Ace Purchaser LLC, dated as of June
30, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.2 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 1, 2021).
2.3
Master  Transaction  Agreement,  by  and  among  MGM  Resorts  International,  MGM  Growth  Properties  LLC,  MGM  Growth  Properties
Operating Partnership LP, VICI Properties Inc., Venus Sub LLC, VICI Properties L.P. and VICI Properties OP LLC, dated as of August 4,
2021 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 5, 2021).
2.4
Purchase Agreement  by and among BRE Spade Parent LLC, BRE Spade PropCo Holdings LLC, BRE Spade Mezz 1 LLC, BRE Spade
Voteco LLC and MGM Resorts International, dated as of September 26, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 of the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 28, 2021).
2.5
Purchase Agreement by and between MGM Resorts International and HR Nevada, LLC, dated as of December 13, 2021 (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 2.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 14, 2021).
3.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Company, dated June 14, 2011 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2011).
3.2
Amended and Restated  Bylaws of the Company, effective  January 13, 2021 (incorporated  by reference  to Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 15, 2021).
4.1(1)
Indenture,  dated  November  15,  1996,  by  and  between  Mandalay  and  Wells  Fargo  Bank  (Colorado),  N.A.,  as  Trustee  (the  “Mandalay
November 1996 Indenture”) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(e) to the Mandalay October 1996 10-Q).
111

4.1(2)
Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 15, 1996, to the Mandalay November 1996 Indenture, with respect to $150 million aggregate
principal amount of 7.0% Senior Notes due 2036 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(f) to the Mandalay October 1996 10-Q).
4.1(3)
7.0% Senior Notes due February 15, 2036, in the principal amount of $150,000,000 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(g) to the Mandalay
October 1996 10-Q).
4.1(4)
Indenture, dated March 22, 2012, between the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
4.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2012).
4.1(5)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated March 22, 2012, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association,
as trustee with respect to $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 7.75% senior notes due 2022 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 of
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2012).
4.1(6)
Fourth  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  November  25,  2014,  among  the  Company,  the  guarantors  named  therein  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee,
relating to the 6.000% senior notes due 2023 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
November 25, 2014).
4.1(7)
Fifth  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  August  19,  2016,  among  MGM  Resorts  International,  the  guarantors  named  therein  and  U.S.  Bank
National Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among MGM Resorts International and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee, relating to the 4.625% senior notes due 2026 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on August 19, 2016).
4.1(8)
Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated June 18, 2018, among MGM Resorts International, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among MGM Resorts International and U.S. Bank National Association,
as trustee, relating to the 5.750% senior notes due 2025 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on June 18, 2018).
4.1(9)
Seventh  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  April  10,  2019,  among  MGM  Resorts  International,  the  guarantors  named  therein  and  U.S.  Bank
National Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among MGM Resorts International and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee, relating to the 5.500% senior notes due 2027 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on April 10, 2019).
4.1(10)
Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated May 4, 2020, among MGM Resorts International, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among MGM Resorts International and U.S. Bank National Association,
as trustee, relating to the 6.750% senior notes due 2025 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on May 4, 2020).
4.1(11)
Ninth  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  October  13,  2020,  among  MGM  Resorts  International,  the  guarantors  named  therein  and  U.S.  Bank
National Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among MGM Resorts International and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee, relating to the 4.750% senior notes due 2028 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on October 13, 2020).
4.1(12)
Indenture,  dated  as  of  August  12,  2016,  among  MGM  Growth  Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the
subsidiary guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current
Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on August 12, 2016).
4.1(13)
Indenture, dated as of April 20, 2016, among MGP Escrow Issuer, LLC and MGP Escrow Co-Issuer, Inc. and U.S. Bank National Association,
as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed April 21, 2016).
4.1(14)
Indenture, dated as of September 21, 2017, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., the
subsidiary guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current
Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 21, 2017).
4.1(15)
Indenture,  dated  as  of  January  25,  2019,  among  MGM  Growth  Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the
subsidiary guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current
Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on January 25, 2019).
4.1(16)
Supplemental Indenture to the Indentures, dated as of June 15, 2018, among MGP OH, Inc., MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc. and MGM Growth
Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.1  to  the  Quarterly  Report  on  Form  10-Q  of  MGM  Growth
Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on August 7, 2018).
112

4.1(17)
Second Supplemental Indenture to the Indentures, dated as of July 10, 2018, among Northfield Park Associates LLC, Cedar Downs OTB,
LLC, MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc. and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on November
6, 2018).
4.1(18)
Third Supplemental Indenture to the Indentures, dated as of January 29, 2019, among MGP Yonkers Realty Sub, LLC, YRL Associates, L.P.,
MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein, and U.S. Bank
National Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of MGM Growth Properties
LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on May 7, 2019).
4.1(19)
Fourth Supplemental Indenture to the Indentures, dated as of March 29, 2019, among MGP, MGP OH Propco, LLC, MGP Finance Co-Issuer,
Inc., MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the Subsidiary Guarantors named therein, and U.S. Bank National Association, as
Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on May 7, 2019).
4.1(20)
Indenture governing the 5.375% senior notes due 2024, dated as of May 16, 2019, between MGM China Holdings Limited and U.S. Bank
National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 16,
2019).
4.1(21)
Indenture governing the 5.875% senior notes due 2026, dated as of May 16, 2019, between MGM China Holdings Limited and U.S. Bank
National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 16,
2019).
4.1(22)
Indenture, dated as of June 5, 2020, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., the subsidiary
guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current Report on
Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on June 5, 2020).
4.1(23)
Indenture governing the 5.25% senior notes due 2025, dated as of June 18. 2020, between MGM China Holdings Limited and Wilmington
Savings Fund Society, FSB, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June
22, 2020).
4.1(24)
Indenture, dated as of November 19, 2020, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., the
subsidiary guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current
Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on November 20, 2020).
4.1(25)
Indenture governing the 4.75% senior notes due 2027, dated as of March 31, 2021, between MGM China Holdings Limited and Wilmington
Savings Fund Society, FSB, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March
31, 2021).
4.1(26)
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 23, 2021, to the Indenture dated as of April 20, 2016, by and among MGM Growth
Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  party  thereto  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 27, 2021).
4.1(27)
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 23, 2021, to the Indenture dated as of August 12, 2016, by and among MGM Growth
Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  party  thereto  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 27, 2021).
4.1(28)
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 23, 2021, to the Indenture dated as of September 21, 2017, by and among MGM
Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National
Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 27, 2021).
4.1(29)
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 23, 2021, to the Indenture dated as of January 25, 2019, by and among MGM Growth
Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  party  thereto  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 27, 2021).
4.1(30)
First  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  as  of  September  23,  2021,  to  the  Indenture  dated  as  of  June  5,  2020,  by  and  among  MGM  Growth
Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  party  thereto  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 27, 2021).
113

4.1(31)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 23, 2021, to the Indenture dated as of November 19, 2020, by and among MGM Growth
Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the  Subsidiary  Guarantors  party  thereto  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.6 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 27, 2021).
4.2
Guarantee (Mandalay Resort Group 7.0% Senior Notes due 2036), dated as of April 25, 2005, by the Company and certain subsidiaries of the
Company, in favor of The Bank of New York, as trustee for the benefit of the holders of the Notes pursuant to the Indenture referred to therein
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.22 of the Company's Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 9, 2005).
4.3
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement, between MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Resorts International, dated as of
October 5, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.8 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM
Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on March 1, 2018).
4.4
Description of MGM Common Stock (incorporated by reference  to Exhibit 4.4 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on
February 26, 2021).
10.1(1)
Credit Agreement, dated as of April 25, 2016, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the financial institutions referred to
as Lenders therein and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.17 of the Current Report on
Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
10.1(2)
First Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated October 26, 2016, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other loan
parties  and  lenders  named  therein  and  Bank  of  America,  N.A.,  as  administrative  agent  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.1  of  the
Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on October 26, 2016).
10.1(3)
Second Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated May 1, 2017, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other loan
parties  and  lenders  named  therein  and  Bank  of  America,  N.A.,  as  administrative  agent  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.1  of  the
Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on May 1, 2017).
10.1(4)
Third Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated March 23, 2018, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other loan
parties  and  lenders  named  therein  and  Bank  of  America,  N.A.,  as  administrative  agent  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.1  of  the
Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on March 26, 2018).
10.1(5)
Fourth Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated June 14, 2018, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other loan
parties  and  lenders  named  therein  and  Bank  of  America,  N.A.,  as  administrative  agent  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.1  of  the
Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on June 18, 2018).
10.1(6)
Fifth Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of February 14, 2020, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other
loan parties and lenders named therein and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of
MGM Growth Properties LLC Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 18, 2020).
10.1(7)
Credit Agreement, dated as of November 24, 2021, among the Company, Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, and certain lenders
party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 26, 2021).
10.1(8)
Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, dated August 12, 2019 (the “2019 Revolving Credit Facility”), by and among MGM China Holdings
Limited and certain Arrangers and Lenders party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed on August 13, 2019).
10.1(9)
Amendment Letter to the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, dated February 18, 2020, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited
and certain Arrangers and Lenders Party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
filed on May 1, 2020).
10.1(10)
Amendment Letter to the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, dated April 9, 2020, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited and
certain Arrangers and Lenders Party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed
on August 3, 2020).
10.1(11)
Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, dated May 26, 2020 (the “2020 Revolving Credit Facility”), by and among MGM China Holdings
Limited and certain Lenders party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
May 29, 2020).
10.1(12)
Increase  Confirmation  to  2020  Revolving  Credit  Facility  dated  as  of  June  29,  2020  between  the  Increase  Lender  and  the  Facility  Agent
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1(13) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 26, 2021).
10.1(13)
Amendment Letter to the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility, dated October 5, 2020, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited and certain
Arrangers and Lenders Party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1(14) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on
February 26, 2021).
114

10.1(14)
Amendment Letter to the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility, dated October 5, 2020, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited and certain
Arrangers and Lenders Party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1(15) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on
February 26, 2021).
10.1(15)
Amendment Letter to the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility, dated February 24, 2021, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited and certain
Arrangers and Lenders Party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on
May 3, 2021).
10.1(16)
Amendment Letter to the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility, dated February 24, 2021, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited and certain
Arrangers and Lenders Party thereto (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on
May 3, 2021).
10.1(17)
Guaranty Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on November 18, 2019).
10.1(18)
Guaranty Agreement, dated as of February 14, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form
10-Q filed on May 1, 2020).
10.2(1)
Subconcession Contract for the Exploitation of Games Fortune and Chance or Other Games in Casino in the Special Administrative Region of
Macau,  dated  April  19,  2005,  between  Sociedade  de  Jogos  de  Macau,  S.A.,  as  concessionaire,  and  MGM  Grand  Paradise  S.A.,  as
subconcessionaire (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 7, 2011).
10.2(2)
Sub-Concession Extension Contract, dated as of March 15, 2019, between MGM Grand Paradise Limited and Sociedade de Jogos de Macau,
S.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 18, 2019).
10.2(3)
MGM  SJM  Agreement,  dated  as  of  March  15,  2019,  between  MGM  Grand  Paradise  Limited  and  Sociedade  de  Jogos  de  Macau,  S.A.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 18, 2019).
10.2(4)
Land Concession Agreement, dated as of April 18, 2005, relating to the MGM Macau resort and casino between the Special Administrative
Region of Macau and MGM Grand Paradise, S.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-
Q filed on August 9, 2011).
10.2(5)
Land  Concession  Agreement,  effective  as  of  January  9,  2013,  relating  to  the  MGM  Macau  resort  and  casino  between  the  Special
Administrative Region of Macau and MGM Grand Paradise S.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2(4) of the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K filed on March 1, 2013).
10.4(1)
Master Lease between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC, dated April 25, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the
Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
10.4(2)
First Amendment to Master Lease, dated as of August 1, 2016, between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2016).
10.4(3)
Second Amendment to Master Lease, dated as of October 5, 2017, between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC (incorporated by
reference  to  Exhibit  10.1  of  the  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K of  MGM Growth  Properties  LLC and  MGM Growth  Properties  Operating
Partnership LP filed on October 6, 2017).
10.4(4)
Third  Amendment  to  Master  Lease  Agreement,  dated  as  of  January  29,  2019,  between  MGP  Lessor,  LLC  and  MGM  Lessee,  LLC
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties
Operating Partnership LP filed on January 29, 2019).
10.4(5)
Fourth Amendment to Master Lease Agreement, dated as of March 7, 2019, between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating
Partnership LP filed on March 8, 2019).
10.4(6)
Fifth Amendment to Master Lease Agreement, dated as of April 1, 2019, between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC (incorporated by
reference  to  Exhibit  10.1  of  the  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K of  MGM Growth  Properties  LLC and  MGM Growth  Properties  Operating
Partnership LP on Form 8-K filed on April 4, 2019).
10.4(7)
Sixth Amendment to Master Lease, by and between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGP Lessee, LLC, dated as of February 14, 2020 (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the Commission on February 18, 2020).
10.4(8)
Seventh  Amendment  to  Master  Lease  Agreement,  dated  as  of  October  29,  2021,  between  MGP  Lessor,  LLC  and  MGM  Lessee,  LLC
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on October 29, 2021).
10.4(9)
Lease, by and between BCORE Paradise LLC and Bellagio, LLC, dated as of November 15, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 18, 2019).
115

10.4(10)
First Amendment to Lease, by and between BCORE Paradise LLC and Bellagio, LLC, dated as of April 14, 2021 (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 6, 2021).
10.4(11)
Lease,  by  and  between  Mandalay  PropCo,  LLC,  MGM  Grand  PropCo,  LLC  and  MGM  Lessee  II,  LLC,  dated  as  of  February  14,  2020
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 18, 2020).
10.4(12)
Master  Lease  by  and  among  Ace  A  PropCo  LLC,  Ace  V  PropCo  LLC  and  MGM  Lessee  III,  LLC,  dated  as  of  September  28,  2021
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 28, 2021).
10.4(13)
Tax  Protection  Agreement,  by  and  among  Bellagio,  LLC,  BCORE  Paradise  Parent  LLC  and  BCORE  Paradise  JV  LLC,  dated  as  of
November 15, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 18, 2019).
10.4(14)
Tax Protection Agreement, by and among MGM Resorts International, MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP and MGP BREIT
Venture 1 LLC, dated as of February 14, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed
on February 18, 2020).
*10.5(1)
Amended and Restated 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed on June 10, 2014).
*10.5(2)
Second Amended and Restated Annual Performance-Based Incentive Plan for Executive Officers (incorporated by reference to Appendix A
of the Company’s Proxy Statement filed on April 20, 2016).
*10.5(3)
Deferred Compensation Plan II, as Amended and Restated, effective December 17, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(6) of the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on March 2, 2015).
*10.5(4)
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of December 30, 2004 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company's
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 10, 2005).
*10.5(5)
Amendment No. 1 to the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of July 10, 2007 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3(12)
of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 29, 2008 ).
*10.5(6)
Amendment No. 2 to the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of October 15, 2007 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3(14) of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 29, 2008).
*10.5(7)
Amendment No. 1 to the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of November 4, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.2 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 7, 2008).
*10.5(8)
Employment  Agreement,  effective  as  of  April  1,  2020,  by  and  between  the  Company  and  Corey  Sanders  (incorporated  by  reference  to
Exhibit 10.2 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 31, 2020).
*10.5(9)
Employment  Agreement, effective  as of April 1, 2020, by and between the Company and John McManus (incorporated  by reference  to
Exhibit 10.3 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 31, 2020).
*10.5(10)
Employment Agreement, effective as of July 29, 2020, by and between the Company and William Hornbuckle (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 31, 2020).
*10.5(11)
Employment Agreement, effective as of January 11, 2021, by and between the Company and Jonathan Halkyard (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 6, 2021).
*10.5(12)
Employment Agreement, effective June 3, 2021, by and between the Company and Tilak Mandadi.
*10.5(13)
Amended and Restated Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-employee Directors, effective as of June 5, 2014 (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 11, 2014).
*10.5(14)
Form of Restricted Stock Units Agreement of the Company effective for awards granted in October 2015 and thereafter (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(15)
Form  of  Restricted  Stock  Units  Agreement  of  the  Company  (Performance)  effective  for  awards  granted  in  October  2015  and  thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(16)
Form of Sign-On RSU Award Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
October 5, 2016).
*10.5(17)
Form of RSU Agreement (Named Executive Officer Employment Agreement Awards) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the
Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 31, 2020).
116

*10.5(18)
Form of RSU Agreement (Hornbuckle) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
March 31, 2020).
*10.5(19)
Form of Performance Share Units Agreement of the Company effective for awards granted in October 2015 and thereafter (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.6 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(20)
Form of Bonus Performance  Share Units Agreement of the Company, effective  for bonus awards granted in March 2016 and thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on May 6, 2016).
*10.5(21)
Change of Control Policy for Executive Officers, dated as of November 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 of the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 8, 2012).
*10.5(22)
Form of Memorandum Agreement re: Changes to Severance and Change of Control Policies (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 of the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 8, 2012).
*10.5(23)
MGM Growth Properties LLC 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 of the Registration Statement on
Form S-8 of MGM Growth Properties LLC (File No. 333-210832) filed on April 19, 2016).
*10.5(24)
MGM Growth Properties LLC Form of 2016 Restricted Share Units Agreement (MGM Non-Employee Directors) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.15 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
*10.5(25)
MGM Growth Properties LLC Form of 2016 Restricted Share Units Agreement (MGM Employees) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.16 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
*10.5(26)
Retirement Policy for Senior Officers, adopted January 10, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed on January 12, 2017).
*10.5(27)
Amended and Restated Retirement Policy for Senior Officers, dated October 7, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5(31) of the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
*10.5(28)
Form of Letter to Employees re: Existing Equity Awards (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2017).
*10.5(29)
Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement (Bonus Payout) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2017).
*10.5(30)
Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2017).
*10.5(31)
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (Non-Employee Director) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2017).
*10.5(32)
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (with Performance Hurdle) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2017).
*10.5(33)
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (no Performance Hurdle) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 of the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on March 10, 2017).
*10.5(34)
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (Bonus RSUs) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5(40) of the Company’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K filed on March 1, 2018).
*10.5(35)
Form of Restricted Stock Unit (Deferred Payment Bonus) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q filed on May 7, 2018).
*10.5(36)
Form  of  Relative  Performance  Share  Unit  Agreement  (Annual  Grant)  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.5(41)  of  the  Company’s
Annual Report on Form 10‑K filed on March 1, 2018).
*10.5(37)
Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5(41) of the Company’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
*10.5(38)
Form  of  Performance  Share  Unit  Agreement  (Annual  Grant,  Messrs.  Hornbuckle,  Sanders  &  McManus)  (incorporated  by  reference  to
Exhibit 10.5(42) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
*10.5(39)
Form  of  Restricted  Stock  Unit  Agreement  (with  Performance  Hurdle)  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.5(43)  of  the  Company’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
*10.5(40)
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (no Performance Hurdle) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5(44) of the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
*10.5(41)
Form  of  Relative  Performance  Share  Unit  Agreement  (Annual  Grant)  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.5(45)  of  the  Company’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
*10.5(42)
Form of Relative Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant, Messrs. Hornbuckle, Sanders & McManus) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.5(46) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2020).
117

*10.5(43)
Form of Omnibus Amendment to Relative Performance Share Unit Agreements (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 of the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on May 3, 2021).
*10.5(44)
Form of Relative Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant).
*10.5(45)
Form of Relative Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant, Messrs. Hornbuckle, Sanders & McManus).
21
List of subsidiaries of the Company.
22
Subsidiary Guarantors.
23.1
Consent of Deloitte & Touche LLP, independent auditors to the Company.
31.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer of Periodic Report Pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) and Rule 15d‑14(a).
31.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer of Periodic Report Pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) and Rule 15d‑14(a).
**32.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350.
**32.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350.
99.1
Description of Regulation and Licensing.
101.INS
Inline XBRL Instance Document – the instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags are embedded
within the Inline XBRL document.
101.SCH
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document.
101.CAL
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document.
101.DEF
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document.
101.LAB
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document.
101.PRE
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document.
104
The cover page from this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021, has been formatted in Inline XBRL.
*
Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
**
Exhibits 32.1 and 32.2 shall not be deemed filed with the SEC, nor shall they be deemed incorporated by reference in any filing with the SEC under the
Exchange Act or the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, whether made before or after the date hereof and irrespective of any general incorporation language
in any filings.
In accordance with Rule 402 of Regulation S-T, the XBRL information included in Exhibit 101 and Exhibit 104 to this Form 10-K shall not be deemed to be
filed for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), or otherwise subject to the liability of that
section, and shall not be incorporated by reference into any registration statement or other document filed under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or
the Exchange Act, except as shall be expressly set forth by specific reference in such filing.
ITEM 16.    FORM 10-K SUMMARY
None.
118

SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
MGM Resorts International
By:
/s/ WILLIAM J. HORNBUCKLE
William J. Hornbuckle
Chief Executive Officer and President
(Principal Executive Officer)
Dated: February 25, 2022
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
 
/s/ William J. Hornbuckle
 
 
Chief Executive Officer and President
(Principal Executive Officer)
February 25, 2022
William J. Hornbuckle
 
/s/ Jonathan S. Halkyard
 
 
Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
(Principal Financial Officer)
 
February 25, 2022
Jonathan S. Halkyard
 
/s/ Todd R. Meinert
 
 
Senior Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
February 25, 2022
Todd R. Meinert
 
/s/ Paul Salem
 
Chairman of the Board
 
 
February 25, 2022
Paul Salem
 
 
 
/s/ Mary Chris Jammet
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Mary Chris Jammet
 
 
/s/ Barry Diller
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Barry Diller
 
 
 
/s/ Alexis M. Herman
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Alexis M. Herman
 
 
/s/ Joseph Levin
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Joseph Levin
 
 
/s/ Rose McKinney-James
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Rose McKinney-James
 
 
119

Signature
Title
Date
 
/s/ Keith A. Meister
 
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Keith A. Meister
 
 
 
/s/ Gregory M. Spierkel
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Gregory M. Spierkel
 
 
 
/s/ Janet Swartz
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Janet Swartz
 
 
 
/s/ Daniel J. Taylor
 
Director
 
 
February 25, 2022
Daniel J. Taylor
 
 

Exhibit 10.5(12)
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
This Employment Agreement (this “Agreement”) is entered into as of June 3, 2021 by and between MGM Resorts International
(“Employer”), and Tilak Mandadi (“Employee”).
1.
Employment. Employer  hereby  employs  Employee,  and  Employee  hereby  accepts  employment  by  Employer  as Chief
Strategy, Innovation & Technology Officer to perform such executive, managerial or administrative duties as Employer
may specify from time to time during the Specified Term (as defined in Section 2). If during the Specified Term Employee
becomes  an  employee  of  another  employer  affiliated  with  the  “Company”  (defined  below  in  Section  21)  Employee’s
employment with the Employer shall terminate as of the date Employee commences such other employment, and pursuant to
Section 19 Employee’s new Company-affiliated employer shall assume all rights and obligations of Employer under this
Agreement.
2.
Term. The term of Employee’s employment under this Agreement commences on July 6, 2021 and it terminates on July 6,
2024 (the “Specified Term”), unless a new written employment agreement is executed by the parties. If Employee remains
employed  after the expiration  of the Specified  Term, and the parties do not execute  a new employment  agreement,  then
Employee  shall  be  employed at-will and  none  of  the  provisions  of  the  Agreement  shall  apply  to  Employee’s  continued
employment  at-will,  except  Sections  8,  10.5,  11  and  12,  and  Employer  shall  have  the  right  to  terminate  Employee’s
employment with or without cause or notice, for any reason or no reason, and (unless otherwise provided herein) without any
payment of severance or compensation.
3.
Compensation. During the Specified Term, Employer shall pay Employee a minimum annual salary of $850,000 payable in
arrears at such frequencies and times as Employer pays its other employees. Employee is also eligible to receive employee
and fringe benefits that are no less favorable than those provided to employees having the rank of the second highest senior
executive of the Company. Employer will also reimburse Employee for all reasonable business and non-commute related
travel  expenses  Employee  incurs  in  performing  Employee’s  duties  under  this  Agreement,  payable  in  accordance  with
Employer’s  customary  practices  and policies,  as Employer  may modify and amend them from time to time. Employee’s
performance may be reviewed periodically. Employee is eligible for consideration for a discretionary raise, bonuses (whether
in cash or equity or equity-based awards), promotion, and/or participation in discretionary benefit plans; provided, however,
whether  and to what  extent  Employee  will  be granted  any of the above  will be determined  by Employer  in its sole and
absolute discretion.
3.1
In addition, Employee is eligible for consideration for a discretionary annual bonus in accordance with the terms and
conditions  of  the  Employer’s  Second  Amended  and  Restated  Annual  Performance-Based  Incentive  Plan  for
Executive Officers, or any successor plan (the “Program”). Employee will be eligible for consideration for an annual
bonus up to 150% of Employee’s base salary (the “Target Bonus”). The terms and conditions of the Program may be
changed from time to time. For the 2021 year, Employee’s bonus will be calculated on a full year basis with no pro
ration.
3.2
During  the  Specified  Term,  it  is  anticipated  that  Employee  will  be  required  to  travel  extensively  on  behalf  of
Employer. Such travel, if by air, may be on aircraft provided by Employer (if authorized by the Chief Executive
Officer), or if commercial airlines are used, on a first-class basis (or best available basis, if first class is not available).
120

3.3
Employee  shall  be  eligible  for  annual  equity  awards  in  forms  and  amounts  determined  by  the  Compensation
Committee in its discretion. It is the Compensation Committee’s present expectation that such annual awards will
have an aggregate grant-date Accounting Value targeted at $2,550,000 and that the grant in 2021 will be calculated on
a full year basis with no pro ration. Any annual or other equity awards granted on or after the Effective Date shall be
subject to such terms as the Compensation  Committee  may determine  in its discretion.  Employee will receive an
initial  grant  of 75,000 Restricted  Stock  Units (“ RSUs”)  on  the  first  business  day  of  the  month  succeeding
Employee’s first date of employment (the “Grant Date”), pursuant to the MGM Resorts International Amended and
Restated 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan, as amended from time to time (the “Omnibus Plan”), which shall vest in two
equal annual installments on each of the first two anniversaries of the Grant Date, and otherwise shall be subject to
the  terms  set  forth  in  the  Company’s  current  standard  form  of  award  agreement  for  RSUs  attached  as Exhibit A
hereto.
3.4
Notwithstanding  anything  herein  to  the  contrary,  with  respect  to  any  regular  annual  incentive  awards  granted  to
Employee during the Specified Term under the Omnibus Plan or any successor thereto (but excluding any one-time or
special retention awards, as determined by the Compensation Committee), the applicable award agreements for such
awards shall include provisions with respect (i) death or Disability, (ii) termination by Employer other than by reason
of “Employer’s Good Cause” and (iii) termination by Employee by reason of “Participant’s Good Cause” that shall be
no less favorable to Employee than as set forth in the form attached as Exhibit A hereto for RSUs and, with respect to
Relative Performance Share Units, the Form of Relative Performance Share Unit Agreement filed Exhibit 10.5(45) to
the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 (the “Form 10-K”) and the Form
of Performance Shae Unit Agreement filed as Exhibit 10.5(41) to the Form 10-K.
4.
Extent of Services. Employee agrees that Employee’s employment by Employer is full time and exclusive. Employee further
agrees to perform Employee’s duties in a competent, trustworthy and businesslike manner. Except with respect to the entities
and positions noted on Exhibit B, Employee agrees that during the Specified Term, Employee will not render any services of
any kind (whether or not for compensation) for any person or entity other than Employer, and that Employee will not engage
in any other business activity (whether or not for compensation) that is similar to or conflicts with Employee’s duties under
this  Agreement,  without  the  approval  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  MGM  Resorts  International  or  the  person  or  persons
designated by the Board of Directors to determine such matters.
5.
Policies and Procedures. Employee agrees and acknowledges that Employee is bound by Employer’s policies and procedures
as they may be modified, amended or adopted by Employer from time to time, including, but not limited to, the Company’s
Code of Conduct and Conflict of Interest policies. In the event the terms in this Agreement conflict with Employer’s policies
and procedures, the terms of this Agreement shall take precedence. As Employee is aware, problem gaming and underage
gambling  can  have  adverse  effects  on  individuals  and  the  gaming  industry  as  a  whole. Employee  acknowledges  that
Employee has read and is familiar with Employer’s policies, procedures and manuals and agrees to abide by them. Because
these matters are of such importance to Employer, Employee specifically confirms that Employee is familiar with and will
comply with Employer’s policies of prohibiting underage gaming, supporting programs to treat compulsive gambling, and
promoting diversity in all aspects of Employer’s business.
2

6.
Licensing Requirements. Employee acknowledges that Employer is engaged in a business that is or may be subject to and
exists  because  of  privileged  licenses  issued  by  governmental  authorities  in  Nevada,  Michigan,  Mississippi,  Maryland,
Massachusetts,  Ohio, New Jersey, New York, Macau S.A.R., and other jurisdictions  in which Employer  is engaged  in a
gaming  business  or  where  Employer  has  applied  to  (or  during  the  Specified  Term  may  apply  to)  engage  in  a  gaming
business. Employee shall apply for and obtain any license, qualification, clearance or other similar approval which Employer
or any regulatory authority which has jurisdiction over Employer requests or requires that Employee obtain.
7.
Failure to Satisfy Licensing Requirement. Employer has the right to terminate Employee’s employment under Section 10.1 of
this Agreement if: (i) Employee fails to satisfy any licensing requirement referred to in Section 6 above; (ii) Employer is
directed  to  cease  business  with  Employee  by  any  governmental  authority  referred  to  in  Section  6  above;  (iii)  Employer
determines, in its sole and exclusive judgment, that Employee was, is or might be involved in, or are about to be involved in,
any activity, relationship(s) or circumstance which could or does jeopardize Employer’s business, reputation or such licenses;
or (iv) any of Employer’s licenses is threatened to be, or is, denied, curtailed, suspended or revoked as a result of Employee’s
employment by Employer or as a result of Employee’s actions.
8.
Restrictive Covenants. Employee  acknowledges  that,  in  the  course  of  performing  Employee’s  responsibilities  under  this
Agreement, Employee will form relationships  and become acquainted with “Confidential Information” (defined below in
Section  21). Employee  further  acknowledges  that  such  relationships  and  the  Confidential  Information  are  valuable  to
Employer and the Company, and the restrictions on Employee’s future employment contained in this Agreement, if any, are
reasonably  necessary  in  order  for  Employer  to  remain  competitive  in  Employer’s  various  businesses  and  to  prevent
Employee  from  engaging  in  unfair  competition  against  Employer  after  termination  of  Employee’s  employment  with
Employer for any reason.
In consideration of this Agreement and the compensation payable to Employee under this Agreement, and in recognition of
Employer’s  heightened  need  for  protection  from  abuse  of  relationships  formed  or  disclosure  and  misuse  of  Confidential
Information garnered before and during the Specified Term of this Agreement, Employee covenants and agree as follows:
8.1
Competition. Except as otherwise explicitly provided in Paragraph 10 of this Agreement, during the entire Specified
Term  and  thereafter  for  the  “Restrictive  Period”  (defined  below  in  Section  21)  Employee  shall  not  directly  or
indirectly  be  employed  by,  provide  consultation  or  other  services  to,  engage  in,  participate  in  or  otherwise  be
connected  in  any  way  with  any  “Competitor”  (defined  below  in  Section  21)  in  any  capacity  that  is  the  same,
substantially the same or similar to the position or capacity (irrespective of title or department) as that held at any
time during Employee’s employment with Employer; provided, however, that if Employee remains employed at-will
by Employer after expiration of the Specified Term and is thereafter separated by Employer during the Restrictive
Period for any reason other than “Employer’s Good Cause” (defined below in Section 21), Employee shall not be
subject to this Section 8.1.
8.2
Non-Solicitation. At  all  times  during  Employee’s  employment  with  the  Company  and  at  all  times  thereafter,
Employee shall not use, access, disclose, make known to, or otherwise disseminate for personal gain or for the benefit
of a third party (or induce, encourage or assist others in doing any of the foregoing acts) any
3

Company  “Trade  Secrets”  (as  defined  in  Section  21)  for  any  purpose  whatsoever. Further,  at  all  times  during
Employee’s  employment  with  the  Company,  and  for  12  months  thereafter,  Employee  will  not,  without  the  prior
written consent of Company:
(a)
make known to any Competitor and/or any member, manager, officer, director, employee or agent of a
Competitor, the “Business Contacts” (defined in Section 21) of the Company;
(b)
call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or take away, or attempt to call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or
take away, any Business Contacts of the Company; and/or
(c)
approach, solicit, contract with or hire any current Business Contacts of the Company or entice any
Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship with the Company or end his/her employment with
the Company, without the prior written consent of Company, in each and every instance, such consent
to be within Company’s sole and absolute discretion.
8.3
Confidentiality. At all times during Employee’s employment with the Company, and at all times thereafter, Employee
shall not, without the prior written consent of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer or General Counsel in each and
every instance—such consent to be within the Company’s sole and absolute discretion—use, disclose or make known
to  any  person,  entity  or  other  third  party  outside  of  the  Company  any  Confidential  Information  belonging  to  the
Company or its individual members.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of Section 8.3 shall not apply to Confidential Information: (i) that is
required to be disclosed by law or by any court, arbitrator, mediator or administrative or legislative body (including
any  committee  thereof)  in  any  litigation,  arbitration,  mediation  or  legislative  hearing,  with  jurisdiction  to  order
Employee to disclose or make accessible any information, provided, however, that Employee provides Company with
ten (10) days’ advance written notice of such disclosure to enable Company to seek a protective order or other relief
to protect the confidentiality of such Confidential Information; (ii) that becomes generally known to the public or
within the relevant trade or industry other than due to Employee’s or any third party’s violation of this Agreement or
other obligation of confidentiality; or (iii) that becomes available to Employee on a non-confidential basis from a
source that is legally entitled to disclose it to Employee.
8.4
Third Party Information. Employee understands and acknowledges that the Company has received, and in the future
will  receive,  from  third  parties,  their  confidential  or  proprietary  information  subject  to  a  duty  to  maintain  the
confidentiality of such information and to use it only for certain limited purposes. At all times during Employee’s
employment with the Company, whether pursuant to this Agreement or at-will, and at all times thereafter, Employee
shall  hold  any  and  all  such  third  party  confidential  or  proprietary  information  of  third  parties  in  the  strictest
confidence and will not intentionally or negligently disclose it to any person or entity or to use it except as necessary
in carrying out Employee’s  duties and obligations  hereunder  consistent with the Company’s  agreement  with such
third party. Employee shall not be in violation of Employee’s obligations hereunder if such third party confidential or
proprietary information is already
4

generally known to the public through no wrongful act of Employee or any other party.
8.5
Acknowledgement of Ownership of Confidential Information Property Acquired or Developed During Employment;
Non-Transfer. Employee  understands,  agrees,  and  hereby  confirms  that  Employee’s  duties  and  responsibilities
include  acquiring  Confidential  Information  and  developing  Relationships  for  the  benefit  of  Company  and,  as
applicable,  the  Company. Employee  acknowledges  that  Confidential  Information  acquired,  obtained,  learned,  or
developed during Employee’s employment with Company, including but not limited to, Business Contacts developed
during Employee’s employment, constitutes the sole and exclusive property of Company, regardless of whether the
information qualifies for protection as a Trade Secret.
Employee further understands, agrees, and hereby confirms that during Employee’s employment, Employee shall not,
at  any  time  or  for  any  reason  whatsoever,  except  upon  the  express  written  authorization  of  the  Company,  store,
transfer, maintain, copy, duplicate or otherwise possess Confidential Information on any device or in any form or
format except on devices and in such formats as expressly approved and issued by the Company to Employee. By
way of example, and without limitation, Employee shall not text, copy, or otherwise transfer in any form or format
Confidential  Information  to  any  document,  paper,  computer,  tablet,  Blackberry,  cellular  phone,  personal  mobile
device, iPhone, iPad, thumb drive, smart phone memory, zip drive or disk, flash drive, external drive or any other
similar device used for storing or recording data of any kind (the “Devices”) unless such Device is issued by the
Company to Employee, or unless such text, copy or transfer is expressly approved in writing by the Company before
Employee’s use of such Device.
8.6
Return  of  Confidential  Information. Upon  termination  of  Employee’s  employment  for  any  reason  at  any  time,
Employee  shall  immediately  return  to  the  Company,  and  retain  no  copies  of,  any  all  Confidential  Information  in
Employee’s  possession  or  control. If  any  Confidential  Information  is  recorded  or  saved  in  any  format  or  on  any
Devices,  Employee  shall  delete  the  Confidential  Information  and,  upon  Company’s  request,  allow  Company  to
inspect such Devices to confirm the deletion. Upon Company’s request, Employee shall allow Company reasonable
access to Employee’s personal computers, email accounts, and Devices to confirm that Employee does not possess
any Confidential Information of Company in contravention of this Agreement.
8.7
Acknowledgement of Copyrights in and to Compilations of Confidential Information. Employee acknowledges that
Company owns copyrights in any and all compilations of Confidential Information in any tangible or electronic form
(including,  but  not  limited  to,  printed  lists,  handwritten  lists,  spreadsheets,  and  databases)  in  any  storage  media,
including,  but  not  limited  to,  Devices,  (collectively,  “Copyrighted Works”). Employee  further  acknowledges  that
unauthorized  copying,  distributing,  or  creating  derivative  works,  or  inducing  or  contributing  to  such  conduct  by
others,  based  on  such  Copyrighted  Works  constitutes  infringement  of  Company’s  copyrights  in  and  to  the
Copyrighted Works. Employee acknowledges that only the Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer of the
Company are authorized to grant authorization to Employee to copy, distribute or create derivative works based on
the Copyrighted Works. Employee shall obtain any such authorization from Company in writing, in advance of any
copying, distribution or creation of derivative works by
5

Employee. Employee acknowledges that federal law provides for civil liability and criminal penalties for copyright
infringement. Employee  agrees  not  to  challenge,  contest  or  dispute  Company’s  right,  title  and  interest  in  the
Copyrighted Works and waives any legal or equitable defense to infringement of such Copyrighted Works.
9.
Representations and Warranties. Employee hereby represents and warrants to Company, and hereby agrees with Company, as
follows:
9.1
A  portion  of  Employee’s  compensation  and  consideration  under  this  Agreement  is  (i)  Company’s  agreement  to
employ Employee; (ii) Employee’s agreement that the covenants contained in Sections 4 and 8 hereof are reasonable,
appropriate and suitable in their geographic scope, duration and content; (iii) Employee’s agreement that Employee
shall not, directly or indirectly, raise any issue of the reasonableness, appropriateness and suitability of the geographic
scope,  duration  or  content  of  such  covenants  and  agreements  in  any  proceeding  to  enforce  such  covenants  and
agreements;  (iv)  Employee’s  agreement  that  such  covenants  and  agreements  shall  survive  the  termination  of  this
Agreement, in accordance with their terms; and (v) the free and full assignability by Company of such covenants and
agreements upon a sale, reorganization or other transaction of any kind relating to the ownership and/or control of the
Company or its members or assigns.
9.2
The enforcement of any remedy under this Agreement will not prevent Employee from earning a livelihood, because
Employee’s past work history and abilities are such that Employee can reasonably expect to find work irrespective of
the covenants and agreements contained in Section 8 hereof.
9.3
The covenants and agreements stated in Sections 4, 6, 7, and 8 hereof are essential for the Company’s reasonable
protection of its Trade Secrets, Business Contacts, and Confidential Information.
9.4
The Company has reasonably relied on Employee’s covenants, representations and agreements in this Agreement.
9.5
Employee has the full right, power and authority to enter into this Agreement and perform Employee’s duties and
obligations  hereunder,  and  the  entering  into  and  performance  of  this  Agreement  by  Employee  will  not  violate  or
conflict with any arrangements or other agreements Employee may have or agreed to have with any other person or
entity.
9.6
Employee acknowledges that the Company has and will continue to invest substantial time and expense in developing
and protecting Confidential Information, all of which Employee expressly understands and agrees belongs solely and
exclusively to Company. Employee further acknowledges and agrees that because the Company has and will continue
to  invest  substantial  time  and  expense  in  developing  and  protecting  Confidential  Information,  that  any  loss  of  or
damage to the Company as a result of a breach or threatened breach of any of the covenants or agreements set forth in
Sections 4 and 8 hereof, the Company will suffer irreparable harm. Consequently, Employee covenants and agrees
that  any  violation  by  Employee  of  Sections  4  or  8  of  this  Agreement  shall  entitle  the  Company  to  immediate
injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction without the necessity of posting any bond or waiving any claim
for damages. Employee further covenants and agrees that Employee will not contest the
6

enforceability of such an injunction in any state or country in which such an injunction is not, itself, a violation of
law.
10.
Termination.
10.1
Employer’s Good Cause Termination. Employer has the right to terminate this Agreement at any time during the
Specified  Term hereof  for “Employer’s  Good  Cause”  (defined  below  in Section  21). Upon  any such termination,
Employer  shall  have  no  further  liability  or  obligations  whatsoever  to  Employee  under  this  Agreement  except  as
provided under Sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 below.
10.1.1 In the event Employer’s Good Cause termination is the result of Employee’s death during the Specified Term,
Employee’s  beneficiary  (as  designated  by  Employee  on  Employer’s  benefit  records)  shall  be  entitled  to
receive Employee’s salary for a twelve (12) month period following Employee’s death, such amount to be
paid at regular payroll intervals.
10.1.2 In the event Employer’s Good Cause termination is the result of Employee’s “Disability” (defined below in
Section  21),  Employer  shall  pay  Employee  (or  Employee’s  beneficiary  in  the  event  of  Employee’s  death
during the period in which payments are being made) an amount equal to Employee’s salary for twelve (12)
months  following  Employee’s  termination,  such  amount  to  be  paid  at  regular  payroll  intervals,  net  of
payments  received  by  Employee  from  any  short  term  disability  policy  which  is  either  self-insured  by
Employer or the premiums of which were paid by Employer (and not charged as compensation to Employee).
10.2
Employer’s  No  Cause  Termination. Employer  has  the  right  to  terminate  this  Agreement  on  written  notice  to
Employee  in  its  sole  discretion  for  any  cause  Employer  deems  sufficient  or  for  no  cause,  at  any  time  during  the
Specified  Term,  including  on  the  last  day  of  the  Specified  Term. Subject  to  the  conditions  set  forth  below,
Employer’s sole liability to Employee upon such termination shall be as follows:
10.2.1 Employee  shall receive an amount equal to: (i) Employee’s  annual  base salary and (ii) Target  Bonus  (the
“Severance Payment”),  less all  applicable  taxes,  payable  in twelve  (12)  monthly  installments  commencing
upon the date that is thirty (30) days after the date of separation; plus any earned but unpaid discretionary
bonus due to Employee, payable in accordance with the provisions of the Program. In addition, Employee
shall receive a lump sum payment equal to 1.5 times the cost of COBRA coverage for a period of twelve (12)
months  immediately  following  separation  (the  “COBRA  Payment”),  payable  in  twelve  (12)  monthly
installments commencing upon separation.
(a)
If  Employee  remains  employed  at-will  by  Employer  after  expiration  of  the  Specified  Term  and  is
thereafter separated during the Restrictive Period for No Cause, employee shall receive a lump sum
payment (less all applicable taxes) equal to Employee’s then-current annual base salary, payable upon
the date that is thirty (30) days after the date of separation.
10.2.2 Employee’s eligibility for the Severance Payment and COBRA Payment set forth in Section 10.2.1 shall be
expressly subject to, conditioned upon,
7

and in consideration of Employee’s execution, within twenty-one (21) days following the date of Employee’s
termination of employment (or such shorter time period as may be required by the Company consistent with
applicable law) and non-revocation of a release prepared by Employer and waiving and releasing Employer
and the Company, their parents, subsidiaries and affiliates, and their officers, directors, agents, benefit plan
trustees and employees, from any and all claims whether known or unknown, and regardless of type, cause or
nature,  including  but  not  limited  to  claims  arising  under  any  and  all  express  or  implied  employment
agreements,  any  and  all  statutory  and  common  law  tort  claims,  any  and  all  salary,  bonus,  stock,  vacation
(PTO), insurance and other benefit plans, and all state and federal laws, ordinances and statutes applicable to
Employee’s  employment  or  the  cessation  of  that  employment  that  may  be  released  by  private  agreement
(including but not limited to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; the Age Discrimination in
Employment  Act  as  amended  by  the  Older  Workers  Benefit  Protection  Act  of  1990;  the  Americans  with
Disabilities Act, as amended; the Equal Pay Act; the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act; the Family and Medical
Leave Act; the Employee Retirement Income Security Act; the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act;
Chapter 608, Compensation, Wages and Hours, of the Nevada Revised Statutes; Chapter 613, Employment
Practices, of the Nevada Revised Statutes; the Worker Adjustment Retraining Notification Act (“WARN”);
Post-Civil War Reconstruction Act, as Amended (42 U.S.C. §1981-1988); the National Labor Relations Act;
the  Labor  Management  Relations  Act;  any  other  federal,  state  or  local  law  prohibiting  employment
discrimination or otherwise regulating employment; which release becomes irrevocable in accordance with its
terms (which, for the avoidance of doubt, will occur within thirty (30) days or fewer following the date of
Employee’s termination of employment).
10.2.3 As a further condition to Employer’s obligations under Section 10.2.1 above, Employee agrees to cooperate
with Employer regarding matters on which Employee has worked, on a reasonable basis and at times mutually
convenient to both parties. Employee further agrees to fully cooperate with the Company in any ongoing or
future legal matters about which Employee has knowledge or information, or that concern Employee’s former
position with the Company.
10.2.4 Upon  any  such  termination,  Employee  shall  continue  to  be  bound  by  the  restrictions  in  Section  8  above;
provided, however, that if the reason for the termination is the elimination of Employee’s position, Employee
shall not be bound by Section 8.1 but will continue to be bound by all other restrictions in Section 8 above.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, Employer’s conditional obligation under Section 10.2.1 to
pay Employee’s salary shall cease if Employee breaches in any material respect any of the covenants set forth
in Section 8 above; additionally, and without waiving any rights to other damages resulting from said breach,
Employer shall be entitled to recover any and all amounts already paid to Employee under Section 10.2.1.
10.3
Employee’s  Good  Cause  Termination. Employee  may  terminate  this  Agreement  for  “Employee’s  Good  Cause”
(defined below in Section 21). Prior to any termination under this Section 10.3 being effective, Employee agrees to
give
8

Employer thirty (30) days’ advance written notice, within thirty (30) days of the initial event comprising Employee’s
Good Cause, specifying the facts and circumstances that comprise Employee’s Good Cause. During such thirty (30)
day period, Employer may either cure the breach (in which case Employee’s notice will be considered withdrawn and
this Agreement will continue in full force and effect) or declare that Employer disputes that Employee’s Good Cause
exists,  in  which  case  this  Agreement  will  continue  in  full  force  until  the  dispute  is  resolved  in  accordance  with
Section 12. In  the  event  this  Agreement  is  terminated  under  this  Section  10.3,  subject  to  the  conditions  set  forth
below, Employer’s sole liability to Employee upon such termination shall be as follows:
10.3.1 Employee  shall receive an amount equal to: (i) Employee’s  annual  base salary and (ii) Target  Bonus  (the
“Severance Payment”),  less all  applicable  taxes,  payable  in twelve  (12)  monthly  installments  commencing
upon the date that is thirty (30) days after the date of separation; plus any earned but unpaid discretionary
bonus due to Employee, payable in accordance with the provisions of the Program. In addition, Employee
shall receive a lump sum payment equal to 1.5 times the cost of COBRA coverage for a period of twelve (12)
months  immediately  following  separation  (the  “COBRA  Payment”),  payable  in  twelve  (12)  monthly
installments commencing upon separation.
10.3.2 Employee’s eligibility for the salary payments and health benefits set forth in Section 10.3.1 shall be expressly
subject  to,  conditioned  upon,  and  in  consideration  of  Employee’s  execution,  within  twenty-one  (21)  days
following the date of Employee’s termination of employment (or such shorter time period as may be required
by the Company consistent with applicable law), and non-revocation of a release prepared by Employer and
waiving and releasing Employer and the Company, their parents, subsidiaries and affiliates, and their officers,
directors, agents, benefit plan trustees and employees, from any and all claims whether known or unknown,
and regardless of type, cause or nature, including but not limited to claims arising under any and all express or
implied employment agreements, any and all statutory and common law tort claims, any and all salary, bonus,
stock,  vacation  (PTO),  insurance  and  other  benefit  plans,  and  all  state  and  federal  laws,  ordinances  and
statutes applicable to Employee’s employment or the cessation of that employment that may be released by
private agreement (including but not limited to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended; the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act as amended by the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act of 1990; the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended; the Equal Pay Act; the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act; the Family
and  Medical  Leave  Act;  the  Employee  Retirement  Income  Security  Act;  the  Genetic  Information
Nondiscrimination  Act;  Chapter  608,  Compensation,  Wages  and  Hours,  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes;
Chapter  613,  Employment  Practices,  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes;  the  Worker  Adjustment  Retraining
Notification Act (“WARN”); Post-Civil War Reconstruction Act, as Amended (42 U.S.C. §1981-1988); the
National  Labor  Relations  Act;  the  Labor  Management  Relations  Act;  any  other  federal,  state  or  local  law
prohibiting  employment  discrimination  or  otherwise  regulating  employment;  which  release  becomes
irrevocable in accordance with its terms (which, for the avoidance of doubt, will occur within thirty (30) days
or fewer following the date of Employee’s termination of employment).
9

10.3.3 As  a  further  condition  to  Employer’s  salary  obligations  under  Section  10.2.1  above,  Employee  agrees  to
cooperate  with Employer  regarding  matters  on which  Employee  has worked,  on a reasonable  basis and at
times mutually convenient to both parties. Employee further agrees to fully cooperate with the Company in
any ongoing or future legal matters about which Employee has knowledge or information, or that concern
Employee’s former position with the Company.
10.3.4 In the event of termination of this Agreement under this Section 10.3, the restrictions of Section 8.1 shall no
longer apply.
10.4
Employee’s No Cause Termination. In the event Employee terminates Employee’s employment under this Agreement
without cause, Employer will have no further liability or obligations whatsoever to Employee hereunder. Employer
will be entitled to all of Employer’s rights and remedies by reason of such termination, including without limitation,
the right to enforce the covenants and agreements contained in Section 8 and Employer’s right to recover damages.
10.5
Survival of Covenants. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Agreement to the contrary, except as specifically
provided in Sections 10.2.4 and 10.3.4 with respect to the undertaking contained in Section 8.1, the covenants and
agreements  contained  in  Section  8  shall  survive  a  termination  of  this  Agreement  or  the  cessation  of  Employee’s
employment to the extent and for the period provided for in Section 8, regardless of the reason for such termination.
11.
Arbitration. Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement and in Exhibit D to this Agreement (which constitutes a
material provision of this Agreement), any controversy, dispute or claim directly or indirectly arising out of or relating to this
Agreement, or the breach thereof, or arising out of or relating to the employment of Employee, or the termination thereof,
shall be resolved by binding arbitration pursuant to Exhibit D.
12.
Disputed Claim. In the event of any “Disputed Claim” (defined below in Section 21), such Disputed Claim shall be resolved
by binding arbitration pursuant to Exhibit D. Unless and until the arbitration process for a Disputed Claim is finally resolved
in Employee’s favor and Employer thereafter fails to satisfy such award within thirty (30) days of its entry, Employee shall
not have affected an Employee’s Good Cause termination and Employee shall not have any termination rights pursuant to
Section 10.3 with respect to such Disputed Claim. Nothing herein shall preclude or prohibit Company from invoking the
provisions of Section 10.2, or of Company seeking or obtaining injunctive or other equitable relief.
13.
Severability. If any section, provision, paragraph, phrase, word, and/or line (collectively, “Provision”) of this Agreement is
declared to be unenforceable, then this Agreement will be deemed retroactively modified to the extent necessary to render the
otherwise unenforceable Provision, and the rest of the Agreement, valid and enforceable. If a court or arbitrator declines to
modify this Agreement as provided herein, the invalidity or unenforceability of any Provision of this Agreement shall not
affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining Provisions. This Section 13 does not limit the Company’s rights to seek
damages or such additional  relief as may be allowed by law and/or equity in respect to any breach  by Employee  of the
enforceable provisions of this Agreement.
14.
No Waiver of Breach or Remedies. No failure or delay on the part of Employee or Employer in exercising any right, power
or remedy hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such right, power or
remedy
10

preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, power or remedy hereunder. The remedies
herein provided are cumulative and not exclusive of any remedies provided by law.
15.
Amendment or Modification. No amendment, modification, termination or waiver of any provision of this Agreement shall
be effective unless the same shall be in writing and signed by Employee and a duly authorized member of Employer’s senior
management and be approved by the Compensation Committee. No consent to any departure by Employee from any of the
terms of this Agreement shall be effective unless the same is signed by a duly authorized member of Employer’s senior
management and is approved by the Compensation Committee. Any such waiver or consent shall be effective only in the
specific instance and for the specific purpose for which given.
16.
Governing Law. The  laws  of  the  State  in  which  the  Employer’s  principal  place  of  business  is  located  shall  govern  the
validity, construction and interpretation of this Agreement, and except for Disputed Claims and subject to the Arbitrations
provisions included herewith, exclusive jurisdiction over any claim with respect to this Agreement shall reside in the courts
of the State of Nevada.
17.
Number and Gender. Where the context of this Agreement requires the singular shall mean the plural and vice versa and
references to males shall apply equally to females and vice versa.
18.
Headings. The  headings  in  this  Agreement  have  been  included  solely  for  convenience  of  reference  and  shall  not  be
considered in the interpretation or construction of this Agreement.
19.
Assignment. This  Agreement  is  personal  to  Employee  and  may  not  be  assigned  by  Employee. Employee  agrees  that
Employer  may  assign  this  Agreement. Without  limitation  of  the  foregoing,  Employee  expressly  agrees  that  Employer’s
successors, affiliates and assigns may enforce the provisions of Section 8 above, and that five percent (5%) of the annual
salary Employer has agreed to pay in Section 3 above is in consideration for Employee’s consent to the right of Employer’s
successors, affiliates and assigns to enforce the provisions of Section 8.
20.
Successors  and  Assigns. This  Agreement  shall  be  binding  upon  and  inure  to  the  benefit  of  Employer’s  successors  and
assigns.
21.
Certain Definitions. As used in this Agreement:
“Business Contacts” are defined as the names, addresses, contact information or any information pertaining to any persons,
advertisers,  suppliers,  vendors,  independent  contractors,  brokers,  partners,  employees,  entities,  patrons  or  customers
(excluding Company’s Trade Secrets, which are protected from disclosure in accordance with Section 8.2 above) upon whom
or which Employee: contacted or attempted to contact in any manner, directly or indirectly, or which Company reasonably
anticipated Employee would contact within six months of Employee’s last day of employment at Company, or with whom or
which Employee worked or attempted to work during Employee’s employment by Company.
“Company”  means  MGM  Resorts  International,  and  all  of  its  subsidiary  and  affiliated  entities,  together  with  all  of  their
respective officers, directors, joint venturers, members, shareholders, employees, ERISA plans, attorneys and assigns.
11

“Competitor” means any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity which is either directly,
indirectly or through an affiliated company, engaged in or proposes to engage in (A) the development, ownership, operation
or management of (i) gaming facilities; (ii) convention or meeting facilities; or (iii) one or more hotels if any such hotel is
connected  in  any  way,  whether  physically  or  by  business  association,  to  a  gaming  establishment  and,  further,  where
Competitor’s activities are within a 150 mile radius of any location where any of the foregoing facilities, hotels, or venues
are, or are proposed to be, owned, operated, managed or developed by the Company or (B) iGaming or sports betting.
“Confidential  Information”  is  defined  as  all  Trade  Secrets,  Business  Contacts,  business  practices,  business  procedures,
business  processes,  financial  information,  contractual  relationships,  marketing  practices  and  procedures,  management
policies and procedures, and/or any other information of the Company or otherwise regarding the Company’s operations
and/or Trade Secrets or those of any member of the Company and all information maintained or entered on any database,
document  or  report  set  forth  on  Exhibit  C  or  any  other  loyalty,  hotel,  casino  or  other  customer  database  or  system,
irrespective of whether such information is used by Employee during Employee’s employment by Company.
“Disputed Claim” means that Employee maintains pursuant to Section 10.3 that Employer has materially breached its duty to
Employee and Employer has denied such material breach.
“Employee’s Good Cause” shall mean (i) any assignment to Employee of duties that are materially and significantly different
than those contemplated by the terms of this Agreement; (ii) any material and significant limitation on the powers of the
Employee  not  contemplated  by  the  terms  of  the  Agreement;  (iii)  a  material  adverse  change  in  Employee’s  reporting
relationship; or (iv) the failure of Employer to pay Employee any compensation when due, save and except a Disputed Claim
to compensation.
“Employee’s Physician”  shall  mean  a  licensed  physician  selected  by  Employee  for  purposes  of  determining  Employee’s
disability pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
“Employer’s Good Cause” shall mean:
(1)    Employee’s death;
(2)    Employee’s “Disability,” which is hereby defined to include incapacity for medical reasons certified to by “Employer’s
Physician”  (defined below) which precludes the Employee  from performing  the essential  functions of Employee’s  duties
hereunder  for  a  consecutive  or  predominately  consecutive  period  of  six  (6)  months,  with  or  without  reasonable
accommodations. (In the event Employee disagrees with the conclusions of Employer’s Physician, Employee (or Employee’s
representative) shall designate a physician of Employee’s choice, (“Employee’s Physician”) and Employer’s Physician and
Employee’s Physician shall then jointly select a third physician, who shall make a final determination regarding Employee’s
Disability,  which  shall  be  binding  on  the  parties). Employee  acknowledges  that  consistent  and  reliable  attendance  is  an
essential function of Employee’s position. Employee agrees and acknowledges that a termination under this paragraph does
not  violate  any  federal,  state  or  local  law,  regulation  or  ordinance,  including  but  not  limited  to  the  Americans  With
Disabilities Act;
(3)    (A) the Employee’s conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to (x) a crime relating to the Company or its
affiliates or (y) any felony, (B) Employee is found
12

disqualified or not suitable to hold a casino or other gaming license by a final, non-appealable determination (or if Employee
fails  to  appeal  a  determination  that  may  be  appealed)  of  an  applicable  governmental  gaming  authority,  which  causes
Employee’s failure or inability to satisfy gaming licensing requirements set forth in this Agreement, (C) willful misconduct,
gross misconduct, or gross negligence in the performance of the Employee’s duties to the Company, (D) a material breach by
the  Employee  of  any  material  written  agreement  entered  into  between  the  Employee  and  the  Company,  or  any  material
written policy of the Company, including the Company’s sexual harassment policy, (E) the Employee’s refusal or intentional
failure to follow a lawful and proper direction of the Chief Executive Officer or the Board, or (F) any conduct (whether or
not listed in (A) through (E) of this paragraph) by the Employee, whether or not in the course of performing the Employee’s
responsibilities to the Company, that has or is reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the business, assets or
reputation of the Company; in the cases of each of (C) through (F) above, that, if curable, is not cured by the Employee
within thirty (30) days following the Employee’s receipt of written notice given to the Employee by the Company; or
(4)    Employee’s failure or inability to satisfy the requirements stated in Section 6 above.
“Employer’s Physician”  shall  mean  a  licensed  physician  selected  by  Employer  for  purposes  of  determining  Employee’s
disability pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
“Restrictive Period” means the twelve (12) month period immediately following any separation of Employee from active
employment for any reason occurring during the Specified Term or the twelve (12) month period immediately following the
expiration of the Specified Term.
“Trade Secrets”  are  defined  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  broadest  interpretation  of  Nevada  law. Trade  Secrets  shall
include,  without  limitation,  Confidential  Information,  formulas,  inventions,  patterns,  compilations,  vendor  lists,  customer
lists, contracts, business plans and practices, marketing plans and practices, financial plans and practices, programs, devices,
methods, know-hows, techniques or processes, any of which derive economic value, present or potential, from not being
generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons who may or could obtain any
economic value from its disclosure or use, including but not limited to the general public.
22.
Employee acknowledges that MGM Resorts International is a publicly traded company and agrees that in the event there is
any default or alleged default by Employer under the Agreement, or Employee has or may have any claims arising from or
relating to the Agreement, Employee shall not commence any action or otherwise seek to impose any liability whatsoever
against any person or entity in its capacity as a stockholder of MGM Resorts International (“Stockholder”). Employee further
agrees that Employee shall not permit any party claiming through Employee, to assert a claim or impose any liability against
any Stockholder (in its capacity as a Stockholder) as to any matter or thing arising out of or relating to the Agreement or any
alleged breach or default by Employer.
23.
Section 409A.
23.1
This Agreement is intended to comply with, or otherwise be exempt from, Section 409A of Internal Revenue Code of
1986,  as  amended  (the  “Code”)  and  any  regulations  and  Treasury  guidance  promulgated  thereunder  (“Section
409A”). If Employer determines in good faith that any provision of this Agreement would cause Employee to incur
an additional tax, penalty, or interest under Section
13

409A, the Compensation Committee and Employee shall use reasonable efforts to reform such provision, if possible,
in a mutually agreeable fashion to maintain to the maximum extent practicable the original intent of the applicable
provision without violating the provisions of Section 409A or causing the imposition of such additional tax, penalty,
or  interest  under  Section  409A. The  preceding  provisions,  however,  shall  not  be  construed  as  a  guarantee  by
Employer of any particular tax effect to Employee under this Agreement.
23.2
“Termination of employment,” or words of similar import, as used in this Agreement means, for purposes of any
payments under this Agreement that are payments of deferred compensation subject to Section 409A, Employee’s
“separation from service” as defined in Section 409A.
23.3
For purposes of Section 409A, the right to a series of installment payments under this Agreement shall be treated as a
right to a series of separate payments.
23.4
With respect to any reimbursement of Employee’s expenses, or any provision of in-kind benefits to Employee, as
specified under this Agreement, such reimbursement of expenses or provision of in-kind benefits shall be subject to
the following conditions: (1) the expenses eligible for reimbursement or the amount of in-kind benefits provided in
one taxable year shall not affect the expenses eligible for reimbursement or the amount of in-kind benefits provided in
any  other  taxable  year,  except  for  any  medical  reimbursement  arrangement  providing  for  the  reimbursement  of
expenses  referred  to  in  Section  105(b)  of  the  Code;  (2)  the  reimbursement  of  an  eligible  expense  shall  be  made
pursuant  to  Employer’s  reimbursement  policy  but  no  later  than  the  end  of  the  year  after  the  year  in  which  such
expense was incurred; and (3) the right to reimbursement or in-kind benefits shall not be subject to liquidation or
exchange for another benefit.
23.5
If  a  payment  obligation  under  this  Agreement  that  constitutes  a  payment  of  “deferred  compensation”  (as  defined
under  Treasury  Regulation  Section  1.409A-1(b)(1),  after  giving  effect  to  the  exemptions  in  Treasury  Regulation
Sections 1.409A-1(b)(3) through (b)(12)) arises on account of Employee’s separation from service while Employee is
a “specified employee” (as defined under Section 409A), any payment thereof that is scheduled to be paid within six
(6) months after such separation from service shall accrue without interest and shall be paid within 15 days after the
end  of  the  six-month  period  beginning  on  the  date  of  such  separation  from  service  or,  if  earlier,  within  15  days
following Employee’s death.
24.
Ownership of Intellectual Property. Employee expressly acknowledges that all trademarks, trade dress, copyrightable works,
patentable inventions, ideas, new or novel inventions, concepts, systems, methods of operation, improvements, strategies,
techniques,  trade  secrets  including,  but  not  limited  to,  customers  (including,  but  not  limited  to,  customer  names,  contact
information, historical and/or theoretical play, or other information, and the right to market to such customers), data of any
type or nature and regardless of the form or media, as well as all materials of any type of nature that comprise, reflect or
embody any of the foregoing including, without limitation, databases, software, artistic works, advertisements, brochures,
marketing plans, customer lists, memoranda,  business plans, and proposals (collectively, “Intellectual Property”) created,
conceived,  developed,  contributed  to,  or  otherwise  obtained,  in  whole  or  in  part  by  the  Employee  during  the  term  of
Employee’s  employment  by  Employer  shall  at  all  times  be  owned  by  Employer  (and  is  hereby  expressly  assigned  by
Employee to Employer) if the Intellectual Property: (a) was created, conceived, developed, or contributed to: (1) using
14

any of Employer’s property or resources; (2) on Employer’s premises; or (3) during Employee’s hours of employment; or (b)
relates to Employee’s employment by Employer, even though creation of such Intellectual Property was not within the scope
of Employee’s duties and responsibilities for which the Employer employs the Employee. All works of authorship created by
Employee within the scope of this provision shall be deemed works made for hire as defined in the Copyright Act of 1976,
17 U.S.C. § 101 To the extent such works are deemed not to be works of authorship, Employee hereby irrevocably assigns
(or authorizes Employer to act as Employee’s agent to assign) all right, title and interest in and to the copyrights in the works,
including, without limitation, right of attribution and all related moral rights, to the Employer. Employee further agrees that
any inventions and trade secrets covered by this provision shall be owned absolutely and exclusively by Employer, including
all patent rights throughout the world. Employee acknowledges that this provision provides Employer with rights greater than
provided under certain applicable laws including, without limitation, Nevada Revised Statutes § 600.500. Employee shall
promptly inform Employer about such patentable inventions and shall not disclose to any third parties any information about
the inventions without the prior written consent of Employer. Employee agrees to execute and deliver to Employer, upon
request, such documents as may be necessary for Employer to perfect its rights in any and all Intellectual Property covered
by this provision. To fulfill the intent of this paragraph, Employee irrevocably appoints Employer and Employer’s authorized
agents as his/her agent and attorney in fact to transfer, vest or confirm Employer’s rights and to execute and file any such
applications  and  to  do  all  other  lawful  acts  to  further  the  prosecution  and  issuance  of  letters,  patents  or  trademark  or
copyright registrations with the same legal force as if done by Employee, in all instances in which Employer is unable for any
reason to secure Employee’s personal signature. Employee shall not be entitled to any compensation or other consideration
for any Intellectual Property covered by this provision.
25.
Certain Protections.
25.1
Employee understands that nothing contained in this Agreement limits or otherwise prohibits Employee from filing a
charge or complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal, state
or  local  governmental  agency  or  commission  (“Government  Agencies”). Employee  further  understands  that  this
Agreement does not limit Employee’s ability to communicate with any Government Agencies or otherwise participate
in  any  investigation  or  proceeding  that  may  be  conducted  by  any  Government  Agency,  including  providing
documents or other information (subject to paragraph 26.2 below), without notice to the Employer. This Agreement
does not limit Employee’s right to receive an award for information provided to any Government Agencies.
25.2
Defend Trade Secrets Act Notice. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement or otherwise, pursuant
to the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016, Employer hereby advises Employee as follows:
(a)
An individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable under any Federal or State trade secret law
for  the  disclosure  of  a  trade  secret  that  (i)  is  made  (a)  in  confidence  to  a  Federal,  State,  or  local
government official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and (b) solely for the purpose of
reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law; or (ii) is made in a complaint or other
15

document filed in a lawsuit or other proceeding, if such filing is made under seal; and
(b)
An individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a suspected violation of
law may disclose the trade secret to the attorney of the individual and use the trade secret information
in the court proceeding, if the individual (i) files any document containing the trade secret under seal;
and (ii) does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order.
26.
CARES Act. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, to the extent required pursuant to the terms of the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security Act (as may be amended or modified, the “CARES Act”) in connection with the Company
entering  into,  or  becoming  eligible  to  enter  into,  a  loan,  loan  guarantee  or  other  form  of  financial  assistance  with  the
Secretary of the Treasury or other governmental entity under the CARES Act, (i) Employee shall agree to such limitations or
reductions with respect to Employee’s compensation (including, without limitation, equity awards) or severance entitlements
from the Company that are required by any governmental entity to comply with the applicable provisions of the CARES Act;
and (ii) Employee’s compensation (including, without limitation, equity awards) and severance entitlements from Employer
may be limited or reduced by the Compensation Committee to the extent necessary to comply with the applicable provisions
of  the  CARES  Act. To  the  extent  permitted  by  the  CARES  Act  or  other  applicable  related  law  or  agreement,  any  such
limitation  or  reduction  shall  be  made  in  good  faith  consultation  with  Employee. No  limitation,  reduction  or  other
consequence of this Section 26 shall constitute Employee's Good Cause.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Employer and Employee have entered into this Agreement in Las Vegas, Nevada, as of the date first
written above.
EMPLOYEE – Tilak Mandadi
/s/ Tilak Mandadi     
Dated: June 3, 2021
EMPLOYER – MGM Resorts International
/s/ William J. Hornbuckle    
By:    William J. Hornbuckle, Chief Executive
         Officer and President
Dated: June 4, 2021
16

EXHIBIT A
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS AGREEMENT
No. of Restricted Stock Units: ________
This Agreement (including its Exhibit, the “Agreement”) is made by and between MGM Resorts International, a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”), and ___________ (the “Participant”) with an effective date of ___________ (the “Effective Date”).
RECITALS
A. The Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”) has adopted the Company’s 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan, as
amended (the “Plan”), which provides for the granting of Restricted Stock Units (as that term is defined in Section 1 below) to
selected service providers. Capitalized terms used and not defined in this Agreement shall have the same meanings as in the Plan.
B. The Board believes that the grant of Restricted Stock Units will stimulate the interest of selected employees in, and
strengthen their desire to remain with, the Company or a Parent or Subsidiary (as those terms are hereinafter defined).
C. The Compensation Committee of the Board (the “Committee”) has authorized the grant of Restricted Stock Units to the
Participant pursuant to the terms of the Plan and this Agreement.
D. The Committee and the Participant intend that the Plan and this Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the
parties hereto with regard to the subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings
(whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the
Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether previously
entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future) which relate to the subject matter hereof.
Accordingly, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
1. Definitions.
1.1 “Business Contacts” means the names, addresses, contact information or any information pertaining to any
persons, advertisers, suppliers, vendors, independent contractors, brokers, partners, employees, entities, patrons or customers
(excluding Employer’s Trade Secrets, which are protected from disclosure in accordance with Section 3.10 below) upon whom or
which a Participant: contacted or attempted to contact in any manner, directly or indirectly, or which Employer reasonably
anticipated a Participant would contact within six months of a Participant’s last day of employment at Employer, or with whom or
which a Participant worked or attempted to work during Participant’s employment by Employer.
    1.2 “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
1.3 “Competitor” means any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity which is either
directly, indirectly or through an affiliated company, engaged in or proposes to engage in the development, ownership, operation or
management of
17

(i) gaming facilities; (ii) convention or meeting facilities; or (iii) one or more hotels if any such hotel is connected in any way,
whether physically or by business association, to a gaming establishment and, further, where Competitor’s activities are within a 150
mile radius of any location where any of the foregoing facilities, hotels, or venues are, or are proposed to be, owned, operated,
managed or developed by the Employer.
1.4 “Confidential Information” means all Trade Secrets, Business Contacts, business practices, business procedures,
business processes, financial information, contractual relationships, marketing practices and procedures, management policies and
procedures, and/or any other information of the Employer or otherwise regarding the Employer’s operations and/or Trade Secrets or
those of any member of the Employer and all information maintained or entered on any database, document or report set forth on
Exhibit B hereto or any other loyalty, hotel, casino or other customer database or system, irrespective of whether such information is
used by Participant during Participant’s employment by the Employer.
    1.5 “Current Employment Agreement” means the Participant’s employment agreement with the Company or any of its
affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) in effect as of the applicable date of determination.
    1.6 “Disability” means that the Participant is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a
continuous period of not less than twelve (12) months or is, by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment
that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12) months,
receiving income replacement benefits for a period of not less than three (3) months under an accident and health plan covering
employees of the Employer.
    1.7 “Employer” means the Company, the Subsidiaries and any Parent and affiliated companies.
    1.8 “Employer’s Good Cause” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment
Agreement; provided that if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a
comparable term, “Employer’s Good Cause” means:
        A. Participant’s failure to abide by the Employer’s policies and procedures, misconduct, insubordination, inattention to
the Employer’s business, failure to perform the duties required of the Participant up to the standards established by the Employer’s
senior management, or material breach of the Current Employment Agreement, which failure or breach is not cured by the
Participant within ten (10) days after written notice thereof from the Employer specifying the facts and circumstances of the alleged
failure or breach, provided, however, that such notice and opportunity to cure shall not be required if, in the good faith judgment of
the Board, such breach is not capable of being cured within ten (10) days;
        B. Participant’s failure or inability to apply for and obtain any license, qualification, clearance or other similar approval
which the Employer or any regulatory authority which has jurisdiction over the Employer requests or requires that the Participant
obtain;
        C. the Employer is directed by any governmental authority in Nevada, Michigan, Mississippi, Illinois, Macau S.A.R., or
any other jurisdiction in which the Employer is engaged in a gaming business or where the Employer has applied to (or during the
term of the Participant’s employment under the Current Employment Agreement, may apply to) engage in a gaming business to
cease business with the Participant;
18

        D. the Employer determines, in its reasonable judgment, that the Participant was, is or might be involved in, or is about
to be involved in, any activity, relationship(s) or circumstance which could or does jeopardize the Employer’s business, reputation or
licenses to engage in the gaming business; or
        E. any of the Employer’s gaming business licenses are threatened to be, or are, denied, curtailed, suspended or revoked
as a result of the Participant’s employment by the Employer or as a result of the Participant’s actions.
    1.9 “Fair Market Value” means the closing price of a share of Stock reported on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”)
or other applicable established stock exchange or over the counter market on the applicable date of determination, or if no closing
price was reported on such date, the first trading day immediately preceding the applicable date of determination on which such a
closing price was reported. In the event shares of Stock are not publicly traded at the time a determination of their value is required
to be made hereunder, the determination of their Fair Market Value shall be made by the Committee in such manner as it deems
appropriate.
    1.10 “Parent” means a parent corporation as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code.
    1.11 “Participant’s Good Cause” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment
Agreement; provided that if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a
comparable term, “Participant’s Good Cause” means:
        A. The failure of the Employer to pay the Participant any compensation when due; or
        B. A material reduction in the scope of duties or responsibilities of the Participant or any reduction in the Participant’s
salary.
    If a breach constituting Participant’s Good Cause occurs, the Participant shall give the Employer thirty (30) days’ advance
written notice specifying the facts and circumstances of the alleged breach. During such thirty (30) day period, the Employer may
either cure the breach (in which case such notice will be considered withdrawn) or declare that the Employer disputes that
Participant’s Good Cause exists, in which case Participant’s Good Cause shall not exist until the dispute is resolved in accordance
with the methods for resolving disputes specified in Exhibit A hereto.
    1.12 “Restricted Stock Unit” means an award granted to a Participant pursuant to Article 8 of the Plan, except that no
shares of Stock are actually awarded or granted to the Participant on the date of grant.
1.13 “Restrictive Period” means the twelve (12) month period immediately following the Participant’s date of
termination.
    1.14 “Retirement” means termination of employment with the Employer at a time when Participant’s age plus years of
service with the Employer is equal to or greater than 65; provided that, (i) Participant is at least age 55, (ii) Participant has at least 5
years of service with Employer and (iii) Participant has given the Employer at least ninety (90) days’ notice of termination.
1.15 “Section 409A” means Section 409A of the Code, and the regulations and guidance promulgated thereunder to
the extent applicable.
19

    1.16 “Stock” means the Company’s common stock, $.01 par value per share.
    1.17 “Subsidiary” means a subsidiary corporation of the Company as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code or corporation
or other entity, whether domestic or foreign, in which the Company has or obtains a proprietary interest of more than fifty percent
(50%) by reason of stock ownership or otherwise.
1.18 “Trade Secrets” are defined in a manner consistent with the broadest interpretation of Nevada law. Trade Secrets
shall include, without limitation, Confidential Information, formulas, inventions, patterns, compilations, vendor lists, customer lists,
contracts, business plans and practices, marketing plans and practices, financial plans and practices, programs, devices, methods,
know-hows, techniques or processes, any of which derive economic value, present or potential, from not being generally known to,
and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons who may or could obtain any economic value from its
disclosure or use, including but not limited to the general public.
1.19 “Vesting Period” means the period of time from the date of this Agreement until the last scheduled vesting date
described in Section 3.1 below.
2. Grant to Participant. The Company hereby grants to the Participant, subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this
Agreement, an award of ________ Restricted Stock Units. Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan or this Agreement, (i) each
Restricted Stock Unit represents the right to receive one (1) share of Stock upon vesting of such Restricted Stock Units, (ii) unless
and until the Restricted Stock Units have vested in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, the Participant shall not have any
right to delivery of the shares of Stock underlying such Restricted Stock Units or any other consideration in respect thereof and (iii)
each Restricted Stock Unit that vests shall be paid to the Participant within thirty (30) days following the date that the Restricted
Stock Unit vests or the date(s) set forth in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, as applicable.
3. Terms and Conditions.
    3.1 Vesting Schedule. Subject to Section 3.2, the Restricted Stock Units shall vest as set forth in (i) through (iv) below,
subject to the Participant’s continued employment with the Company or any Subsidiary or Parent on each of the dates specified in (i)
through (iv) below:
        (i) The first installment shall consist of twenty-five percent (25%) of the shares of Stock subject to the Restricted Stock
Units and shall vest on the first anniversary of the Effective Date (the “Initial Vesting Date”).
        (ii) The second installment shall consist of twenty-five percent (25%) of the shares of Stock subject to the Restricted
Stock Units and shall vest on the first anniversary of the Initial Vesting Date.
        (iii) The third installment shall consist of twenty-five percent (25%) of the shares of Stock subject to the Restricted
Stock Units and shall vest on the second anniversary of the Initial Vesting Date.
        (iv) The fourth installment shall consist of twenty-five percent (25%) of the shares of Stock subject to the Restricted
Stock Units and shall vest on the third anniversary of the Initial Vesting Date;
provided, that any Restricted Stock Units which vest under the schedule set forth in this Section 3.1 shall be paid to the Participant
within thirty (30) days following the date that the applicable installment vests.
20

    3.2 Vesting at Termination. Upon termination of employment with the Employer for any reason the unvested portion of the
Restricted Stock Units shall be forfeited without any consideration; provided, however, that, (i) upon termination of employment by
the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause or by the Participant with Participant’s Good Cause, the Restricted Stock Units that
would have become vested (but for such termination) under the schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein during the twelve (12)
months from the date of termination of employment shall remain outstanding and be paid on the same schedule determined in
Section 3.1 herein, (ii) upon termination of employment due to the Participant’s Retirement, so long as the date of termination is at
least 6 months following the Effective Date, all unvested Restricted Stock Units shall remain outstanding and be paid on the same
schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein, and (iii) upon termination of employment due to the Participant’s death or Disability, all
unvested Restricted Stock Units shall become immediately vested and paid to the Participant within thirty (30) days following the
date of termination. Any continued vesting provided for in the preceding sentence shall immediately cease and unvested Restricted
Stock Units shall be forfeited in the event the Participant breaches any post-termination covenant with the Company or its affiliate in
an employment agreement or set forth in Section 3.10 below (after taking into account any applicable cure period).
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if Participant qualifies at the time of termination of employment for both a
termination of employment due to Retirement (determined without regard to the 90-day notice requirement) and a termination by the
Employer without Employer’s Good Cause, Participant shall be permitted to designate whether Participant’s employment is due to
Participant’s Retirement or by the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause.
    3.3 Committee Discretion. The Committee, in its discretion, may accelerate the vesting of the balance, or some lesser
portion, of the Participant’s unvested Restricted Stock Units at any time, subject to the terms of the Plan and this Agreement. If so
accelerated, the Restricted Stock Units will be considered as having vested as of the date specified by the Committee or an
applicable written agreement but the Committee will have no right to accelerate any payment under this Agreement if such
acceleration would cause this Agreement to fail to comply with Section 409A.
    3.4 Stockholder Rights and Dividend Equivalents.
        (i)    Participant will have no rights as a stockholder with respect to any shares of Stock subject to Restricted Stock Units
until the Restricted Stock Units have vested and shares of Stock relating thereto have been issued and recorded on the records of the
Company or its transfer agent or registrars.
        (ii)    Notwithstanding the foregoing, each Restricted Stock Unit shall accrue dividend equivalents with respect to
dividends that would otherwise be paid on the Stock underlying such Restricted Stock Unit during the period from the date of grant
to the date such Stock is delivered. Any such dividend equivalent shall be deemed reinvested in additional full and fractional
Restricted Stock Units immediately upon the related dividend’s payment date, based on the then-current Fair Market Value, and
shall be subject to the same vesting, settlement and other conditions applicable to the Restricted Stock Unit on which such dividend
equivalent is paid. Any fractional shares shall be paid in cash upon the vesting of such Restricted Share Units.
    3.5 Limits on Transferability. The Restricted Stock Units granted under this Agreement may be transferred solely to a trust
in which the Participant or the Participant’s spouse control the management of the assets. With respect to Restricted Stock Units, if
any, that have been transferred to a trust, references in this Agreement to vesting related to such Restricted Stock Units shall be
deemed to include such trust. Any transfer of Restricted Stock Units shall be
21

subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement and the transferee shall be subject to the same terms and
conditions as if it were the Participant. No interest of the Participant under this Agreement shall be subject to attachment, execution,
garnishment, sequestration, the laws of bankruptcy or any other legal or equitable process.
    3.6 Adjustments. If there is any change in the Stock by reason of any stock dividend, recapitalization, reorganization,
merger, consolidation, split-up, combination or exchange of shares of Stock, or any similar change affecting the Stock the
Committee will make appropriate and proportionate adjustments (including relating to the Stock, other securities, cash or other
consideration which may be acquired upon vesting of the Restricted Stock Units) that it deems necessary to the number and class of
securities subject to the Restricted Stock Units and any other terms of this Agreement. Any adjustment so made shall be final and
binding upon the Participant.
    3.7 No Right to Continued Performance of Services. The grant of the Restricted Stock Units does not confer upon the
Participant any right to continue to be employed by the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or
Subsidiary) nor may it interfere in any way with the right of the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any
Parent or Subsidiary) for which the Participant performs services to terminate the Participant’s employment at any time.
    3.8 Compliance With Law and Regulations. The grant and vesting of Restricted Stock Units and the obligation of the
Company to issue shares of Stock under this Agreement are subject to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations,
including those related to disclosure of financial and other information to the Participant and to approvals by any government or
regulatory agency as may be required. The Company shall not be required to issue or deliver any certificates for shares of Stock
prior to (A) the listing of such shares on any stock exchange on which the Stock may then be listed and (B) the completion of any
registration or qualification of such shares under any federal or state law, or any rule or regulation of any government body which
the Company shall, in its sole discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable.
    3.9 Corporate Transaction. Upon the occurrence of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar
transaction, unless otherwise specifically prohibited under applicable laws or by the applicable rules and regulations of any
governing governmental agencies or national securities exchanges, the Committee is authorized (but not obligated) to make
adjustments in the terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock Units, including without limitation the following (or any
combination thereof): (i) continuation or assumption of the Restricted Stock Units by the Company (if it is the surviving company or
corporation) or by the surviving company or corporation or its parent; (ii) substitution by the surviving company or corporation or its
parent of an award with substantially the same terms for the Restricted Stock Units; (iii) accelerated vesting with respect to the
Restricted Stock Units immediately prior to the occurrence of such event and payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days
thereafter; and (iv) cancellation of all or any portion of the Restricted Stock Units for fair value (in the form of cash or its equivalent
(e.g., by check), other property or any combination thereof) as determined in the sole discretion of the Committee and which value
may be zero (if the value of the underlying stock is zero), and payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days thereafter.
3.10 Participant Covenants. The Participant acknowledges that, in the course of performing his or her responsibilities
to the Employer, the Participant will form relationships and become acquainted with Confidential Information. The Participant
further acknowledges that such relationships and the Confidential Information are valuable to the Employer, and the restrictions on
his or her future employment contained in this Section 3.10, if any, are reasonably necessary in order for the Employer to remain
competitive in its various businesses. In
22

consideration of the benefits provided under this Agreement (including, but not limited to, the potential vesting continuation or
acceleration under Section 3.2 hereof), and in recognition of the Employer’s heightened need for protection from abuse of
relationships formed or Confidential Information garnered during the Participant’s employment with the Employer, Participant
hereby agrees to the following covenants as a condition of receipt of the benefits provided under this Agreement:
(i)     Non-Competition. During the entire Restrictive Period, the Participant shall not directly or indirectly be
employed by, provide consultation or other services to, engage in, participate in or otherwise be connected in any way with any
“Competitor” in any capacity that is the same, substantially the same or similar to the position or capacity (irrespective of title or
department) as that held at any time during Participant’s employment with the Company. During the entire Vesting Period, if the
Participant directly or indirectly becomes employed by, provides consultation or other services to, engages in, participates in or
otherwise becomes connected in any way with any “Competitor”, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.2 of this
Agreement will immediately terminate and all of such Participant’s then outstanding Restricted Stock Units will immediately
terminate and be forfeited as of the date Participant becomes employed by or otherwise associated in any way with a Competitor.
(ii)    Non-Solicitation. In addition, during the Restrictive Period under this Section 3.10: (A) the Participant
will not call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or take away, or attempt to call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or take away, any
Business Contacts of Employer, and (B) the Participant will not approach, solicit, contract with or hire any current Business Contacts
of Employer or entice any Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship with Employer or end his/her employment with
Employer, without the prior written consent of Company, in each and every instance, such consent to be within Company’s sole and
absolute discretion. During the entire Vesting Period, if the Participant (x) calls on, solicits, induces to leave and/or takes away, or
attempts to call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or take away, any Business Contacts of Employer or (y) approaches, solicits,
contracts with or hires any current Business Contacts of Employer or entices any Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship
with Employer or end his/her employment with Employer, without the prior written consent of Company, the continued vesting
provided for under Section 3.2 of this Agreement will immediately terminate and all of such Participant’s then outstanding
Restricted Stock Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date of such action.
(iii)    Non-Disclosure and Confidentiality. The Participant will not make known to any Competitor and/or any
member, manager, officer, director, employee or agent of a Competitor, the Business Contacts of Employer. The Participant further
covenants and agrees that at all times during Participant’s employment with the Company, and at all times thereafter, Participant
shall not, without the prior written consent of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer or General Counsel in each and every instance
—such consent to be within the Company’s sole and absolute discretion—use, disclose or make known to any person, entity or other
third party outside of the Employer any Confidential Information belonging to Employer or its individual members. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to Confidential Information: (A) that is required to be disclosed by law
or by any court, arbitrator, mediator or administrative or legislative body (including any committee thereof) in any litigation,
arbitration, mediation or legislative hearing, with jurisdiction to order Participant to disclose or make accessible any information,
provided, however, that Participant provides Company with ten (10) days’ advance written notice of such disclosure to enable
Company to seek a protective order or other relief to protect the confidentiality of such Confidential Information; (B) that becomes
generally known to the public or within the relevant trade or industry other than due to Participant’s or any third party’s violation of
this Section 3.10 or other obligation of confidentiality; or (C) that becomes available to Participant on a non-confidential basis from
a source that is legally entitled to disclose it to Participant.
23

(iv)    Forfeiture. It is a condition to the receipt of any benefits under this Agreement that, in the event of any
breach of the Participant’s obligations under this Section 3.10, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.2 of this
Agreement will immediately terminate and all of the Participant’s then outstanding Restricted Stock Units will immediately
terminate and be forfeited as of the date the Company determines that such a breach has occurred.
Nothing contained in this Section 3.10 limits or otherwise prohibits the Participant from filing a charge or complaint with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the
Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal, state or local governmental agency or commission (“Government
Agencies”). Further, this Section 3.10 does not limit the Participant’s ability to communicate with any Government Agencies or
otherwise participate in any investigation or proceeding that may be conducted by any Government Agency, including providing
documents or other information (subject to the paragraph below), without notice to the Company. This Section 3.10 does not limit
the Participant’s right to receive an award for information provided to any Government Agencies.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 3.10 or otherwise, pursuant to the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016, the
Company hereby advises the Participant as follows: (A) an individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable under any Federal
or State trade secret law for the disclosure of a trade secret that (i) is made (a) in confidence to a Federal, State, or local government
official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and (b) solely for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected
violation of law; or (ii) is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or other proceeding, if such filing is made under
seal; and (B) an individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a suspected violation of law may disclose
the trade secret to the attorney of the individual and use the trade secret information in the court proceeding, if the individual (i) files
any document containing the trade secret under seal; and (ii) does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order.
The Participant agrees to notify the Company immediately of any other persons or entities for whom he or she works or provide
services within the Vesting Period (excluding occasional consulting services for a non-Competitor, and similar activities), and to
provide such information as the Company may reasonably request regarding such work or services during the Vesting Period within
a reasonable time following such request. If the Participant fails to provide such notice or information, which failure is not cured by
you within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from the Company, any right to continued vesting under Section 3.2 shall
immediately cease. The Participant further agrees to promptly notify the Company, within the Vesting Period, of any contacts made
by any Competitor which concern or relate to an offer to employ the Participant or for the Participant to provide consulting or other
services during the Vesting Period.
4. Investment Representation. The Participant must, within five (5) days of demand by the Company furnish the Company an
agreement satisfactory to the Company in which the Participant represents that the shares of Stock acquired upon vesting are being
acquired for investment. The Company will have the right, at its election, to place legends on the certificates representing the shares
of Stock so being issued with respect to limitations on transferability imposed by federal and/or state laws, and the Company will
have the right to issue “stop transfer” instructions to its transfer agent.
5. Participant Bound by Plan. The Participant hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Plan and agrees to be bound by
all the terms and provisions thereof as amended from time to time.
24

6. Withholding. The Company or any Parent or Subsidiary shall have the right and is hereby authorized to withhold, any
applicable withholding taxes in respect of the Restarted Stock Units awarded by this Agreement, their grant, vesting or otherwise,
and to take such other action as may be necessary in the opinion of the Company to satisfy all obligations for the payment of such
withholding taxes, which may include, without limitation, reducing the number of shares otherwise distributable to the Participant by
the number of shares of Stock whose Fair Market Value is equal to the amount of tax required to be withheld by the Company or a
Parent or Subsidiary as a result of the vesting or settlement or otherwise of the Restricted Stock Units.
7. Notices. Any notice hereunder to the Company must be addressed to: MGM Resorts International, 3600 Las Vegas
Boulevard South, Las Vegas, Nevada 89109, Attention: 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan Administrator, and any notice hereunder to
the Participant must be addressed to the Participant at the Participant’s last address on the records of the Company, subject to the
right of either party to designate at any time hereafter in writing some other address. Any notice shall be deemed to have been duly
given on personal delivery or three (3) days after being sent in a properly sealed envelope, addressed as set forth above, and
deposited (with first class postage prepaid) in the United States mail.
8. Entire Agreement. This Agreement and the Plan constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to
the subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and
whether express or implied, and including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company
or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether previously entered into, currently effective or
entered into in the future that includes terms and conditions regarding equity awards) which relate to the subject matter hereof.
9. Waiver. No waiver of any breach or condition of this Agreement shall be deemed a waiver of any other or subsequent
breach or condition whether of like or different nature.
10. Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional action and execute whatever additional
documents the Company may deem necessary or advisable to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions
imposed on either the Participant or the Restricted Stock Units pursuant to this Agreement.
11. Successors and Assigns. The provisions of this Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, the
Company and its successors and assigns and upon the Participant, the Participant’s assigns and the legal representatives, heirs and
legatees of the Participant’s estate, whether or not any such person shall have become a party to this Agreement and agreed in
writing to be joined herein and be bound by the terms hereof.
12. Governing Law. The parties hereto agree that the validity, construction and interpretation of this Agreement shall be
governed by the laws of the state of Nevada.
13. Arbitration. Except as otherwise provided in Exhibit A to this Agreement (which constitutes a material provision of this
Agreement), disputes relating to this Agreement shall be resolved by arbitration pursuant to Exhibit A hereto.
14. Clawback Policy. By accepting this award the Participant hereby agrees that this award and any other compensation paid
or payable to the Participant is subject to Company’s Policy on Recovery of Incentive Compensation in Event of Financial
Restatement (or any successor policy) as in effect from time to time, and that this award shall be considered a bonus for purposes of
such policy. In addition, the Participant agrees that such policy may be amended from time to time by the Board in a manner
designed to comply with applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements. The Participant also hereby agrees that the
award granted
25

hereunder and any other compensation payable to the Participant shall be subject to recovery (in whole or in part) by the Company to
the minimum extent required by applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements.
15. Amendment. This Agreement may not be altered, modified, or amended except by written instrument signed by the
parties hereto; provided that the Company may alter, modify or amend this Agreement unilaterally if such change is not materially
adverse to the Participant or to cause this Agreement to comply with applicable law.
16. Severability. The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any portion of this Agreement is declared contrary to
any law, regulation or is otherwise invalid, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall nevertheless be
binding and enforceable.
17. Execution. Each party agrees that an electronic, facsimile or digital signature or an online acceptance or acknowledgment
will be accorded the full legal force and effect of a handwritten signature under Nevada law. This Agreement may be signed in
counterparts, each of which shall be an original, with the same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon the same
instrument.
18. Variation of Pronouns. All pronouns and any variations thereof contained herein shall be deemed to refer to masculine,
feminine, neuter, singular or plural, as the identity of the person or persons may require.
19. Tax Treatment; Section 409A. The Participant shall be responsible for all taxes with respect to the Restricted Stock Units.
Notwithstanding the forgoing or any provision of the Plan or this Agreement:
    19.1 The parties agree that this Agreement shall be interpreted to comply with or be exempt from Section 409A, and all
provisions of this Agreement shall be construed in a manner consistent with the requirements for avoiding taxes or penalties under
Section 409A. If any provision of this Agreement or the Plan contravenes Section 409A or could cause the Participant to incur any
tax, interest or penalties under Section 409A, the Committee may, in its sole discretion and without the Participant’s consent, modify
such provision in order to comply with the requirements of Section 409A or to satisfy the conditions of any exception therefrom, or
otherwise to avoid the imposition of the additional income tax and interest under Section 409A, while maintaining, to the maximum
extent practicable, the original intent and economic benefit to the Participant, without materially increasing the cost to the Company,
of the applicable provision. However, the Company makes no guarantee regarding the tax treatment of the Restricted Stock Units
and none of the Company, its Parent, Subsidiaries or affiliates, nor any of their employees or representatives shall have any liability
to the Participant with respect thereto.
    19.2 A termination of employment shall not be deemed to have occurred for purposes of any provision of this Agreement
providing for the payment of any amounts or benefits considered “nonqualified deferred compensation” under Section 409A upon or
following a termination of employment unless such termination is also a “separation from service” within the meaning of Section
409A and, for purposes of any such provision of this Agreement, references to a “termination,” “termination of employment” or like
terms shall mean “separation from service.” If the Participant is deemed on the date of termination to be a “specified employee”
within the meaning of that term under Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B), then with regard to any payment or the provision of any benefit
that is considered nonqualified deferred compensation under Section 409A payable on account of a “separation from service,” such
payment or benefit shall be made or provided at the date which is the earlier of (i) the expiration of the six (6)-month period
measured from the date of such “separation from service” of the Participant, and (ii) the date of the Participant’s death (the “Delay
Period”). Upon the
26

expiration of the Delay Period, all payments and benefits delayed pursuant to this Section 19.2 (whether they would have otherwise
been payable in a single sum or in installments in the absence of such delay) shall be paid or reimbursed on the first business day
following the expiration of the Delay Period to the Participant in a lump sum, and any remaining payments and benefits due under
this Agreement shall be paid or provided in accordance with the normal payment dates specified for them herein.
    19.3 For purposes of Section 409A, the Participant’s right to receive any installment payments pursuant to this Agreement
shall be treated as a right to receive a series of separate and distinct payments. Whenever a payment under this Agreement specifies a
payment period with reference to a number of days (e.g., “payment shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of
termination”), the actual date of payment within the specified period shall be within the sole discretion of the Company.
20. CARES Act. Participant acknowledges and agrees that the Restricted Stock Units are subject to the terms of Section 27
(CARES Act) of the Current Employment Agreement, which terms shall be incorporated herein by reference.
*          *          *
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
27

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Restricted Stock Units Agreement as of the date first
written above.
 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
 
By:
 
 
Name:
 
 
Title:
 
 
 
PARTICIPANT
 
By:
 
 
Name:
 
 
 
 
 
[Signature Page to Restricted Stock Units Agreement]

EXHIBIT A
ARBITRATION
This Exhibit A sets forth the methods for resolving disputes should any arise under the Agreement, and accordingly, this
Exhibit A shall be considered a part of the Agreement.
1.    Except for a claim by either Participant or the Company for injunctive relief where such would be otherwise authorized by law,
any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the Agreement or the breach hereof including without limitation any claim
involving the interpretation or application of the Agreement or the Plan, shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with
the employment arbitration rules then in effect of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service (“JAMS”), to the extent not
inconsistent with this paragraph. This Exhibit A covers any claim Participant might have against any officer, director, employee, or
agent of the Company, or any of the Company’s subsidiaries, divisions, and affiliates, and all successors and assigns of any of them.
The promises by the Company and Participant to arbitrate differences, rather than litigate them before courts or other bodies, provide
consideration for each other, in addition to other consideration provided under the Agreement.
2.    Claims Subject to Arbitration. This Exhibit A contemplates mandatory arbitration to the fullest extent permitted by law. Only
claims that are justiciable under applicable state or federal law are covered by this Exhibit A. Such claims include any and all alleged
violations of any state or federal law whether common law, statutory, arising under regulation or ordinance, or any other law,
brought by any current or former employees.
3.    Non-Waiver of Substantive Rights. This Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies available under applicable statutes or
common law. However, it does waive Participant’s right to pursue those rights and remedies in a judicial forum. By signing the
Agreement and the acknowledgment at the end of this Exhibit A, the undersigned Participant voluntarily agrees to arbitrate his or her
claims covered by this Exhibit A.
4.    Time Limit to Pursue Arbitration; Initiation: To ensure timely resolution of disputes, Participant and the Company must initiate
arbitration within the statute of limitations (deadline for filing) provided for by applicable law pertaining to the claim. The failure to
initiate arbitration within this time limit will bar any such claim. The parties understand that the Company and Participant are
waiving any longer statutes of limitations that would otherwise apply, and any aggrieved party is encouraged to give written notice
of any claim as soon as possible after the event(s) in dispute so that arbitration of any differences may take place promptly. The
parties agree that the aggrieved party must, within the time frame provided by this Exhibit A, give written notice of a claim pursuant
to Section 7 of the Agreement. In the event such notice is to be provided to the Company, the Participant shall provide a copy of
such notice of a claim to the Company’s Executive Vice President and General Counsel. Written notice shall identify and describe
the nature of the claim, the supporting facts and the relief or remedy sought.
5.    Selecting an Arbitrator: This Exhibit A mandates Arbitration under the then current rules of the Judicial Arbitration and
Mediation Service (JAMS) regarding employment disputes. The arbitrator shall be either a retired judge or an attorney experienced
in employment law and licensed to practice in the state in which arbitration is convened. The parties shall select one arbitrator from
among a list of three qualified neutral arbitrators provided by JAMS. If the parties are unable to agree on the arbitrator, each party
shall strike one name and the remaining named arbitrator shall be selected.
6.    Representation/Arbitration Rights and Procedures:

        a.    Participant may be represented by an attorney of his/her choice at his/her own expense.
    b.    The arbitrator shall apply the substantive law (and the law of remedies, if applicable) of Nevada (without regard to its
choice of law provisions) and/or federal law when applicable. In all cases, this Exhibit A shall provide for the broadest level of
arbitration of claims between the Company and Participant under Nevada or applicable federal law. The arbitrator is without
jurisdiction to apply any different substantive law or law of remedies.
    c.    The arbitrator shall have no authority to award non-economic damages or punitive damages except where such relief is
specifically authorized by an applicable state or federal statute or common law. In such a situation, the arbitrator shall specify in the
award the specific statute or other basis under which such relief is granted.
    d.    The applicable law with respect to privilege, including attorney-client privilege, work product, and offers to
compromise must be followed.
    e.    The parties shall have the right to conduct reasonable discovery, including written and oral (deposition) discovery and
to subpoena and/or request copies of records, documents and other relevant discoverable information consistent with the procedural
rules of JAMS. The arbitrator shall decide disputes regarding the scope of discovery and shall have authority to regulate the conduct
of any hearing and/or trial proceeding. The arbitrator shall have the right to entertain a motion to dismiss and/or motion for summary
judgment.
    f.    The parties shall exchange witness lists at least 30 days prior to the trial/hearing procedure. The arbitrator shall have
subpoena power so that either Participant or the Company may summon witnesses. The arbitrator shall use the Federal Rules of
Evidence. Both parties have the right to file a post hearing brief. Any party, at its own expense, may arrange for and pay the cost of a
court reporter to provide a stenographic record of the proceedings.
    g.    Any arbitration hearing or proceeding shall take place in private, not open to the public, in Las Vegas, Nevada.
7.    Arbitrator’s Award: The arbitrator shall issue a written decision containing the specific issues raised by the parties, the specific
findings of fact, and the specific conclusions of law. The award shall be rendered promptly, typically within 30 days after conclusion
of the arbitration hearing, or the submission of post-hearing briefs if requested. The arbitrator may not award any relief or remedy in
excess of what a court could grant under applicable law. The arbitrator’s decision is final and binding on both parties. Judgment
upon an award rendered by the arbitrator may be entered in any court having competent jurisdiction.
        a.    Either party may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel arbitration under this Exhibit A
and to enforce an arbitration award.
        b.    In the event of any administrative or judicial action by any agency or third party to adjudicate a claim on behalf of
Participant which is subject to arbitration under this Exhibit A, Participant hereby waives the right to participate in any monetary or
other recovery obtained by such agency or third party in any such action, and Participant’s sole remedy with respect to any such
claim shall be any award decreed by an arbitrator pursuant to the provisions of this Exhibit A.
8.    Fees and Expenses: The Company shall be responsible for paying any filing fee and the fees and costs of the arbitrator;
provided, however, that if Participant is the party initiating the claim, Participant will contribute an amount equal to the filing fee to
initiate a claim in the court
30

of general jurisdiction in the state in which Participant is (or was last) employed by the Company. Participant and the Company shall
each pay for their own expenses, attorney’s fees (a party’s responsibility for his/her/its own attorney’s fees is only limited by any
applicable statute specifically providing that attorney’s fees may be awarded as a remedy), and costs and fees regarding witness,
photocopying and other preparation expenses. If any party prevails on a statutory claim that affords the prevailing party attorney’s
fees and costs, or if there is a written agreement providing for attorney’s fees and/or costs, the arbitrator may award reasonable
attorney’s fees and/or costs to the prevailing party, applying the same standards a court would apply under the law applicable to the
claim(s).
9.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A shall survive the termination of Participant’s employment with the Company and the
expiration of the Agreement. These arbitration provisions can only be modified or revoked in a writing signed by both parties and
which expressly states an intent to modify or revoke the provisions of this Exhibit A.
10.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A do not alter or affect the termination provisions of this Agreement.
11.    Capitalized terms not defined in this Exhibit A shall have the same definition as in the Agreement to which this is Exhibit A.
12.    If any provision of this Exhibit A is adjudged to be void or otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of Exhibit A. All other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
31

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
BOTH PARTIES ACKNOWLEDGE THAT: THEY HAVE CAREFULLY READ THIS EXHIBIT A IN ITS ENTIRETY,
THEY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS, EXHIBIT A CONSTITUTES A MATERIAL TERM AND CONDITION OF THE
RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES TO WHICH IT IS EXHIBIT A, AND THEY AGREE
TO ABIDE BY ITS TERMS.
The parties also specifically acknowledge that by agreeing to the terms of this Exhibit A, they are waiving the right to pursue
claims covered by this Exhibit A in a judicial forum and instead agree to arbitrate all such claims before an arbitrator without a court
or jury. It is specifically understood that this Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies which are available under applicable
state and federal statutes or common law. Both parties enter into this Exhibit A voluntarily and not in reliance on any promises or
representation by the other party other than those contained in the Agreement or in this Exhibit A.
Participant further acknowledges that Participant has been given the opportunity to discuss this Exhibit A with Participant’s
private legal counsel and that Participant has availed himself/herself of that opportunity to the extent Participant wishes to do so.
*          *          *
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]

Exhibit C
Name of Report
  Generated By
Including, but not limited to:
  
Arrival Report
  Room Reservation/Casino Marketing
Departure Report
  Room Reservation/Casino Marketing
Master Gaming Report
  Casino Audit
Department Financial Statement
  Finance
$5K Over High Action Play Report
  Casino Marketing
$50K Over High Action Play Report
  Casino Marketing
Collection Aging Report(s)
  Collection Department
Accounts Receivable Aging
  Finance
Marketing Reports
  Marketing
Daily Player Action Report
  Casino Operations
Daily Operating Report
  Slot Department
Database Marketing Reports
  Database Marketing
Special Event Calendar(s)
  Special Events/Casino Marketing
Special Event Analysis
  Special Events/Casino Marketing
Tenant Gross Sales Reports
  Finance
Convention Group Tentative/Confirmed Pacing Reports
  Convention Sales
Entertainment Event Settlement Reports
  Finance
Event Participation Reports
  Casino Marketing
Table Ratings
  Various
B-1

Top Players
  Various
Promotion Enrollment
  Promotions
Player Win/Loss
  Various
B-2

EXHIBIT D: ARBITRATION AGREEMENT
This  Arbitration  Agreement  is  entered  into  as  of  June  [3],  2021  (the  “Effective  Date”),  by  and  between MGM  Resorts
International, its affiliates, parents, subsidiaries, divisions, successors, assigns and their current and former members, employees,
officers, directors, and agents (hereafter collectively referred to as the “Employer”) and Tilak Mandadi on behalf of him/herself,
his/her heirs, administrators, executors, successors and assigns (“Employee”).
By signing this Agreement, both Employee and Employer (collectively the “Parties”) affirmatively assent and are specifically
authorizing the resolution of the covered claims (as set forth below) by final and binding arbitration per the terms of this
Agreement,  rather  than  litigation  before  a  judge  and/or  jury  in  court. The  Parties  acknowledge  that  by  agreeing  to
arbitration, they are WAIVING ANY RIGHTS TO A JURY TRIAL.
Employee initials: \s\ TM
Employer initials: \s\ BH
A.    Scope of the Arbitration Agreement: Claims Covered and Not Covered.
    1.    Except as otherwise provided in this Arbitration Agreement, Employee and Employer agree to resolve through final and
binding arbitration any and all claims, disputes, or controversies that could otherwise be filed in court (“Claims”), whether legal or
equitable, that Employee or Employer may have against each other. Claims covered by the Arbitration Agreement include, but are
not limited to, those arising out of or relating to Employee’s obligations under the Employment Agreement, dated as of the Effective
Date, by and between Employee and Employer (“employment Agreement”), as well as those arising out of or relating to Employee’s
application  for  employment,  the  employment  relationship,  and  Employee’s  separation  from  employment;  Title  VII  of  the  Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (as amended); the Fair Labor Standards Act; the Equal Pay Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act; the Age
Discrimination  in  Employment  Act;  the  Genetic  Information  and  Nondisclosure  Act;  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act;  the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”); the Fair Credit Reporting Act; Sections 1981 through 1988 of Title
42 of the United States Code; the Pregnancy Discrimination Act; the Rehabilitation Act; the Worker Adjustment and Retraining
Notification  Act;  any other  federal,  state,  or local  law,  ordinance  or regulation  relating  to the employment  relationship  between
Employee and Employer, including, but not limited to, the payment of wage of any kind or based on any public policy, contract, tort,
or common  law;  or any claim  for damages,  costs, fees, or other  expenses  or legal  or equitable  relief,  including  attorneys’  fees.
Moreover, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary below, it is the Parties’ clear and unmistakable intent that all Claims be
resolved through binding arbitration to the fullest extent permitted by federal law (and state law that is not preempted by federal
law), not an administrative proceeding or court.
    2.    Certain claims are not covered by this Arbitration Agreement: (i) claims for workers' compensation benefits; (ii) claims for
unemployment  compensation  benefits;  (iii)  claims  which  by  federal  law  may  not  be  subject  to  mandatory  binding  pre-dispute
arbitration, such as certain claims under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act; (iv) claims against a federal contractor that may
not be the subject of a pre-dispute arbitration agreement as provided by valid, applicable, and enforceable federal Executive Orders
and their implementing rules, regulations, and guidance; (v) claims asserted on an individual basis alleging quid pro quo or hostile
work environment sexual harassment, and sex discrimination claims based on sexually harassing conduct under federal and state law
(but excluding claims of sexual harassment and sex discrimination asserted on a class or representative basis, and excluding sex
discrimination
C-1

pay equity claims); and, (vi) claims under employee pension, welfare benefit or stock option plans if those plans provide a dispute
resolution procedure.
    3.    Notwithstanding the parties’ agreement to be bound by this Arbitration Agreement, Employee understands and agrees that
failure to abide by Employee’s promises under the Employment Agreement would impair Employer’s essential ongoing business
plans  and  financial  arrangements  and  would  cause  Employer  irreparable  harm. As  such,  Employee  understands  and  agrees  that
Employer may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for temporary, preliminary, or emergency injunctive relief in the event
Employer  believes  in good  faith  that  Employee  has breached  such promises.  This  Arbitration  Agreement  also does  not prohibit
Employee  or  the  Employer  from  filing  a  motion  in  court  to  compel  arbitration. This  Arbitration  Agreement  does  not  prohibit
Employee  from  filing  administrative  charges  with  a  federal,  state,  or  local  administrative  agency  such  as  the  National  Labor
Relations  Board  (NLRB),  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  (EEOC),  or  Securities  Exchange  Commission,  nor  does
anything in this Arbitration Agreement preclude, prohibit, or otherwise limit, in any way, Employee’s rights and abilities to contact,
communicate with, report matters to, or otherwise participate in any whistleblower program administered by any such agencies.
B.    Class/Collective Action Waiver.
Except where prohibited  by federal law, covered claims must be brought on an individual basis only. The parties agree that by
signing this Arbitration Agreement, they waive their right to commence, or be a party to, any class, collective, representative, or
multi-plaintiff claims. The parties agree any claim can be pursued, but only on an individual basis, except the lack of co-plaintiffs
shall not, in and of itself, be a bar to pursuit of a pattern and practice claim. Any disputes concerning the validity of this multi-
plaintiff, class, collective, and representative action waiver will be decided by a court of competent jurisdiction, not by the arbitrator.
In the event a court determines that this waiver is unenforceable with respect to any claim or portion of a claim, this waiver shall not
apply to that claim or portion of the claim, which may then only proceed in court as the exclusive forum.
C.     Authority to Determine Arbitrability.
Except  as  expressly  provided  for  above,  the  arbitrator  shall  have  the  exclusive  authority  to  resolve  any  dispute  relating  to  the
enforceability  or  formation  of  this  Arbitration  Agreement  (including  all  defenses  to  contract  enforcement  such  as,  for  example,
waiver and unconscionability) or the arbitrability of any claim. Enforcement of this Arbitration Agreement may not be precluded on
the grounds that (1) a party to this Arbitration Agreement is also a party to a pending court action or special proceeding with a third
party  arising  out  of  the  same  transaction  or  series  of  related  transactions,  or  (2)  a  party  to  this  Arbitration  Agreement  asserts
arbitrable and non-arbitrable claims
C-2

D.    The Arbitration Process.
1.    This Arbitration Agreement is governed by and shall be enforced pursuant to the Federal Arbitration Act (the “FAA”).
The  arbitration  will  be  heard  by  a  neutral  arbitrator  and  will  be  administered  by  the  Judicial  Arbitration  Mediation  Service
(“JAMS”), pursuant to the JAMS Employment Arbitration Rules (“JAMS Rules”). A copy of the JAMS Rules may be obtained from
the Employer or downloaded from JAMS (www.jamsadr.com) or by calling JAMS at 1(800)352-5267. To the extent any of the
provisions in this Arbitration Agreement conflict with the JAMS Rules or any other rules of JAMS, this Arbitration Agreement shall
prevail. The parties may agree upon an individual arbitrator to hear the case or follow the JAMS Rules relating to selection of an
arbitrator. The arbitrator shall have the power to award any type of legal or equitable relief on an individual basis that would be
available in a court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, costs (except as provided for in Section E.3 below) and
attorneys’ fees, to the extent available under applicable law. The arbitrator must issue a written award and decision. Any arbitral
award may be entered as a judgment in any court of competent jurisdiction, as permitted by and in accordance with the FAA.
2.    The party initiating an arbitration must submit a written demand for arbitration to JAMS within the statute of limitations
applicable to the claims asserted in the demand for arbitration. Any claim for arbitration will be timely only if brought within the
statute of limitations applicable to the claim or claims in the demand. Within the same time frame, the party initiating the arbitration
also should send a copy of the demand for arbitration to the other party. Employer will send demands for arbitration to Employee at
the address the Employer has on file for Employee.
3.    Employer agrees to bear JAMS filing fees and administrative costs, as well as the cost of the arbitrator, including the
arbitrator’s  travel  expenses,  if  any,  and  will  reimburse  Employee  for  any  fees  Employee  may  be  required  to  pay  for  filing  the
demand for arbitration. The parties each shall bear their own attorneys’ fees and costs (if any) relating to any arbitration proceeding
itself, except as part of any remedy that may be awarded, the arbitrator shall have the authority to award the parties his, her, or its
attorneys’ fees and costs where required or permitted by law or by operation of law pursuant to an offer of judgment.
4.    The arbitration will take place in the city and state in which Employee is employed or was last employed by Employer.
In adjudicating the claim(s), the arbitrator shall apply the substantive laws of the state in which Employee is employed or was last
employed by Employer or the state in which the claim(s) arose. Each party shall have the right to conduct discovery adequate to
fully and fairly present the claims and defenses consistent with the streamlined nature of arbitration.
5.    If for whatever reason JAMS declines to act as the neutral, the parties shall utilize NAM (www.namadr.com) as the
neutral for the arbitration/appeal and shall utilize its Rules for Resolution of Employment Disputes. Each party agrees that it has had
an opportunity to review the current JAMS Employment Arbitration Rules.
E.    Consideration For This Arbitration Agreement.
The Parties agree that new or continued employment, the Employer’s agreement to pay all fees and costs including JAMS filing fees
and  administrative  costs,  as  well  as  the  cost  of  the  arbitrator,  and  the  mutual  promises  to  arbitrate  the  claims  covered  by  this
Arbitration Agreement serve as adequate consideration.
F.    Severability and Related Issues.
C-3

If any provision or portion of a provision is found to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the provision or portion of the provision
shall be interpreted in a manner or modified to make it enforceable. If that is not possible, it shall be severed, and the remaining
portions of the provisions and other provisions of this Arbitration Agreement shall remain in full force and effect. Neither JAMS
(defined below) nor the arbitrator shall have power under this Arbitration Agreement to modify or alter this Arbitration Agreement
so as to permit the arbitrator or JAMS to consolidate claims and/or to hear a multi-plaintiff, class, collective, or representative action.
G.    Other Provisions of this Arbitration Agreement.
This Arbitration Agreement contains the complete agreement between the parties regarding the subjects covered in it and supersedes
any prior or inconsistent agreements that might exist between Employee and Employer as to the subjects addressed herein. This
Arbitration  Agreement  can  be  modified  only  by  an  express  written  agreement  signed  by  Employee  and  an  authorized  Legal
Representative for Employer. This Arbitration Agreement shall survive the termination of Employee’s employment.
Neither  the terms nor conditions  described  in this Arbitration  Agreement  are intended  to create  a contract  of employment  for a
specific duration of time. Employment with the Employer is voluntarily entered into, and Employee is free to resign at any time.
Similarly, the Employer may terminate the employment relationship at any time for any reason, with or without prior notice.
BY ISSUANCE OF THIS ARBITRATION AGREEMENT, THE EMPLOYER AGREES TO BE BOUND TO ITS TERMS
WITHOUT ANY REQUIREMENT TO SIGN THIS ARBITRATION AGREEMENT.
I  KNOWINGLY  AGREE  TO  THIS  MUTUAL  AGREEMENT  TO  ARBITRATE  CLAIMS,  WHICH  OTHERWISE
COULD HAVE BEEN BROUGHT IN COURT. I UNDERSTAND THAT THIS ARBITRATION AGREEMENT, WHICH
MAY BE ENFORCED IN COURT, REQUIRES THAT CLAIMS COVERED BY THIS ARBITRATION AGREEMENT
BE SUBMITTED TO ARBITRATION PURSUANT TO THIS ARBITRATION AGREEMENT RATHER TO A JUDGE
OR  JURY  IN  COURT. I  AFFIRM  THAT  I  HAVE  HAD  SUFFICIENT  TIME  TO  READ  AND  UNDERSTAND  THE
TERMS  OF  THIS  ARBITRATION  AGREEMENT  AND  THAT  I  HAVE  BEEN  ADVISED  OF  MY  RIGHT  TO  SEEK
LEGAL COUNSEL REGARDING THE MEANING AND EFFECT OF THIS ARBITRATION AGREEMENT PRIOR TO
SIGNING.
\s\ Tilak Mandadi
June 3, 2021
Tilak Mandadi
Date
C-4

Exhibit 10.5(44)
FORM
rTSR PSU Award – Standard Form
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
PERFORMANCE SHARE UNITS AGREEMENT
 
 
Target No. of Performance Share Units: [●]
This Agreement (including its Exhibits, the “Agreement”) is made by and between MGM Resorts International (formerly MGM MIRAGE), a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”), and [●] (the “Participant”) with an effective date of [●] (the “Effective Date”).
RECITALS
A. The Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”) has adopted the Company’s 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan, as amended (the “Plan”), which
provides for the granting of Performance Share Units (as that term is defined in Section 1 below) to selected service providers. Capitalized terms used and not
defined in this Agreement shall have the same meanings as in the Plan.
B. The Board believes that the grant of Performance Share Units will stimulate the interest of selected employees in, and strengthen their desire to remain
with, the Company or a Parent or Subsidiary (as those terms are hereinafter defined).
C. The Compensation Committee of the Board (the “Committee”) has authorized the grant of Performance Share Units to the Participant pursuant to the
terms of the Plan and this Agreement.
D. The Committee and the Participant intend that the Plan and this Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to the
subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and
including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any
Parent or Subsidiary) whether previously entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future) which relate to the subject matter hereof. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, with respect to James J. Murren, the terms of his Current Employment Agreement shall control with respect to the treatment of this
award upon a termination due to Retirement, death or Disability in lieu of the terms set forth herein.
Accordingly, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
1. Definitions.
1.1
“Beginning Average Share Price” means the average closing price of either (a) the Shares or (b) the stock of a member of the Comparison
Group, as applicable, in any such case over the sixty (60) calendar day period ending on the Effective Date.
1.2
“Bankrupt Comparator Entity” means a company that is a member of the Comparison Group as of the Effective Date and that becomes subject to
any of the following conditions during the Performance Period: (a) bankruptcy, (b) liquidation, (c) dissolution or (d) other than as part of a merger, acquisition or
similar corporate transaction, cessation of business operations. Determinations with respect to a Bankrupt Comparator Entity shall be made by the Committee in its
sole discretion.
1.3
“Business Contacts” means the names, addresses, contact information or any information pertaining to any persons, advertisers, suppliers,
vendors, independent contractors, brokers, partners, employees, entities, patrons or customers (excluding Employer’s Trade Secrets, which are protected from
disclosure in accordance with Section 3.11 below) upon whom or which a Participant: contacted or attempted to contact in any

manner, directly or indirectly, or which Employer reasonably anticipated a Participant would contact within six months of a Participant’s last day of employment at
Employer, or with whom or which a Participant worked or attempted to work during Participant’s employment by Employer.
1.4
“Change of Control” means:
A.
the date that a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar transaction is consummated, unless: (i) at least 50% of
the outstanding voting securities of the surviving or resulting entity (including, without limitation, an entity which as a result of such transaction owns the
Company either directly or through one or more subsidiaries) (“Resulting Entity”) are beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, by the persons who were the
beneficial owners of the outstanding voting securities of the Corporation immediately prior to such transaction in substantially the same proportions as their
beneficial ownership, immediately prior to such transaction, of the outstanding voting securities of the Corporation and (ii) immediately following such transaction
no person or persons acting as a group beneficially owns capital stock of the Resulting Entity possessing thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the total voting
power of the stock of the Resulting Entity;
B.
the date that a majority of members of the Company’s Board is replaced during any twelve (12) month period by directors whose
appointment or election is not endorsed by a majority of the members of the Company’s Board before the date of the appointment or election;
C.
the date that any one person, or persons acting as a group, acquires (or has or have acquired as of the date of the most recent acquisition
by such person or persons) beneficial ownership of stock of the Company possessing thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the total voting power of the stock of the
Company; or
D.
the date that any one person acquires, or persons acting as a group acquire (or has or have acquired as of the date of the most recent
acquisition by such person or persons), assets from the Company that have a total gross fair market value equal to or more than forty percent (40%) of the total
gross fair market value of all of the assets of the Company immediately before such acquisition or acquisitions.
1.5
“Code” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. For purposes of the Plan and this Agreement, references
to sections of the Code shall be deemed to include references to any applicable regulations thereunder and any successor or similar provision.
1.6
“Comparison Group” means the S&P 500 as constituted as of the Effective Date. Determinations with respect to the Comparison Group shall be
made by the Committee in its sole discretion.
1.7
“Competitor” means any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity which is either directly, indirectly or through
an affiliated company, engaged in or proposes to engage in the development, ownership, operation or management of (i) gaming facilities; (ii) convention or
meeting facilities; or (iii) one or more hotels if any such hotel is connected in any way, whether physically or by business association, to a gaming establishment
and, further, where Competitor’s activities are within a 150 mile radius of any location where any of the foregoing facilities, hotels, or venues are, or are proposed
to be, owned, operated, managed or developed by the Employer.
1.8
“Confidential Information” means all Trade Secrets, Business Contacts, business practices, business procedures, business processes, financial
information, contractual relationships, marketing practices and procedures, management policies and procedures, and/or any other information of the Employer or
otherwise regarding the Employer’s operations and/or Trade Secrets or those of any member of the Employer and all information maintained or entered on any
database, document or report set forth on Exhibit C hereto or any other loyalty, hotel, casino or other customer database or system, irrespective of whether such
information is used by Participant during Participant’s employment by the Employer.
1.9
“Current Employment Agreement” means the Participant’s employment agreement with the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without
limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) in effect as of the applicable date of determination.
1.10 “Disability” means that the Participant is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or
mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12) months or is, by reason of
any medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than
twelve (12) months, receiving income replacement benefits for a period of not less than three (3) months under an accident and health plan covering employees of
the Employer.
2

1.11 “Employer” means the Company, the Subsidiaries and any Parent and affiliated companies.
1.12 “Employer’s Good Cause” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment Agreement; provided, that
if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a comparable term, “Employer’s Good Cause” means:
A.
Participant’s failure to abide by the Employer’s policies and procedures, misconduct, insubordination, inattention to the Employer’s
business, failure to perform the duties required of the Participant up to the standards established by the Employer’s senior management, or material breach of the
Current Employment Agreement, which failure or breach is not cured by the Participant within ten (10) days after written notice thereof from the Employer
specifying the facts and circumstances of the alleged failure or breach, provided, however, that such notice and opportunity to cure shall not be required if, in the
good faith judgment of the Board, such breach is not capable of being cured within ten (10) days;
B.
Participant’s failure or inability to apply for and obtain any license, qualification, clearance or other similar approval which the
Employer or any regulatory authority which has jurisdiction over the Employer requests or requires that the Participant obtain;
C.
the Employer is directed by any governmental authority in Nevada, Michigan, Mississippi, Illinois, Macau S.A.R., or any other
jurisdiction in which the Employer is engaged in a gaming business or where the Employer has applied to (or during the term of the Participant’s employment
under the Current Employment Agreement, may apply to) engage in a gaming business to cease business with the Participant;
D.
the Employer determines, in its reasonable judgment, that the Participant was, is or might be involved in, or is about to be involved in,
any activity, relationship(s) or circumstance which could or does jeopardize the Employer’s business, reputation or licenses to engage in the gaming business; or
E.
any of the Employer’s gaming business licenses are threatened to be, or are, denied, curtailed, suspended or revoked as a result of the
Participant’s employment by the Employer or as a result of the Participant’s actions.
1.13 “Ending Average Share Value” means the sum of (a) the average closing price of either (i) the Shares or (ii) the stock of a member of the
Comparison Group, as applicable, in any such case over the sixty (60) calendar day period ending on the last day of the Performance Period plus (b) the sum of all
dividends paid on (x) a Share or (y) a share of stock, as applicable, in any such case during the Performance Period (assuming such dividends are reinvested in
Shares or stock, as applicable); provided, however, that in the event of a Change of Control prior to the third anniversary of the Effective Date, the “Ending
Average Share Value” for purposes of the Company shall equal the sum of (I) the price per share of the Company’s Shares to be paid to the holders thereof in
accordance with the definitive agreement governing the transaction constituting the Change of Control (or, in the absence of such agreement, the closing price per
Share for the last trading day prior to the consummation of the Change of Control) and (II) the sum of all dividends paid on a Share during the Performance Period
(assuming such dividends are reinvested in Shares).
1.14 “Fair Market Value” or “FMV” shall have the meaning set forth for such term in the Plan.
1.15 “Merged Comparator Entity” means a company, other than a Bankrupt Comparator Entity, that is a member of the Comparison Group as of the
Effective Date but that ceases to have a class of equity securities that is both registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and actively traded on a U.S.
public securities market during the Performance Period. Determinations with respect to a Merged Comparator Entity shall be made by the Committee in its sole
discretion.
1.16  “Parent” means a parent corporation as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code.
1.17 “Participant’s Good Cause” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment Agreement; provided, that
if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a comparable term, “Participant’s Good Cause” means:
A.
The failure of the Employer to pay the Participant any compensation when due; or
B.
A material reduction in the scope of duties or responsibilities of the Participant or any reduction in the Participant’s salary.
3

If a breach constituting Participant’s Good Cause occurs, the Participant shall give the Employer thirty (30) days’ advance written notice specifying the facts and
circumstances of the alleged breach. During such thirty (30) day period, the Employer may either cure the breach (in which case such notice will be considered
withdrawn) or declare that the Employer disputes that Participant’s Good Cause exists, in which case Participant’s Good Cause shall not exist until the dispute is
resolved in accordance with the methods for resolving disputes specified in Exhibit A hereto.
1.18 “Performance Period” means the period beginning on the Effective Date and ending on third anniversary thereof or, if earlier, the date of
consummation of a Change of Control.
1.19 “Performance Share Units” means an award of Performance Share Units granted to a Participant pursuant to Article 9 of the Plan.
1.20 “Restrictive Period” means the twelve (12) month period immediately following the Participant’s date of termination.
1.21 “Retirement” means termination of employment with the Employer at a time when Participant’s age plus years of service with the Employer is
equal to or greater than 65; provided that, (i) Participant is at least age 55, (ii) Participant has at least 5 years of service with Employer and (iii) Participant has
given the Employer at least ninety (90) days’ notice of termination.
1.22 “Section 409A” means Code Section 409A, the regulations thereunder promulgated by the United States Department of Treasury and other
guidance issued thereunder.
1.23 “Share” means the Company’s common stock, $.01 per share.
1.24 “Subsidiary” means a subsidiary corporation of the Company as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code or corporation or other entity, whether
domestic or foreign, in which the Company has or obtains a proprietary interest of more than fifty percent (50%) by reason of stock ownership or otherwise.
1.25 “Total Shareholder Return” or “TSR” means, with respect to (a) the Company or (b) any member of the Comparison Group (but, for avoidance
of doubt, excluding any Merged Comparator Entity), the quotient of the Ending Average Share Value over the Beginning Average Share Price for the applicable
entity, expressed as a percentage return; provided, however, that TSR for a Bankrupt Comparator Entity will be negative one hundred percent (-100%).
Determinations with respect to TSR shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion.
1.26 “Trade Secrets” are defined in a manner consistent with the broadest interpretation of Nevada law. Trade Secrets shall include, without
limitation, Confidential Information, formulas, inventions, patterns, compilations, vendor lists, customer lists, contracts, business plans and practices, marketing
plans and practices, financial plans and practices, programs, devices, methods, know-hows, techniques or processes, any of which derive economic value, present
or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons who may or could obtain any economic
value from its disclosure or use, including but not limited to the general public.
1.27 “Vesting Period” means the period of time beginning on the Effective Date and ending on third anniversary of the Effective Date.
2. Grant to Participant. The Company hereby grants to the Participant, subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement, a target award of
[●] Performance Share Units (the “Target Award”). Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan or this Agreement, (i) the grant of Performance Share Units represents
the right to receive a percentage of the Target Award upon vesting of such Performance Share Units, with each Performance Share Unit that vests representing the
right to receive one (1) Share upon vesting thereof, (ii) unless and until the Performance Share Units have vested in accordance with the terms of this Agreement,
the Participant shall not have any right to delivery of the Shares underlying such Performance Share Units or any other consideration in respect thereof, and (iii) the
portion of the Target Award that vests hereunder shall be paid to the Participant as set forth in Section 3 hereof.
3. Terms and Conditions.
3.1
Vesting.
4

(i)
Subject to Section 3.3 herein, a percentage of the Target Award shall vest at the end of the Vesting Period as set forth in the table below
based on the Company’s percentile rank of TSR against the Comparison Group over the Performance Period; provided, however, that, notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, if the Company’s absolute TSR is negative during the Performance Period and the Relative TSR Percentile is below the 75th percentile, the
maximum portion of the Target Award that shall be eligible for vesting in accordance with the following table shall be 100%.
Performance Level
  
Relative TSR Percentile
  
Vested % of Target Award
Maximum
  
75th or greater
  
150%
Target
  
50th
  
100%
Threshold
  
25th
  
50%
(ii)
In no event shall the Participant be awarded more than 150% of the Target Award. If the Company’s percentile rank of TSR is below
the 25  percentile, no portion of the Target Award will vest.
(iii)
If the Company’s percentile rank of TSR should fall between two of the percentiles set forth above, the percentage of the Target Award
that shall vest shall be determined based on straight-line interpolation between the applicable figures.
(iv)
Any Performance Share Units that are not vested as of the last day of the Vesting Period shall immediately be forfeited and cancelled
without consideration.
3.2
Payment. Any Performance Share Units which vest in accordance with Section 3.1 (following application of Section 3.3), and any Dividend
Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid to the Participant in Shares, less applicable withholding taxes, within thirty (30) days
following the last day of the Vesting Period; provided, that any fractional Shares shall be paid in cash.
3.3
Termination of Service. Upon termination of employment (or other service) with the Employer for any reason on or prior to the last day of the
Vesting Period, the Performance Share Units shall be forfeited without any consideration; provided, however, that, (i) upon termination of employment by the
Employer without Employer’s Good Cause or by the Participant with Participant’s Good Cause, a pro-rata portion of the Performance Share Units, if any, that
would have become vested (but for such termination) under the schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein, shall vest, such proration determined based on the
number of days Participant was employed during the Vesting Period plus an additional twelve (12) months (or, if shorter, through the end of the Vesting Period
Period), and, together with any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid on the same schedule determined in
Section 3.2 herein, (ii) upon termination of employment due to the Participant’s Retirement, so long as the date of termination is at least 6 months following the
Effective Date, aa pro-rata portion of the Performance Share Units, if any, that would have become vested (but for such termination) under the schedule determined
in Section 3.1 herein, shall vest, such proration determined based on the number of days Participant was employed during the Vesting Period, and, together with
any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid on the same schedule determined in Section 3.2 herein, and (iii) upon
termination of employment due to the Participant’s death or Disability, the Performance Share Units, if any, that would have become vested under the schedule
determined in Section 3.1 herein if the Vesting Period ended on the date of termination (rather than the third anniversary of the Effective Date) shall vest, and,
together with any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid to the Participant within thirty (30) days following the date
of termination. Any continued vesting provided for in the preceding sentence shall immediately cease and unvested Performance Share Units shall be forfeited in
the event the Participant breaches any post-termination covenant with the Company or its affiliate in an employment agreement or set forth in Section 3.11 below
(after taking into account any applicable cure period).
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if Participant qualifies at the time of termination of employment for both a termination of employment due to
Retirement (determined without regard to the 90-day notice requirement) and a termination by the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause, Participant shall be
permitted to designate whether Participant’s employment is due to Participant’s Retirement or by the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause.
3.4
Committee Discretion. The Committee, in its discretion, may accelerate the vesting of the Target Award up to the maximum amount described in
Section 3.1 above, at any time, subject to the terms of the Plan and this Agreement and Section 409A. If so accelerated, the Performance Share Units will be
considered as having
th
5

vested as of the date specified by the Committee or an applicable written agreement, but the Committee will have no right to accelerate any payment under this
Agreement if such acceleration would cause this Agreement to fail to comply with, or give rise to any tax, penalty or interest under, Section 409A.
3.5
Stockholder Rights and Dividend Equivalents.
A.
Participant will have no rights as a stockholder with respect to any Shares subject to Performance Share Units until the Performance
Share Units have vested and Shares relating thereto have been issued and recorded on the records of the Company or its transfer agent or registrars.
B.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this award shall accrue dividend equivalents with respect to dividends that would otherwise be paid on
the Shares underlying the award during the period from the date of grant to the date such Performance Share Unit is earned and the underlying Shares delivered.
On each dividend payment date during such period, the award shall accrue a target number of dividend equivalents equal to (A) the sum of (i) the number of
Performance Share Units subject to the Target Award, plus (ii) the number of dividend equivalents previously accrued, multiplied by (B) the applicable per-share
dividend amount and divided by (C) the then-current Fair Market Value. The dividend equivalent shall be subject to the same vesting, settlement and other
conditions applicable to the Performance Share Units on which such dividend equivalents are accrued. As such, the determination of the number of dividend
equivalents which vest and are payable pursuant to the award shall be determined as the product of (a) the sum of all dividend equivalents determined in
accordance with this Section 3.5(ii) and (b) a fraction equal to (i) the number of Performance Share Units which vest in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement divided by (ii) the number of Performance Share Units subject to the Target Award.
3.6
Limits on Transferability. The Performance Share Units granted under this Agreement may be transferred solely to a trust in which the
Participant or the Participant’s spouse control the management of the assets. With respect to Performance Share Units, if any, that have been transferred to a trust,
references in this Agreement to vesting related to such Performance Share Units shall be deemed to include such trust. Any transfer of Performance Share Units
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement and the transferee shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as if it were the
Participant. No interest of the Participant under this Agreement shall be subject to attachment, execution, garnishment, sequestration, the laws of bankruptcy or any
other legal or equitable process.
3.7
Adjustments. If there is any change in the Shares by reason of any stock dividend, recapitalization, reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-
up, combination or exchange of Shares, or any similar change affecting the Shares the Committee will make appropriate and proportionate adjustments (including
relating to the Shares, other securities, cash or other consideration which may be acquired upon vesting of the Performance Share Units) that it deems necessary to
the number and class of securities subject to the Performance Share Units and any other terms of this Agreement. Any adjustment so made shall be final and
binding upon the Participant.
3.8
No Right to Continued Performance of Services. The grant of the Performance Share Units does not confer upon the Participant any right to
continue to be employed by the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) nor may it interfere in any way with the
right of the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) for which the Participant performs services to terminate the
Participant’s employment at any time.
3.9
Compliance With Law and Regulations. The grant and vesting of Performance Share Units and the obligation of the Company to issue Shares
under this Agreement are subject to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations, including those related to disclosure of financial and other
information to the Participant and to approvals by any government or regulatory agency as may be required. The Company shall not be required to issue or deliver
any certificates for Shares prior to (A) the listing of such shares on any stock exchange on which the Shares may then be listed and (B) the completion of any
registration or qualification of such shares under any federal or state law, or any rule or regulation of any government body which the Company shall, in its sole
discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable.
3.10 Corporate Transaction. Upon the occurrence of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar transaction, unless otherwise
specifically prohibited under applicable laws or by the applicable rules and regulations of any governing governmental agencies or national securities exchanges,
the Committee is authorized (but not obligated) to make adjustments in the terms and conditions of the Performance Share Units, including without limitation the
following (or any combination thereof): (i) continuation or assumption of the Performance Share Units by the Company (if it is the surviving company or
corporation) or by the surviving company or corporation or its parent; (ii) substitution by the surviving company or corporation or its parent of an award with
substantially the same terms for the Performance Share Units; (iii) accelerated vesting with respect to the Performance Share Units immediately prior to the
occurrence of such event and payment to the Participant within
6

thirty (30) days thereafter; and (iv) cancellation of all or any portion of the Performance Share Units for fair value (in the form of cash or its equivalent (e.g., by
check), other property or any combination thereof) as determined in the sole discretion of the Committee and which value may be zero (if the value of the
underlying stock is zero), and payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days thereafter.
3.11 Participant Covenants. The Participant acknowledges that, in the course of performing his or her responsibilities to the Employer, the Participant
will form relationships and become acquainted with Confidential Information. The Participant further acknowledges that such relationships and the Confidential
Information are valuable to the Employer, and the restrictions on his or her future employment contained in this Section 3.11, if any, are reasonably necessary in
order for the Employer to remain competitive in its various businesses. In consideration of the benefits provided under this Agreement (including, but not limited
to, the potential vesting continuation or acceleration under Section 3.3 hereof), and in recognition of the Employer’s heightened need for protection from abuse of
relationships formed or Confidential Information garnered during the Participant’s employment with the Employer, Participant hereby agrees to the following
covenants as a condition of receipt of the benefits provided under this Agreement:
A.
Non-Competition. During the entire Restrictive Period, the Participant shall not directly or indirectly be employed by, provide
consultation or other services to, engage in, participate in or otherwise be connected in any way with any “Competitor” in any capacity that is the same,
substantially the same or similar to the position or capacity (irrespective of title or department) as that held at any time during Participant’s employment with the
Company. During the entire Vesting Period, if the Participant directly or indirectly becomes employed by, provides consultation or other services to, engages in,
participates in or otherwise becomes connected in any way with any “Competitor”, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.3 of this Agreement will
immediately terminate and all of such Participant’s then outstanding Performance Share Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date Participant
becomes employed by or otherwise associated in any way with a Competitor.
B.
Non-Solicitation. In addition, during the Restrictive Period under this Section 3.11: (A) the Participant will not call on, solicit, induce to
leave and/or take away, or attempt to call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or take away, any Business Contacts of Employer, and (B) the Participant will not
approach, solicit, contract with or hire any current Business Contacts of Employer or entice any Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship with Employer or
end his/her employment with Employer, without the prior written consent of Company, in each and every instance, such consent to be within Company’s sole and
absolute discretion. During the entire Vesting Period, if the Participant (x) calls on, solicits, induces to leave and/or takes away, or attempts to call on, solicit,
induce to leave and/or take away, any Business Contacts of Employer or (y) approaches, solicits, contracts with or hires any current Business Contacts of Employer
or entices any Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship with Employer or end his/her employment with Employer, without the prior written consent of
Company, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.3 of this Agreement will immediately terminate and all of such Participant’s then outstanding
Performance Share Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date of such action.
C.
Non-Disclosure and Confidentiality. The Participant will not make known to any Competitor and/or any member, manager, officer,
director, employee or agent of a Competitor, the Business Contacts of Employer. The Participant further covenants and agrees that at all times during Participant’s
employment with the Company, and at all times thereafter, Participant shall not, without the prior written consent of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, Chief
Operating Officer or General Counsel in each and every instance—such consent to be within the Company’s sole and absolute discretion—use, disclose or make
known to any person, entity or other third party outside of the Employer any Confidential Information belonging to Employer or its individual members.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to Confidential Information: (A) that is required to be disclosed by law or by any
court, arbitrator, mediator or administrative or legislative body (including any committee thereof) in any litigation, arbitration, mediation or legislative hearing,
with jurisdiction to order Participant to disclose or make accessible any information, provided, however, that Participant provides Company with ten (10) days’
advance written notice of such disclosure to enable Company to seek a protective order or other relief to protect the confidentiality of such Confidential
Information; (B) that becomes generally known to the public or within the relevant trade or industry other than due to Participant’s or any third party’s violation of
this Section 3.11 or other obligation of confidentiality; or (C) that becomes available to Participant on a non-confidential basis from a source that is legally entitled
to disclose it to Participant.
D.
Forfeiture. It is a condition to the receipt of any benefits under this Agreement that, in the event of any breach of the Participant’s
obligations under this Section 3.11, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.3 of this Agreement will immediately terminate and all of the Participant’s
then outstanding Performance Share Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date the Company determines that such a breach has occurred.
7

Nothing contained in this Section 3.11 limits or otherwise prohibits the Participant from filing a charge or complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Securities and Exchange Commission or any other
federal, state or local governmental agency or commission (“Government Agencies”). Further, this Section 3.11 does not limit the Participant’s ability to
communicate with any Government Agencies or otherwise participate in any investigation or proceeding that may be conducted by any Government Agency,
including providing documents or other information (subject to the paragraph below), without notice to the Company. This Section 3.11 does not limit the
Participant’s right to receive an award for information provided to any Government Agencies.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 3.11 or otherwise, pursuant to the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016, the Company hereby advises the
Participant as follows: (A) an individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable under any Federal or State trade secret law for the disclosure of a trade secret
that (i) is made (a) in confidence to a Federal, State, or local government official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and (b) solely for the purpose of
reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law; or (ii) is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or other proceeding, if such filing is made
under seal; and (B) an individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a suspected violation of law may disclose the trade secret to the
attorney of the individual and use the trade secret information in the court proceeding, if the individual (i) files any document containing the trade secret under seal;
and (ii) does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order.
The Participant agrees to notify the Company immediately of any other persons or entities for whom he or she works or provide services within the Vesting Period
(excluding occasional consulting services for a non-Competitor, and similar activities), and to provide such information as the Company may reasonably request
regarding such work or services during the Vesting Period within a reasonable time following such request. If the Participant fails to provide such notice or
information, which failure is not cured by you within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from the Company, any right to continued vesting under Section
3.3 shall immediately cease. The Participant further agrees to promptly notify the Company, within the Vesting Period, of any contacts made by any Competitor
which concern or relate to an offer to employ the Participant or for the Participant to provide consulting or other services during the Vesting Period.
4. Investment Representation. The Participant must, within five (5) days of demand by the Company furnish the Company an agreement satisfactory to the
Company in which the Participant represents that the Shares acquired upon vesting are being acquired for investment. The Company will have the right, at its
election, to place legends on the certificates representing the Shares so being issued with respect to limitations on transferability imposed by federal and/or state
laws, and the Company will have the right to issue “stop transfer” instructions to its transfer agent.
5. Participant Bound by Plan. The Participant hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Plan and agrees to be bound by all the terms and provisions
thereof as amended from time to time.
6. Withholding. The Company or any Parent or Subsidiary shall have the right and is hereby authorized to withhold, any applicable withholding taxes in
respect of the Performance Share Units awarded by this Agreement, their grant, vesting or otherwise, and to take such other action as may be necessary in the
opinion of the Company to satisfy all obligations for the payment of such withholding taxes, which may include, without limitation, reducing the number of shares
otherwise distributable to the Participant by the number of Shares whose Fair Market Value is equal to the amount of tax required to be withheld by the Company
or a Parent or Subsidiary as a result of the vesting or settlement or otherwise of the Performance Share Units.
7. Notices. Any notice hereunder to the Company must be addressed to: MGM Resorts International, 3600 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas, Nevada
89109, Attention: 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan Administrator, and any notice hereunder to the Participant must be addressed to the Participant at the Participant’s
last address on the records of the Company, subject to the right of either party to designate at any time hereafter in writing some other address. Any notice shall be
deemed to have been duly given on personal delivery or three (3) days after being sent in a properly sealed envelope, addressed as set forth above, and deposited
(with first class postage prepaid) in the United States mail.
8. Entire Agreement. This Agreement and the Plan constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to the subject matter hereof and
shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and including, without limitation,
any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether
previously entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future that includes terms and conditions regarding equity awards) which relate to the subject
matter hereof.
8

9. Waiver. No waiver of any breach or condition of this Agreement shall be deemed a waiver of any other or subsequent breach or condition whether of like
or different nature.
10.
Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional action and execute whatever additional documents the Company may
deem necessary or advisable to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed on either the Participant or the Performance Share Units
pursuant to this Agreement.
11.
Successors and Assigns. The provisions of this Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, the Company and its successors and
assigns and upon the Participant, the Participant’s assigns and the legal representatives, heirs and legatees of the Participant’s estate, whether or not any such
person shall have become a party to this Agreement and agreed in writing to be joined herein and be bound by the terms hereof.
12.
Governing Law. The parties hereto agree that the validity, construction and interpretation of this Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the
state of Nevada.
13.
Arbitration. Except as otherwise provided in Exhibit A to this Agreement (which constitutes a material provision of this Agreement), disputes
relating to this Agreement shall be resolved by arbitration pursuant to Exhibit A hereto.
14.
Clawback Policy. By accepting this award the Participant hereby agrees that this award and any other compensation paid or payable to the
Participant is subject to Company’s Policy on Recovery of Incentive Compensation in Event of Financial Restatement (or any successor policy) as in effect from
time to time, and that this award shall be considered a bonus for purposes of such policy. In addition, the Participant agrees that such policy may be amended from
time to time by the Board in a manner designed to comply with applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements. The Participant also hereby agrees that
the award granted hereunder and any other compensation payable to the Participant shall be subject to recovery (in whole or in part) by the Company to the
minimum extent required by applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements.
15.
Amendment. This Agreement may not be altered, modified, or amended except by written instrument signed by the parties hereto; provided, that
the Company may alter, modify or amend this Agreement unilaterally if such change is not materially adverse to the Participant or to cause this Agreement to
comply with applicable law or avoid the imposition of any tax, interest or penalty under Section 409A.
16.
Severability. The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any portion of this Agreement is declared contrary to any law, regulation or is
otherwise invalid, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall nevertheless be binding and enforceable.
17.
Execution. Each party agrees that an electronic, facsimile or digital signature or an online acceptance or acknowledgment will be accorded the
full legal force and effect of a handwritten signature under Nevada law. This Agreement may be signed in counterparts, each of which shall be an original, with the
same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon the same instrument.
18.
Variation of Pronouns. All pronouns and any variations thereof contained herein shall be deemed to refer to masculine, feminine, neuter, singular
or plural, as the identity of the person or persons may require.
19.
Tax Treatment; Section 409A. The Participant shall be responsible for all taxes with respect to the Performance Share Units. Notwithstanding the
forgoing or any provision of the Plan or this Agreement:
19.1 The parties agree that this Agreement shall be interpreted to comply with or be exempt from Section 409A, and all provisions of this Agreement
shall be construed in a manner consistent with the requirements for avoiding taxes or penalties under Section 409A. If any provision of this Agreement or the Plan
contravenes Section 409A or could cause the Participant to incur any tax, interest or penalties under Section 409A, the Committee may, in its sole discretion and
without the Participant’s consent, modify such provision in order to comply with the requirements of Section 409A or to satisfy the conditions of any exception
therefrom, or otherwise to avoid the imposition of the additional income tax and interest under Section 409A, while maintaining, to the maximum extent
practicable, the original intent and economic benefit to the Participant, without materially increasing the cost to the Company, of the applicable provision.
However, the Company makes no guarantee regarding the tax treatment of the Performance Share Units and none of the Company, its Parent, Subsidiaries or
affiliates, nor any of their employees or representatives shall have any liability to the Participant with respect thereto.
9

19.2 A termination of employment shall not be deemed to have occurred for purposes of any provision of this Agreement providing for the payment
of any amounts or benefits considered “nonqualified deferred compensation” under Section 409A upon or following a termination of employment unless such
termination is also a “separation from service” within the meaning of Section 409A and, for purposes of any such provision of this Agreement, references to a
“termination,” “termination of employment” or like terms shall mean “separation from service.” If the Participant is deemed on the date of termination to be a
“specified employee” within the meaning of that term under Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B), then with regard to any payment or the provision of any benefit that is
considered nonqualified deferred compensation under Section 409A payable on account of a “separation from service,” such payment or benefit shall be made or
provided at the date which is the earlier of (i) the expiration of the six (6)-month period measured from the date of such “separation from service” of the
Participant, and (ii) the date of the Participant’s death (the “Delay Period”). Upon the expiration of the Delay Period, all payments and benefits delayed pursuant to
this Section 19.2 (whether they would have otherwise been payable in a single sum or in installments in the absence of such delay) shall be paid or reimbursed on
the first business day following the expiration of the Delay Period to the Participant in a lump sum, and any remaining payments and benefits due under this
Agreement shall be paid or provided in accordance with the normal payment dates specified for them herein.
19.3 For purposes of Section 409A, the Participant’s right to receive any installment payments pursuant to this Agreement shall be treated as a right to
receive a series of separate and distinct payments. Whenever a payment under this Agreement specifies a payment period with reference to a number of days (e.g.,
“payment shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of termination”), the actual date of payment within the specified period shall be within the sole
discretion of the Company.
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
 
10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Performance Share Units Agreement as of the date first written above.
 
MGM RESORTS
INTERNATIONAL
By:
  
Name:
 
Title:
 
PARTICIPANT
By:
  
Name:
 
 
[Signature Page to Performance Share Units Agreement]

EXHIBIT A
ARBITRATION
This Exhibit A sets forth the methods for resolving disputes should any arise under the Agreement, and accordingly, this Exhibit A shall be considered a part
of the Agreement.
 
1.    Except for a claim by either Participant or the Company for injunctive relief where such would be otherwise authorized by law, any controversy or claim
arising out of or relating to the Agreement or the breach hereof including without limitation any claim involving the interpretation or application of the Agreement
or the Plan, shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with the employment arbitration rules then in effect of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation
Service (“JAMS”), to the extent not inconsistent with this paragraph. This Exhibit A covers any claim Participant might have against any officer, director,
employee, or agent of the Company, or any of the Company’s subsidiaries, divisions, and affiliates, and all successors and assigns of any of them. The promises by
the Company and Participant to arbitrate differences, rather than litigate them before courts or other bodies, provide consideration for each other, in addition to
other consideration provided under the Agreement.
 
2.    Claims Subject to Arbitration: This Exhibit A contemplates mandatory arbitration to the fullest extent permitted by law. Only claims that are justiciable under
applicable state or federal law are covered by this Exhibit A. Such claims include any and all alleged violations of any state or federal law whether common law,
statutory, arising under regulation or ordinance, or any other law, brought by any current or former employees.
 
3.    Non-Waiver of Substantive Rights: This Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies available under applicable statutes or common law. However, it does
waive Participant’s right to pursue those rights and remedies in a judicial forum. By signing the Agreement and the acknowledgment at the end of this Exhibit A,
the undersigned Participant voluntarily agrees to arbitrate his or her claims covered by this Exhibit A.
 
4.    Time Limit to Pursue Arbitration; Initiation: To ensure timely resolution of disputes, Participant and the Company must initiate arbitration within the statute of
limitations (deadline for filing) provided for by applicable law pertaining to the claim. The failure to initiate arbitration within this time limit will bar any such
claim. The parties understand that the Company and Participant are waiving any longer statutes of limitations that would otherwise apply, and any aggrieved party
is encouraged to give written notice of any claim as soon as possible after the event(s) in dispute so that arbitration of any differences may take place promptly.
The parties agree that the aggrieved party must, within the time frame provided by this Exhibit A, give written notice of a claim pursuant to Section 7 of the
Agreement. In the event such notice is to be provided to the Company, the Participant shall provide a copy of such notice of a claim to the Company’s Executive
Vice President and General Counsel. Written notice shall identify and describe the nature of the claim, the supporting facts and the relief or remedy sought.
5.    Selecting an Arbitrator: This Exhibit A mandates Arbitration under the then current rules of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service (JAMS) regarding
employment disputes. The arbitrator shall be either a retired judge or an attorney experienced in employment law and licensed to practice in the state in which
arbitration is convened. The parties shall select one arbitrator from among a list of three qualified neutral arbitrators provided by JAMS. If the parties are unable to
agree on the arbitrator, each party shall strike one name and the remaining named arbitrator shall be selected.
6.    Representation/Arbitration Rights and Procedures:
 
     a.    Participant may be represented by an attorney of his/her choice at his/her own expense.
 
     b.    The arbitrator shall apply the substantive law (and the law of remedies, if applicable) of Nevada (without regard to its choice of law provisions) and/or
federal law when applicable. In all cases, this Exhibit A shall provide for the broadest level of arbitration of claims between the Company and Participant under
Nevada or applicable federal law. The arbitrator is without jurisdiction to apply any different substantive law or law of remedies.
 
     c.    The arbitrator shall have no authority to award non-economic damages or punitive damages except where such relief is specifically authorized by an
applicable state or federal statute or common law. In such a situation, the arbitrator shall specify in the award the specific statute or other basis under which such
relief is granted.
 
     d.    The applicable law with respect to privilege, including attorney-client privilege, work product, and offers to compromise must be followed.
 
     e.    The parties shall have the right to conduct reasonable discovery, including written and oral (deposition) discovery and to subpoena and/or request copies of
records, documents and other relevant discoverable information consistent with the procedural rules of JAMS. The arbitrator shall decide disputes regarding the
scope of discovery and shall have authority to regulate the conduct of any hearing and/or trial proceeding. The arbitrator shall have the right to entertain a motion
to dismiss and/or motion for summary judgment.
12

 
     f.    The parties shall exchange witness lists at least 30 days prior to the trial/hearing procedure. The arbitrator shall have subpoena power so that either
Participant or the Company may summon witnesses. The arbitrator shall use the Federal Rules of Evidence. Both parties have the right to file a post hearing brief.
Any party, at its own expense, may arrange for and pay the cost of a court reporter to provide a stenographic record of the proceedings.
 
     g.    Any arbitration hearing or proceeding shall take place in private, not open to the public, in Las Vegas, Nevada.
 
7.    Arbitrator’s Award: The arbitrator shall issue a written decision containing the specific issues raised by the parties, the specific findings of fact, and the
specific conclusions of
     law. The award shall be rendered promptly, typically within 30 days after conclusion of the arbitration hearing, or the submission of post-hearing briefs if
requested. The arbitrator may not award any relief or remedy in excess of what a court could grant under applicable law. The arbitrator’s decision is final and
binding on both parties.. Judgment upon an award rendered by the arbitrator may be entered in any court having competent jurisdiction.
 
     a.    Either party may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel arbitration under this Exhibit A and to enforce an arbitration award.
 
     b.    In the event of any administrative or judicial action by any agency or third party to adjudicate a claim on behalf of Participant which is subject to arbitration
under this Exhibit A, Participant hereby waives the right to participate in any monetary or other recovery obtained by such agency or third party in any such action,
and Participant’s sole remedy with respect to any such claim shall be any award decreed by an arbitrator pursuant to the provisions of this Exhibit A.
 
8.    Fees and Expenses: The Company shall be responsible for paying any filing fee and the fees and costs of the arbitrator; provided, however, that if Participant is
the party initiating the claim, Participant will contribute an amount equal to the filing fee to initiate a claim in the court of general jurisdiction in the state in which
Participant is (or was last) employed by the Company. Participant and the Company shall each pay for their own expenses, attorney’s fees (a party’s responsibility
for his/her/its own attorney’s fees is only limited by any applicable statute specifically providing that attorney’s fees may be awarded as a remedy), and costs and
fees regarding witness, photocopying and other preparation expenses. If any party prevails on a statutory claim that affords the prevailing party attorney’s fees and
costs, or if there is a written agreement providing for attorney’s fees and/or costs, the arbitrator may award reasonable attorney’s fees and/or costs to the prevailing
party, applying the same standards a court would apply under the law applicable to the claim(s).
 
9.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A shall survive the termination of Participant’s employment with the Company and the expiration of the Agreement.
These arbitration provisions can only be modified or revoked in a writing signed by both parties and which expressly states an intent to modify or revoke the
provisions of this Exhibit A.
 
10.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A do not alter or affect the termination provisions of this Agreement.
 
11.    Capitalized terms not defined in this Exhibit A shall have the same definition as in the Agreement to which this is Exhibit A.
 
12.    If any provision of this Exhibit A is adjudged to be void or otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of Exhibit A. All other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
 
13

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
BOTH PARTIES ACKNOWLEDGE THAT: THEY HAVE CAREFULLY READ THIS EXHIBIT A IN ITS ENTIRETY, THEY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS,
EXHIBIT A CONSTITUTES A MATERIAL TERM AND CONDITION OF THE PERFORMANCE SHARE UNITS AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES
TO WHICH IT IS EXHIBIT A, AND THEY AGREE TO ABIDE BY ITS TERMS.
The parties also specifically acknowledge that by agreeing to the terms of this Exhibit A, they are waiving the right to pursue claims covered by this Exhibit A in a
judicial forum and instead agree to arbitrate all such claims before an arbitrator without a court or jury. It is specifically understood that this Exhibit A does not
waive any rights or remedies which are available under applicable state and federal statutes or common law. Both parties enter into this Exhibit A voluntarily and
not in reliance on any promises or representation by the other party other than those contained in the Agreement or in this Exhibit A.
Participant further acknowledges that Participant has been given the opportunity to discuss this Exhibit A with Participant’s private legal counsel and that
Participant has availed himself/herself of that opportunity to the extent Participant wishes to do so.
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
14

Exhibit C
Name of Report
  Generated By
Including, but not limited to:
  
Arrival Report
  Room Reservation/Casino Marketing
Departure Report
  Room Reservation/Casino Marketing
Master Gaming Report
  Casino Audit
Department Financial Statement
  Finance
$5K Over High Action Play Report
  Casino Marketing
$50K Over High Action Play Report
  Casino Marketing
Collection Aging Report(s)
  Collection Department
Accounts Receivable Aging
  Finance
Marketing Reports
  Marketing
Daily Player Action Report
  Casino Operations
Daily Operating Report
  Slot Department
Database Marketing Reports
  Database Marketing
Special Event Calendar(s)
  Special Events/Casino Marketing
Special Event Analysis
  Special Events/Casino Marketing
Tenant Gross Sales Reports
  Finance
Convention Group Tentative/Confirmed Pacing Reports
  Convention Sales
Entertainment Event Settlement Reports
  Finance
Event Participation Reports
  Casino Marketing
Table Ratings
  Various
Top Players
  Various
Promotion Enrollment
  Promotions
Player Win/Loss
  Various
 

Exhibit 10.5(45)
FORM
rTSR PSU Award – Form for Hornbuckle, McManus and Sanders
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
PERFORMANCE SHARE UNITS AGREEMENT
 
 
Target No. of Performance Share Units: [●]
This Agreement (including its Exhibits, the “Agreement”) is made by and between MGM Resorts International (formerly MGM MIRAGE), a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”), and [●] (the “Participant”) with an effective date of [●] (the “Effective Date”).
RECITALS
A. The Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”) has adopted the Company’s 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan, as amended (the “Plan”), which
provides for the granting of Performance Share Units (as that term is defined in Section 1 below) to selected service providers. Capitalized terms used and not
defined in this Agreement shall have the same meanings as in the Plan.
B. The Board believes that the grant of Performance Share Units will stimulate the interest of selected employees in, and strengthen their desire to remain
with, the Company or a Parent or Subsidiary (as those terms are hereinafter defined).
C. The Compensation Committee of the Board (the “Committee”) has authorized the grant of Performance Share Units to the Participant pursuant to the
terms of the Plan and this Agreement.
D. The Committee and the Participant intend that the Plan and this Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to the
subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and
including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any
Parent or Subsidiary) whether previously entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future) which relate to the subject matter hereof.
Accordingly, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
1. Definitions.
1.1
“Beginning Average Share Price” means the average closing price of either (a) the Shares or (b) the stock of a member of the Comparison
Group, as applicable, in any such case over the sixty (60) calendar day period ending on the Effective Date.
1.2
“Bankrupt Comparator Entity” means a company that is a member of the Comparison Group as of the Effective Date and that becomes subject to
any of the following conditions during the Performance Period: (a) bankruptcy, (b) liquidation, (c) dissolution or (d) other than as part of a merger, acquisition or
similar corporate transaction, cessation of business operations. Determinations with respect to a Bankrupt Comparator Entity shall be made by the Committee in its
sole discretion.
1.3
“Business Contacts” means the names, addresses, contact information or any information pertaining to any persons, advertisers, suppliers,
vendors, independent contractors, brokers, partners, employees, entities, patrons or customers (excluding Employer’s Trade Secrets, which are protected from
disclosure in accordance with Section 3.11 below) upon whom or which a Participant: contacted or attempted to contact in any manner, directly or indirectly, or
which Employer reasonably anticipated a Participant would contact within six

months of a Participant’s last day of employment at Employer, or with whom or which a Participant worked or attempted to work during Participant’s employment
by Employer.
1.4
“Change of Control” means:
A.
the date that a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar transaction is consummated, unless: (i) at least 50% of
the outstanding voting securities of the surviving or resulting entity (including, without limitation, an entity which as a result of such transaction owns the
Company either directly or through one or more subsidiaries) (“Resulting Entity”) are beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, by the persons who were the
beneficial owners of the outstanding voting securities of the Corporation immediately prior to such transaction in substantially the same proportions as their
beneficial ownership, immediately prior to such transaction, of the outstanding voting securities of the Corporation and (ii) immediately following such transaction
no person or persons acting as a group beneficially owns capital stock of the Resulting Entity possessing thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the total voting
power of the stock of the Resulting Entity;
B.
the date that a majority of members of the Company’s Board is replaced during any twelve (12) month period by directors whose
appointment or election is not endorsed by a majority of the members of the Company’s Board before the date of the appointment or election;
C.
the date that any one person, or persons acting as a group, acquires (or has or have acquired as of the date of the most recent acquisition
by such person or persons) beneficial ownership of stock of the Company possessing thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the total voting power of the stock of the
Company; or
D.
the date that any one person acquires, or persons acting as a group acquire (or has or have acquired as of the date of the most recent
acquisition by such person or persons), assets from the Company that have a total gross fair market value equal to or more than forty percent (40%) of the total
gross fair market value of all of the assets of the Company immediately before such acquisition or acquisitions.
1.5
“Code” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. For purposes of the Plan and this Agreement, references
to sections of the Code shall be deemed to include references to any applicable regulations thereunder and any successor or similar provision.
1.6
“Comparison Group” means the S&P 500 as constituted as of the Effective Date. Determinations with respect to the Comparison Group shall be
made by the Committee in its sole discretion.
1.7
“Competitor” means any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity which is either directly, indirectly or through
an affiliated company, engaged in or proposes to engage in the development, ownership, operation or management of (i) gaming facilities; (ii) convention or
meeting facilities; or (iii) one or more hotels if any such hotel is connected in any way, whether physically or by business association, to a gaming establishment
and, further, where Competitor’s activities are within a 150 mile radius of any location where any of the foregoing facilities, hotels, or venues are, or are proposed
to be, owned, operated, managed or developed by the Employer.
1.8
“Confidential Information” means all Trade Secrets, Business Contacts, business practices, business procedures, business processes, financial
information, contractual relationships, marketing practices and procedures, management policies and procedures, and/or any other information of the Employer or
otherwise regarding the Employer’s operations and/or Trade Secrets or those of any member of the Employer and all information maintained or entered on any
database, document or report set forth on Exhibit C hereto or any other loyalty, hotel, casino or other customer database or system, irrespective of whether such
information is used by Participant during Participant’s employment by the Employer.
1.9
“Current Employment Agreement” means the Participant’s employment agreement with the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without
limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) in effect as of the applicable date of determination.
1.10 “Disability” means that the Participant is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or
mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12) months or is, by reason of
any medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than
twelve (12) months, receiving income replacement benefits for a period of not less than three (3) months under an accident and health plan covering employees of
the Employer.
2

1.11 “Employer” means the Company, the Subsidiaries and any Parent and affiliated companies.
1.12 “Employer’s Good Cause” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment Agreement; provided, that
if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a comparable term, “Employer’s Good Cause” means:
A.
Participant’s failure to abide by the Employer’s policies and procedures, misconduct, insubordination, inattention to the Employer’s
business, failure to perform the duties required of the Participant up to the standards established by the Employer’s senior management, or material breach of the
Current Employment Agreement, which failure or breach is not cured by the Participant within ten (10) days after written notice thereof from the Employer
specifying the facts and circumstances of the alleged failure or breach, provided, however, that such notice and opportunity to cure shall not be required if, in the
good faith judgment of the Board, such breach is not capable of being cured within ten (10) days;
B.
Participant’s failure or inability to apply for and obtain any license, qualification, clearance or other similar approval which the
Employer or any regulatory authority which has jurisdiction over the Employer requests or requires that the Participant obtain;
C.
the Employer is directed by any governmental authority in Nevada, Michigan, Mississippi, Illinois, Macau S.A.R., or any other
jurisdiction in which the Employer is engaged in a gaming business or where the Employer has applied to (or during the term of the Participant’s employment
under the Current Employment Agreement, may apply to) engage in a gaming business to cease business with the Participant;
D.
the Employer determines, in its reasonable judgment, that the Participant was, is or might be involved in, or is about to be involved in,
any activity, relationship(s) or circumstance which could or does jeopardize the Employer’s business, reputation or licenses to engage in the gaming business; or
E.
any of the Employer’s gaming business licenses are threatened to be, or are, denied, curtailed, suspended or revoked as a result of the
Participant’s employment by the Employer or as a result of the Participant’s actions.
1.13 “Ending Average Share Value” means the sum of (a) the average closing price of either (i) the Shares or (ii) the stock of a member of the
Comparison Group, as applicable, in any such case over the sixty (60) calendar day period ending on the last day of the Performance Period plus (b) the sum of all
dividends paid on (x) a Share or (y) a share of stock, as applicable, in any such case during the Performance Period (assuming such dividends are reinvested in
Shares or stock, as applicable); provided, however, that in the event of a Change of Control prior to the third anniversary of the Effective Date, the “Ending
Average Share Value” for purposes of the Company shall equal the sum of (I) the price per share of the Company’s Shares to be paid to the holders thereof in
accordance with the definitive agreement governing the transaction constituting the Change of Control (or, in the absence of such agreement, the closing price per
Share for the last trading day prior to the consummation of the Change of Control) and (II) the sum of all dividends paid on a Share during the Performance Period
(assuming such dividends are reinvested in Shares).
1.14 “Fair Market Value” or “FMV” shall have the meaning set forth for such term in the Plan.
1.15 “Merged Comparator Entity” means a company, other than a Bankrupt Comparator Entity, that is a member of the Comparison Group as of the
Effective Date but that ceases to have a class of equity securities that is both registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and actively traded on a U.S.
public securities market during the Performance Period. Determinations with respect to a Merged Comparator Entity shall be made by the Committee in its sole
discretion.
1.16  “Parent” means a parent corporation as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code.
1.17 “Participant’s Good Cause” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment Agreement; provided, that
if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a comparable term, “Participant’s Good Cause” means:
A.
The failure of the Employer to pay the Participant any compensation when due; or
B.
A material reduction in the scope of duties or responsibilities of the Participant or any reduction in the Participant’s salary.
3

If a breach constituting Participant’s Good Cause occurs, the Participant shall give the Employer thirty (30) days’ advance written notice specifying the facts and
circumstances of the alleged breach. During such thirty (30) day period, the Employer may either cure the breach (in which case such notice will be considered
withdrawn) or declare that the Employer disputes that Participant’s Good Cause exists, in which case Participant’s Good Cause shall not exist until the dispute is
resolved in accordance with the methods for resolving disputes specified in Exhibit A hereto.
1.18 “Performance Period” means the period beginning on the Effective Date and ending on third anniversary thereof or, if earlier, the date of
consummation of a Change of Control.
1.19 “Performance Share Units” means an award of Performance Share Units granted to a Participant pursuant to Article 9 of the Plan.
1.20 “Restrictive Period” means the twelve (12) month period immediately following the Participant’s date of termination.
1.21 “Retirement” means termination of employment with the Employer at a time when Participant’s age plus years of service with the Employer is
equal to or greater than 65; provided that, (i) Participant is at least age 55, (ii) Participant has at least 5 years of service with Employer and (iii) Participant has
given the Employer at least ninety (90) days’ notice of termination.
1.22 “Section 409A” means Code Section 409A, the regulations thereunder promulgated by the United States Department of Treasury and other
guidance issued thereunder.
1.23 “Share” means the Company’s common stock, $.01 per share.
1.24 “Subsidiary” means a subsidiary corporation of the Company as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code or corporation or other entity, whether
domestic or foreign, in which the Company has or obtains a proprietary interest of more than fifty percent (50%) by reason of stock ownership or otherwise.
1.25 “Total Shareholder Return” or “TSR” means, with respect to (a) the Company or (b) any member of the Comparison Group (but, for avoidance
of doubt, excluding any Merged Comparator Entity), the quotient of the Ending Average Share Value over the Beginning Average Share Price for the applicable
entity, expressed as a percentage return; provided, however, that TSR for a Bankrupt Comparator Entity will be negative one hundred percent (-100%).
Determinations with respect to TSR shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion.
1.26 “Trade Secrets” are defined in a manner consistent with the broadest interpretation of Nevada law. Trade Secrets shall include, without
limitation, Confidential Information, formulas, inventions, patterns, compilations, vendor lists, customer lists, contracts, business plans and practices, marketing
plans and practices, financial plans and practices, programs, devices, methods, know-hows, techniques or processes, any of which derive economic value, present
or potential, from not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons who may or could obtain any economic
value from its disclosure or use, including but not limited to the general public.
1.27 “Vesting Period” means the period of time beginning on the Effective Date and ending on third anniversary of the Effective Date.
2. Grant to Participant. The Company hereby grants to the Participant, subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement, a target award of
[●] Performance Share Units (the “Target Award”). Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan or this Agreement, (i) the grant of Performance Share Units represents
the right to receive a percentage of the Target Award upon vesting of such Performance Share Units, with each Performance Share Unit that vests representing the
right to receive one (1) Share upon vesting thereof, (ii) unless and until the Performance Share Units have vested in accordance with the terms of this Agreement,
the Participant shall not have any right to delivery of the Shares underlying such Performance Share Units or any other consideration in respect thereof, and (iii) the
portion of the Target Award that vests hereunder shall be paid to the Participant as set forth in Section 3 hereof.
3. Terms and Conditions.
         For Mr. McManus, “Retirement” shall also include termination of employment by the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause or by the Participant with
Participant’s Good Cause.
1
1
4

3.1
Vesting.
(i)
Subject to Section 3.3 herein, a percentage of the Target Award shall vest at the end of the Vesting Period as set forth in the table below
based on the Company’s percentile rank of TSR against the Comparison Group over the Performance Period; provided, however, that, notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, if the Company’s absolute TSR is negative during the Performance Period and the Relative TSR Percentile is below the 75  percentile, the
maximum portion of the Target Award that shall be eligible for vesting in accordance with the following table shall be 100%.
Performance Level
  
Relative TSR Percentile
  
Vested % of Target Award
Maximum
  
75th or greater
  
150%
Target
  
50th
  
100%
Threshold
  
25th
  
50%
(ii)
In no event shall the Participant be awarded more than 150% of the Target Award. If the Company’s percentile rank of TSR is below
the 25  percentile, no portion of the Target Award will vest.
(iii)
If the Company’s percentile rank of TSR should fall between two of the percentiles set forth above, the percentage of the Target Award
that shall vest shall be determined based on straight-line interpolation between the applicable figures.
(iv)
Any Performance Share Units that are not vested as of the last day of the Vesting Period shall immediately be forfeited and cancelled
without consideration.
3.2
Payment. Any Performance Share Units which vest in accordance with Section 3.1 (following application of Section 3.3), and any Dividend
Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid to the Participant in Shares, less applicable withholding taxes, within thirty (30) days
following the last day of the Vesting Period; provided, that any fractional Shares shall be paid in cash.
3.3
Termination of Service. Upon termination of employment (or other service) with the Employer for any reason on or prior to the last day of the
Vesting Period, the Performance Share Units shall be forfeited without any consideration; provided, however, that, (i) upon termination of employment by the
Employer without Employer’s Good Cause or by the Participant with Participant’s Good Cause, a pro-rata portion of the Performance Share Units, if any, that
would have become vested (but for such termination) under the schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein, shall vest, such proration determined based on the
number of days Participant was employed during the Vesting Period plus an additional twelve (12) months (or, if shorter, through the end of the Vesting Period),
and, together with any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid on the same schedule determined in Section 3.2 herein,
(ii) upon termination of employment due to the Participant’s Retirement, so long as the date of termination is at least 6 months following the Effective Date, the
Performance Share Units, if any, that would have become vested (but for such termination) under the schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein, shall vest and,
together with any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid on the same schedule determined in Section 3.2 herein, and
(iii) upon termination of employment due to the Participant’s death or Disability, the Performance Share Units, if any, that would have become vested under the
schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein if the Vesting Period ended on the date of termination (rather than the third anniversary of the Effective Date) shall vest,
and, together with any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid to the Participant within thirty (30) days following the
date of termination. Any continued vesting provided for in the preceding sentence shall immediately cease and unvested Performance Share Units shall be forfeited
in the event the Participant breaches any post-termination covenant with the Company or its affiliate in an employment agreement or set forth in Section 3.11
below (after taking into account any applicable cure period).
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if Participant qualifies at the time of termination of employment for both a termination of employment due to
Retirement (determined without regard to the 90-day notice requirement) and a termination by the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause, Participant shall be
permitted to designate whether Participant’s employment is due to Participant’s Retirement or by the Employer without Employer’s Good Cause.
3.4
Committee Discretion. The Committee, in its discretion, may accelerate the vesting of the Target Award up to the maximum amount described in
Section 3.1 above, at any time, subject to the terms of the Plan and
th
th
5

this Agreement and Section 409A. If so accelerated, the Performance Share Units will be considered as having vested as of the date specified by the Committee or
an applicable written agreement, but the Committee will have no right to accelerate any payment under this Agreement if such acceleration would cause this
Agreement to fail to comply with, or give rise to any tax, penalty or interest under, Section 409A.
3.5
Stockholder Rights and Dividend Equivalents.
A.
Participant will have no rights as a stockholder with respect to any Shares subject to Performance Share Units until the Performance
Share Units have vested and Shares relating thereto have been issued and recorded on the records of the Company or its transfer agent or registrars.
B.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this award shall accrue dividend equivalents with respect to dividends that would otherwise be paid on
the Shares underlying the award during the period from the date of grant to the date such Performance Share Unit is earned and the underlying Shares delivered.
On each dividend payment date during such period, the award shall accrue a target number of dividend equivalents equal to (A) the sum of (i) the number of
Performance Share Units subject to the Target Award, plus (ii) the number of dividend equivalents previously accrued, multiplied by (B) the applicable per-share
dividend amount and divided by (C) the then-current Fair Market Value. The dividend equivalent shall be subject to the same vesting, settlement and other
conditions applicable to the Performance Share Units on which such dividend equivalents are accrued. As such, the determination of the number of dividend
equivalents which vest and are payable pursuant to the award shall be determined as the product of (a) the sum of all dividend equivalents determined in
accordance with this Section 3.5(ii) and (b) a fraction equal to (i) the number of Performance Share Units which vest in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement divided by (ii) the number of Performance Share Units subject to the Target Award.
3.6
Limits on Transferability. The Performance Share Units granted under this Agreement may be transferred solely to a trust in which the
Participant or the Participant’s spouse control the management of the assets. With respect to Performance Share Units, if any, that have been transferred to a trust,
references in this Agreement to vesting related to such Performance Share Units shall be deemed to include such trust. Any transfer of Performance Share Units
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement and the transferee shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as if it were the
Participant. No interest of the Participant under this Agreement shall be subject to attachment, execution, garnishment, sequestration, the laws of bankruptcy or any
other legal or equitable process.
3.7
Adjustments. If there is any change in the Shares by reason of any stock dividend, recapitalization, reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-
up, combination or exchange of Shares, or any similar change affecting the Shares the Committee will make appropriate and proportionate adjustments (including
relating to the Shares, other securities, cash or other consideration which may be acquired upon vesting of the Performance Share Units) that it deems necessary to
the number and class of securities subject to the Performance Share Units and any other terms of this Agreement. Any adjustment so made shall be final and
binding upon the Participant.
3.8
No Right to Continued Performance of Services. The grant of the Performance Share Units does not confer upon the Participant any right to
continue to be employed by the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) nor may it interfere in any way with the
right of the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) for which the Participant performs services to terminate the
Participant’s employment at any time.
3.9
Compliance With Law and Regulations. The grant and vesting of Performance Share Units and the obligation of the Company to issue Shares
under this Agreement are subject to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations, including those related to disclosure of financial and other
information to the Participant and to approvals by any government or regulatory agency as may be required. The Company shall not be required to issue or deliver
any certificates for Shares prior to (A) the listing of such shares on any stock exchange on which the Shares may then be listed and (B) the completion of any
registration or qualification of such shares under any federal or state law, or any rule or regulation of any government body which the Company shall, in its sole
discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable.
3.10 Corporate Transaction. Upon the occurrence of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar transaction, unless otherwise
specifically prohibited under applicable laws or by the applicable rules and regulations of any governing governmental agencies or national securities exchanges,
the Committee is authorized (but not obligated) to make adjustments in the terms and conditions of the Performance Share Units, including without limitation the
following (or any combination thereof): (i) continuation or assumption of the Performance Share Units by the Company (if it is the surviving company or
corporation) or by the surviving company or corporation or its parent; (ii) substitution by the surviving company or corporation or its parent of an award with
substantially the same terms for the Performance Share Units; (iii) accelerated vesting with respect to the
6

Performance Share Units immediately prior to the occurrence of such event and payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days thereafter; and (iv) cancellation
of all or any portion of the Performance Share Units for fair value (in the form of cash or its equivalent (e.g., by check), other property or any combination thereof)
as determined in the sole discretion of the Committee and which value may be zero (if the value of the underlying stock is zero), and payment to the Participant
within thirty (30) days thereafter.
3.11 Participant Covenants. The Participant acknowledges that, in the course of performing his or her responsibilities to the Employer, the Participant
will form relationships and become acquainted with Confidential Information. The Participant further acknowledges that such relationships and the Confidential
Information are valuable to the Employer, and the restrictions on his or her future employment contained in this Section 3.11, if any, are reasonably necessary in
order for the Employer to remain competitive in its various businesses. In consideration of the benefits provided under this Agreement (including, but not limited
to, the potential vesting continuation or acceleration under Section 3.3 hereof), and in recognition of the Employer’s heightened need for protection from abuse of
relationships formed or Confidential Information garnered during the Participant’s employment with the Employer, Participant hereby agrees to the following
covenants as a condition of receipt of the benefits provided under this Agreement:
A.
Non-Competition. During the entire Restrictive Period, the Participant shall not directly or indirectly be employed by, provide
consultation or other services to, engage in, participate in or otherwise be connected in any way with any “Competitor” in any capacity that is the same,
substantially the same or similar to the position or capacity (irrespective of title or department) as that held at any time during Participant’s employment with the
Company. During the entire Vesting Period, if the Participant directly or indirectly becomes employed by, provides consultation or other services to, engages in,
participates in or otherwise becomes connected in any way with any “Competitor”, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.3 of this Agreement will
immediately terminate and all of such Participant’s then outstanding Performance Share Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date Participant
becomes employed by or otherwise associated in any way with a Competitor.
B.
Non-Solicitation. In addition, during the Restrictive Period under this Section 3.11: (A) the Participant will not call on, solicit, induce to
leave and/or take away, or attempt to call on, solicit, induce to leave and/or take away, any Business Contacts of Employer, and (B) the Participant will not
approach, solicit, contract with or hire any current Business Contacts of Employer or entice any Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship with Employer or
end his/her employment with Employer, without the prior written consent of Company, in each and every instance, such consent to be within Company’s sole and
absolute discretion. During the entire Vesting Period, if the Participant (x) calls on, solicits, induces to leave and/or takes away, or attempts to call on, solicit,
induce to leave and/or take away, any Business Contacts of Employer or (y) approaches, solicits, contracts with or hires any current Business Contacts of Employer
or entices any Business Contact to cease his/her/its relationship with Employer or end his/her employment with Employer, without the prior written consent of
Company, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.3 of this Agreement will immediately terminate and all of such Participant’s then outstanding
Performance Share Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date of such action.
C.
Non-Disclosure and Confidentiality. The Participant will not make known to any Competitor and/or any member, manager, officer,
director, employee or agent of a Competitor, the Business Contacts of Employer. The Participant further covenants and agrees that at all times during Participant’s
employment with the Company, and at all times thereafter, Participant shall not, without the prior written consent of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, Chief
Operating Officer or General Counsel in each and every instance—such consent to be within the Company’s sole and absolute discretion—use, disclose or make
known to any person, entity or other third party outside of the Employer any Confidential Information belonging to Employer or its individual members.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to Confidential Information: (A) that is required to be disclosed by law or by any
court, arbitrator, mediator or administrative or legislative body (including any committee thereof) in any litigation, arbitration, mediation or legislative hearing,
with jurisdiction to order Participant to disclose or make accessible any information, provided, however, that Participant provides Company with ten (10) days’
advance written notice of such disclosure to enable Company to seek a protective order or other relief to protect the confidentiality of such Confidential
Information; (B) that becomes generally known to the public or within the relevant trade or industry other than due to Participant’s or any third party’s violation of
this Section 3.11 or other obligation of confidentiality; or (C) that becomes available to Participant on a non-confidential basis from a source that is legally entitled
to disclose it to Participant.
D.
Forfeiture. It is a condition to the receipt of any benefits under this Agreement that, in the event of any breach of the Participant’s
obligations under this Section 3.11, the continued vesting provided for under Section 3.3 of this Agreement will immediately terminate and all of the Participant’s
then outstanding Performance Share Units will immediately terminate and be forfeited as of the date the Company determines that such a breach has occurred.
7

Nothing contained in this Section 3.11 limits or otherwise prohibits the Participant from filing a charge or complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Securities and Exchange Commission or any other
federal, state or local governmental agency or commission (“Government Agencies”). Further, this Section 3.11 does not limit the Participant’s ability to
communicate with any Government Agencies or otherwise participate in any investigation or proceeding that may be conducted by any Government Agency,
including providing documents or other information (subject to the paragraph below), without notice to the Company. This Section 3.11 does not limit the
Participant’s right to receive an award for information provided to any Government Agencies.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 3.11 or otherwise, pursuant to the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016, the Company hereby advises the
Participant as follows: (A) an individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable under any Federal or State trade secret law for the disclosure of a trade secret
that (i) is made (a) in confidence to a Federal, State, or local government official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and (b) solely for the purpose of
reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law; or (ii) is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or other proceeding, if such filing is made
under seal; and (B) an individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a suspected violation of law may disclose the trade secret to the
attorney of the individual and use the trade secret information in the court proceeding, if the individual (i) files any document containing the trade secret under seal;
and (ii) does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order.
The Participant agrees to notify the Company immediately of any other persons or entities for whom he or she works or provide services within the Vesting Period
(excluding occasional consulting services for a non-Competitor, and similar activities), and to provide such information as the Company may reasonably request
regarding such work or services during the Vesting Period within a reasonable time following such request. If the Participant fails to provide such notice or
information, which failure is not cured by you within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from the Company, any right to continued vesting under Section
3.3 shall immediately cease. The Participant further agrees to promptly notify the Company, within the Vesting Period, of any contacts made by any Competitor
which concern or relate to an offer to employ the Participant or for the Participant to provide consulting or other services during the Vesting Period.
4. Investment Representation. The Participant must, within five (5) days of demand by the Company furnish the Company an agreement satisfactory to the
Company in which the Participant represents that the Shares acquired upon vesting are being acquired for investment. The Company will have the right, at its
election, to place legends on the certificates representing the Shares so being issued with respect to limitations on transferability imposed by federal and/or state
laws, and the Company will have the right to issue “stop transfer” instructions to its transfer agent.
5. Participant Bound by Plan. The Participant hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Plan and agrees to be bound by all the terms and provisions
thereof as amended from time to time.
6. Withholding. The Company or any Parent or Subsidiary shall have the right and is hereby authorized to withhold, any applicable withholding taxes in
respect of the Performance Share Units awarded by this Agreement, their grant, vesting or otherwise, and to take such other action as may be necessary in the
opinion of the Company to satisfy all obligations for the payment of such withholding taxes, which may include, without limitation, reducing the number of shares
otherwise distributable to the Participant by the number of Shares whose Fair Market Value is equal to the amount of tax required to be withheld by the Company
or a Parent or Subsidiary as a result of the vesting or settlement or otherwise of the Performance Share Units.
7. Notices. Any notice hereunder to the Company must be addressed to: MGM Resorts International, 3600 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas, Nevada
89109, Attention: 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan Administrator, and any notice hereunder to the Participant must be addressed to the Participant at the Participant’s
last address on the records of the Company, subject to the right of either party to designate at any time hereafter in writing some other address. Any notice shall be
deemed to have been duly given on personal delivery or three (3) days after being sent in a properly sealed envelope, addressed as set forth above, and deposited
(with first class postage prepaid) in the United States mail.
8. Entire Agreement. This Agreement and the Plan constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to the subject matter hereof and
shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and including, without limitation,
any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether
previously entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future that includes terms and conditions regarding equity awards) which relate to the subject
matter hereof.
8

9. Waiver. No waiver of any breach or condition of this Agreement shall be deemed a waiver of any other or subsequent breach or condition whether of like
or different nature.
10.
Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional action and execute whatever additional documents the Company may
deem necessary or advisable to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed on either the Participant or the Performance Share Units
pursuant to this Agreement.
11.
Successors and Assigns. The provisions of this Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, the Company and its successors and
assigns and upon the Participant, the Participant’s assigns and the legal representatives, heirs and legatees of the Participant’s estate, whether or not any such
person shall have become a party to this Agreement and agreed in writing to be joined herein and be bound by the terms hereof.
12.
Governing Law. The parties hereto agree that the validity, construction and interpretation of this Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the
state of Nevada.
13.
Arbitration. Except as otherwise provided in Exhibit A to this Agreement (which constitutes a material provision of this Agreement), disputes
relating to this Agreement shall be resolved by arbitration pursuant to Exhibit A hereto.
14.
Clawback Policy. By accepting this award the Participant hereby agrees that this award and any other compensation paid or payable to the
Participant is subject to Company’s Policy on Recovery of Incentive Compensation in Event of Financial Restatement (or any successor policy) as in effect from
time to time, and that this award shall be considered a bonus for purposes of such policy. In addition, the Participant agrees that such policy may be amended from
time to time by the Board in a manner designed to comply with applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements. The Participant also hereby agrees that
the award granted hereunder and any other compensation payable to the Participant shall be subject to recovery (in whole or in part) by the Company to the
minimum extent required by applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements.
15.
Amendment. This Agreement may not be altered, modified, or amended except by written instrument signed by the parties hereto; provided, that
the Company may alter, modify or amend this Agreement unilaterally if such change is not materially adverse to the Participant or to cause this Agreement to
comply with applicable law or avoid the imposition of any tax, interest or penalty under Section 409A.
16.
Severability. The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any portion of this Agreement is declared contrary to any law, regulation or is
otherwise invalid, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall nevertheless be binding and enforceable.
17.
Execution. Each party agrees that an electronic, facsimile or digital signature or an online acceptance or acknowledgment will be accorded the
full legal force and effect of a handwritten signature under Nevada law. This Agreement may be signed in counterparts, each of which shall be an original, with the
same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon the same instrument.
18.
Variation of Pronouns.. All pronouns and any variations thereof contained herein shall be deemed to refer to masculine, feminine, neuter,
singular or plural, as the identity of the person or persons may require.
19.
Tax Treatment; Section 409A. The Participant shall be responsible for all taxes with respect to the Performance Share Units. Notwithstanding the
forgoing or any provision of the Plan or this Agreement:
19.1 The parties agree that this Agreement shall be interpreted to comply with or be exempt from Section 409A, and all provisions of this Agreement
shall be construed in a manner consistent with the requirements for avoiding taxes or penalties under Section 409A. If any provision of this Agreement or the Plan
contravenes Section 409A or could cause the Participant to incur any tax, interest or penalties under Section 409A, the Committee may, in its sole discretion and
without the Participant’s consent, modify such provision in order to comply with the requirements of Section 409A or to satisfy the conditions of any exception
therefrom, or otherwise to avoid the imposition of the additional income tax and interest under Section 409A, while maintaining, to the maximum extent
practicable, the original intent and economic benefit to the Participant, without materially increasing the cost to the Company, of the applicable provision.
However, the Company makes no guarantee regarding the tax treatment of the Performance Share Units and none of the Company, its Parent, Subsidiaries or
affiliates, nor any of their employees or representatives shall have any liability to the Participant with respect thereto.
9

19.2 A termination of employment shall not be deemed to have occurred for purposes of any provision of this Agreement providing for the payment
of any amounts or benefits considered “nonqualified deferred compensation” under Section 409A upon or following a termination of employment unless such
termination is also a “separation from service” within the meaning of Section 409A and, for purposes of any such provision of this Agreement, references to a
“termination,” “termination of employment” or like terms shall mean “separation from service.” If the Participant is deemed on the date of termination to be a
“specified employee” within the meaning of that term under Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B), then with regard to any payment or the provision of any benefit that is
considered nonqualified deferred compensation under Section 409A payable on account of a “separation from service,” such payment or benefit shall be made or
provided at the date which is the earlier of (i) the expiration of the six (6)-month period measured from the date of such “separation from service” of the
Participant, and (ii) the date of the Participant’s death (the “Delay Period”). Upon the expiration of the Delay Period, all payments and benefits delayed pursuant to
this Section 19.2 (whether they would have otherwise been payable in a single sum or in installments in the absence of such delay) shall be paid or reimbursed on
the first business day following the expiration of the Delay Period to the Participant in a lump sum, and any remaining payments and benefits due under this
Agreement shall be paid or provided in accordance with the normal payment dates specified for them herein.
19.3 For purposes of Section 409A, the Participant’s right to receive any installment payments pursuant to this Agreement shall be treated as a right to
receive a series of separate and distinct payments. Whenever a payment under this Agreement specifies a payment period with reference to a number of days (e.g.,
“payment shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of termination”), the actual date of payment within the specified period shall be within the sole
discretion of the Company.
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
 
10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Performance Share Units Agreement as of the date first written above.
 
MGM RESORTS
INTERNATIONAL
By:
  
Name:
 
Title:
 
PARTICIPANT
By:
  
Name:
 
 
[Signature Page to Performance Share Units Agreement]

EXHIBIT A
ARBITRATION
This Exhibit A sets forth the methods for resolving disputes should any arise under the Agreement, and accordingly, this Exhibit A shall be considered a part
of the Agreement.
 
1.    Except for a claim by either Participant or the Company for injunctive relief where such would be otherwise authorized by law, any controversy or claim
arising out of or relating to the Agreement or the breach hereof including without limitation any claim involving the interpretation or application of the Agreement
or the Plan, shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with the employment arbitration rules then in effect of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation
Service (“JAMS”), to the extent not inconsistent with this paragraph. This Exhibit A covers any claim Participant might have against any officer, director,
employee, or agent of the Company, or any of the Company’s subsidiaries, divisions, and affiliates, and all successors and assigns of any of them. The promises by
the Company and Participant to arbitrate differences, rather than litigate them before courts or other bodies, provide consideration for each other, in addition to
other consideration provided under the Agreement.
 
2.    Claims Subject to Arbitration: This Exhibit A contemplates mandatory arbitration to the fullest extent permitted by law. Only claims that are justiciable under
applicable state or federal law are covered by this Exhibit A. Such claims include any and all alleged violations of any state or federal law whether common law,
statutory, arising under regulation or ordinance, or any other law, brought by any current or former employees.
 
3.    Non-Waiver of Substantive Rights: This Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies available under applicable statutes or common law. However, it does
waive Participant’s right to pursue those rights and remedies in a judicial forum. By signing the Agreement and the acknowledgment at the end of this Exhibit A,
the undersigned Participant voluntarily agrees to arbitrate his or her claims covered by this Exhibit A.
 
4.    Time Limit to Pursue Arbitration; Initiation: To ensure timely resolution of disputes, Participant and the Company must initiate arbitration within the statute of
limitations (deadline for filing) provided for by applicable law pertaining to the claim. The failure to initiate arbitration within this time limit will bar any such
claim. The parties understand that the Company and Participant are waiving any longer statutes of limitations that would otherwise apply, and any aggrieved party
is encouraged to give written notice of any claim as soon as possible after the event(s) in dispute so that arbitration of any differences may take place promptly.
The parties agree that the aggrieved party must, within the time frame provided by this Exhibit A, give written notice of a claim pursuant to Section 7 of the
Agreement. In the event such notice is to be provided to the Company, the Participant shall provide a copy of such notice of a claim to the Company’s Executive
Vice President and General Counsel. Written notice shall identify and describe the nature of the claim, the supporting facts and the relief or remedy sought.
5.    Selecting an Arbitrator: This Exhibit A mandates Arbitration under the then current rules of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service (JAMS) regarding
employment disputes. The arbitrator shall be either a retired judge or an attorney experienced in employment law and licensed to practice in the state in which
arbitration is convened. The parties shall select one arbitrator from among a list of three qualified neutral arbitrators provided by JAMS. If the parties are unable to
agree on the arbitrator, each party shall strike one name and the remaining named arbitrator shall be selected.
6.    Representation/Arbitration Rights and Procedures:
 
     a.    Participant may be represented by an attorney of his/her choice at his/her own expense.
 
     b.    The arbitrator shall apply the substantive law (and the law of remedies, if applicable) of Nevada (without regard to its choice of law provisions) and/or
federal law when applicable. In all cases, this Exhibit A shall provide for the broadest level of arbitration of claims between the Company and Participant under
Nevada or applicable federal law. The arbitrator is without jurisdiction to apply any different substantive law or law of remedies.
 
     c.    The arbitrator shall have no authority to award non-economic damages or punitive damages except where such relief is specifically authorized by an
applicable state or federal statute or common law. In such a situation, the arbitrator shall specify in the award the specific statute or other basis under which such
relief is granted.
 
     d.    The applicable law with respect to privilege, including attorney-client privilege, work product, and offers to compromise must be followed.
 
     e.    The parties shall have the right to conduct reasonable discovery, including written and oral (deposition) discovery and to subpoena and/or request copies of
records, documents and other relevant discoverable information consistent with the procedural rules of JAMS. The arbitrator shall decide disputes regarding the
scope of discovery and shall have authority to regulate the conduct of any hearing and/or trial proceeding. The arbitrator shall have the right to entertain a motion
to dismiss and/or motion for summary judgment.
12

 
     f.    The parties shall exchange witness lists at least 30 days prior to the trial/hearing procedure. The arbitrator shall have subpoena power so that either
Participant or the Company may summon witnesses. The arbitrator shall use the Federal Rules of Evidence. Both parties have the right to file a post hearing brief.
Any party, at its own expense, may arrange for and pay the cost of a court reporter to provide a stenographic record of the proceedings.
 
     g.    Any arbitration hearing or proceeding shall take place in private, not open to the public, in Las Vegas, Nevada.
 
7.    Arbitrator’s Award: The arbitrator shall issue a written decision containing the specific issues raised by the parties, the specific findings of fact, and the
specific conclusions of
     law. The award shall be rendered promptly, typically within 30 days after conclusion of the arbitration hearing, or the submission of post-hearing briefs if
requested. The arbitrator may not award any relief or remedy in excess of what a court could grant under applicable law. The arbitrator’s decision is final and
binding on both parties.. Judgment upon an award rendered by the arbitrator may be entered in any court having competent jurisdiction.
 
     a.    Either party may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel arbitration under this Exhibit A and to enforce an arbitration award.
 
     b.    In the event of any administrative or judicial action by any agency or third party to adjudicate a claim on behalf of Participant which is subject to arbitration
under this Exhibit A, Participant hereby waives the right to participate in any monetary or other recovery obtained by such agency or third party in any such action,
and Participant’s sole remedy with respect to any such claim shall be any award decreed by an arbitrator pursuant to the provisions of this Exhibit A.
 
8.    Fees and Expenses: The Company shall be responsible for paying any filing fee and the fees and costs of the arbitrator; provided, however, that if Participant is
the party initiating the claim, Participant will contribute an amount equal to the filing fee to initiate a claim in the court of general jurisdiction in the state in which
Participant is (or was last) employed by the Company. Participant and the Company shall each pay for their own expenses, attorney’s fees (a party’s responsibility
for his/her/its own attorney’s fees is only limited by any applicable statute specifically providing that attorney’s fees may be awarded as a remedy), and costs and
fees regarding witness, photocopying and other preparation expenses. If any party prevails on a statutory claim that affords the prevailing party attorney’s fees and
costs, or if there is a written agreement providing for attorney’s fees and/or costs, the arbitrator may award reasonable attorney’s fees and/or costs to the prevailing
party, applying the same standards a court would apply under the law applicable to the claim(s).
 
9.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A shall survive the termination of Participant’s employment with the Company and the expiration of the Agreement.
These arbitration provisions can only be modified or revoked in a writing signed by both parties and which expressly states an intent to modify or revoke the
provisions of this Exhibit A.
 
10.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A do not alter or affect the termination provisions of this Agreement.
 
11.    Capitalized terms not defined in this Exhibit A shall have the same definition as in the Agreement to which this is Exhibit A.
 
12.    If any provision of this Exhibit A is adjudged to be void or otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of Exhibit A. All other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
 
13

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
BOTH PARTIES ACKNOWLEDGE THAT: THEY HAVE CAREFULLY READ THIS EXHIBIT A IN ITS ENTIRETY, THEY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS,
EXHIBIT A CONSTITUTES A MATERIAL TERM AND CONDITION OF THE PERFORMANCE SHARE UNITS AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES
TO WHICH IT IS EXHIBIT A, AND THEY AGREE TO ABIDE BY ITS TERMS.
The parties also specifically acknowledge that by agreeing to the terms of this Exhibit A, they are waiving the right to pursue claims covered by this Exhibit A in a
judicial forum and instead agree to arbitrate all such claims before an arbitrator without a court or jury. It is specifically understood that this Exhibit A does not
waive any rights or remedies which are available under applicable state and federal statutes or common law. Both parties enter into this Exhibit A voluntarily and
not in reliance on any promises or representation by the other party other than those contained in the Agreement or in this Exhibit A.
Participant further acknowledges that Participant has been given the opportunity to discuss this Exhibit A with Participant’s private legal counsel and that
Participant has availed himself/herself of that opportunity to the extent Participant wishes to do so.
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
14

Exhibit C
Name of Report
  Generated By
Including, but not limited to:
  
Arrival Report
  Room Reservation/Casino Marketing
Departure Report
  Room Reservation/Casino Marketing
Master Gaming Report
  Casino Audit
Department Financial Statement
  Finance
$5K Over High Action Play Report
  Casino Marketing
$50K Over High Action Play Report
  Casino Marketing
Collection Aging Report(s)
  Collection Department
Accounts Receivable Aging
  Finance
Marketing Reports
  Marketing
Daily Player Action Report
  Casino Operations
Daily Operating Report
  Slot Department
Database Marketing Reports
  Database Marketing
Special Event Calendar(s)
  Special Events/Casino Marketing
Special Event Analysis
  Special Events/Casino Marketing
Tenant Gross Sales Reports
  Finance
Convention Group Tentative/Confirmed Pacing Reports
  Convention Sales
Entertainment Event Settlement Reports
  Finance
Event Participation Reports
  Casino Marketing
Table Ratings
  Various
Top Players
  Various
Promotion Enrollment
  Promotions
Player Win/Loss
  Various
 

Exhibit 21
Subsidiaries of MGM Resorts International
Listed below are the majority-owned subsidiaries of MGM Resorts International as of December 31, 2021. The names of certain subsidiaries have been omitted
because considered in the aggregate as a single subsidiary they would not constitute a significant subsidiary.
Blue Tarp reDevelopment, LLC
Massachusetts
Destron, Inc.
Nevada
Destron International Corp.
Philippines
MGM Grand (International), Pte Ltd.
Singapore
MGM Resorts International Marketing, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Resorts International Marketing, Ltd.
Hong Kong
Las Vegas Arena Management, LLC
Nevada
Mandalay Resort Group, LLC
Nevada
550 Leasing Company II, LLC
Nevada
Circus Circus Casinos, Inc.
Nevada
Mandalay Bay, LLC
Nevada
Mandalay Employment, LLC
Nevada
Mandalay Place LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Festival Grounds, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Festival Grounds II, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Mississippi, LLC
Mississippi
Park MGM, LLC (f/k/a Victoria Partners, LLC)
Nevada
Arena Land Holdings, LLC
Nevada
New York-New York Tower, LLC
Nevada
Park District Holdings, LLC
Nevada
New Castle, LLC
Nevada
Ramparts, LLC
Nevada
Circus Circus Holdings, Inc.
Nevada
Vintage Land Holdings, LLC
Nevada
Northfield Park Associates LLC
Ohio
Cedar Downs OTB, LLC
Ohio
Beau Rivage Resorts, LLC
Mississippi
Metropolitan Marketing, LLC
Nevada
MMNY Land Company, Inc.
New York
MGM Detroit Holdings, LLC (f/k/a MGM Grand Detroit, Inc.)
Delaware
MGM Grand Detroit, LLC
Delaware
MGM Grand Hotel, LLC
Nevada
The Signature Condominiums, LLC
Nevada
Signature Tower I, LLC
Nevada
Signature Tower 2, LLC
Nevada
Signature Tower 3, LLC
Nevada
MGM Growth Properties LLC
Delaware
MGM Growth Properties OP GP LLC
Delaware
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP
Delaware
MGP JV Investco 1 LLC
Delaware
MGP BREIT Venture 1 LLC*
Delaware
MGM Grand Propco, LLC*
Delaware
Mandalay Propco, LLC*
Delaware
MGP Finance Co-Issuer Inc.
Delaware
MGP Lessor Holdings, LLC
Delaware
MGP Lessor, LLC
Delaware
YRL Associates L.P.
New York

MGP Yonkers Realty Sub, LLC
New York
MGM Springfield reDevelopment, LLC
Massachusetts
MGP Lessor II, LLC
Delaware
MGM Hospitality, LLC
Nevada
MGM Hospitality Global, LLC
MGM Hospitality International, LP
MGM Hospitality International, GP, Ltd.
Nevada
Cayman Islands
Cayman Islands
MGM Hospitality Holdings, LLC
Dubai
MGM Hospitality Development, LLC
Dubai
MGM Hospitality International Holdings, Ltd.
Isle of Man
MGM Asia Pacific Limited (f/k/a MGM Resorts China Holdings Limited)
Hong Kong
MGM (Beijing) Hospitality Services Co., Ltd.
Beijing
MGM Hospitality India Private, Ltd.
India
MGM International, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts International Holdings, Ltd.
Isle of Man
MGM China Holdings, Ltd.
Cayman Islands
MGM Resorts West Japan, LLC
Japan
MGM Japan Indirect Holdco I, LLC
Nevada
MGM Japan Holdco LP
Nevada
MGM Resorts Japan, LLC
Japan
MGM Japan Indirect Holdco II, LLC
Nevada
MGM Lessee, LLC
Delaware
MGM Lessee II, LLC
Delaware
MGM National Harbor, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Advertising, Inc.
Nevada
VidiAd
Nevada
MGM Resorts Arena Holdings, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Development, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Global Development, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts International Operations, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Resorts Land Holdings, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Interactive, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Regional Operations, LLC
MGM Resorts Retail
Nevada
Nevada
MGM Resorts Sub 1, LLC
Nevada
Las Vegas Basketball Ventures, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Satellite, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Sub B, LLC
Nevada
MGM Public Policy, LLC
Nevada
Park Theater, LLC
Nevada
Grand Garden Arena Management, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Venue Management, LLC
Nevada
MGM MA Sub, LLC (f/k/a MGM Springfield, LLC)
Massachusetts
MGMM Insurance Company
Nevada
Mirage Resorts, LLC
Nevada
AC Holding Corp.
Nevada
AC Holding Corp. II
Nevada
Bellagio, LLC
Nevada
LV Concrete Corp.
Nevada
MAC, CORP.
New Jersey
Marina District Development Holding Co., LLC
New Jersey
Marina District Development Company, LLC (dba Borgata)
New Jersey

MGM Resorts Aviation Corp.
Nevada
MGM Resorts Corporate Services
Nevada
MGM Resorts Design & Development
Nevada
MGM Resorts Manufacturing Corp.
Nevada
MH, Inc.
Nevada
Mirage Laundry Services Corp.
Nevada
MGM CC, LLC
Nevada
Project CC, LLC
Nevada
Aria Resort & Casino, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Facilities Management, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Realty Corporation
Nevada
CityCenter Retail Holdings Management, LLC
Nevada
Vdara Condo Hotel, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Holdings, LLC
Delaware
MGM Lessee III, LLC
Delaware
CityCenter Land, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Boutique Hotel Holdings, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Boutique Residential Development, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Harmon Development, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Harmon Hotel Holdings, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Veer Towers Development, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Retail Holdings, LLC
Nevada
Aria Resort & Casino Holdings, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Vdara Development, LLC
Nevada
MGM CC Holdings, Inc.
Nevada
New York-New York Hotel & Casino, LLC
Nevada
PRMA, LLC
Nevada
PRMA Land Development Company
Nevada
The Mirage Casino-Hotel, LLC
Nevada
MGM Sports & Interactive Gaming, LLC
Delaware
MGM Live Event Ventures, LLC
Nevada
MGM Dev, LLC
Delaware
MGM Yonkers, Inc.
New York
MGM Resorts Sub X, LLC
Delaware
MGM Resorts Sub Y, LLC
Delaware
MGM Resorts Sub Z, LLC
Delaware
Grand Laundry, Inc.
Nevada
Tower B, LLC
Nevada
Tower C, LLC
Nevada
Vendido, LLC
Nevada
*MGP BREIT Venture 1 LLC is owned 50.1% by MGP JV Investco 1 LLC and 49.9% by BCORE Windmill Parent LLC. MGP BREIT Venture 1 LLC is not
controlled by the registrant or its subsidiaries and, accordingly it, and its subsidiaries, are not consolidated in the registrant’s financial statements.

Exhibit 22
List of Guarantor Subsidiaries of MGM Resorts International
The subsidiaries of MGM Resorts International (the “Company”) listed below have fully and unconditionally guaranteed the Company’s (i) 7.750% senior
notes due 2022, (ii) 6.000% senior notes due 2023, (iii) 5.750% senior notes due 2025, (iv) 6.75% senior notes due 2025, (v) 4.625% senior notes due 2026, (vi)
5.500% senior notes due 2027, and (vii) 4.75% senior notes due 2028 (collectively, the “MGM Notes”). In addition, Mandalay Resort Group, a wholly owned
subsidiary of the Company, is the issuer of 7.0% Debentures due 2036 (the “Mandalay Notes”), and the Company and the other subsidiaries listed below are
guarantors of the Mandalay Notes.
Name of Subsidiary
Issuer/Guarantor Status
550 Leasing Company II, LLC
(1)
AC Holding Corp.
(1)
AC Holding Corp. II
(1)
Arena Land Holdings, LLC
(1)
Aria Resort & Casino Holdings, LLC, dba Aria Resort & Casino
(1)
Aria Resort & Casino, LLC
(1)
Beau Rivage Resorts, LLC, dba Beau Rivage Resort & Casino
(1)
Bellagio, LLC, dba Bellagio
(1)
Cedar Downs OTB, LLC
(1)
Circus Circus Casinos, Inc.
(1)
Circus Circus Holdings, Inc.
(1)
CityCenter Boutique Hotel Holdings, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Boutique Residential Development, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Facilities Management, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Harmon Development, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Harmon Hotel Holdings, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Holdings, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Land, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Realty Corporation
(1)
CityCenter Retail Holdings, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Retail Holdings Management, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Vdara Development, LLC
(1)
CityCenter Veer Towers Development, LLC
(1)
Destron, Inc.
(1)
Grand Garden Arena Management, LLC
(1)
Grand Laundry, Inc.
(1)
Las Vegas Arena Management, LLC
(1)
LV Concrete Corp.
(1)
MAC, CORP.
(1)
Mandalay Bay, LLC, dba Mandalay Bay Resort & Casino
(1)
Mandalay Employment, LLC
(1)
Mandalay Place, LLC
(1)
Mandalay Resort Group, LLC
(2)
Marina District Development Company, LLC, dba The Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa
(1)
Marina District Development Holding Co., LLC
(1)
Metropolitan Marketing, LLC
(1)
MGM CC, LLC
(1)
MGM CC Holdings, Inc.
(1)
MGM Dev, LLC
(1)
- 1 -
41086.01500

MGM Detroit Holdings, LLC
(1)
MGM Grand Hotel, LLC, dba MGM Grand Hotel & Casino
(1)
MGM Hospitality, LLC
(1)
MGM International, LLC
(1)
MGM Lessee, LLC
(1)
MGM Lessee II, LLC
(1)
MGM Lessee III, LLC
(1)
MGM MA Sub, LLC
(1)
MGM Public Policy, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Advertising, Inc.
(1)
MGM Resorts Arena Holdings, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Aviation Corp.
(1)
MGM Resorts Corporate Services
(1)
MGM Resorts Design & Development
(1)
MGM Resorts Development, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Festival Grounds, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Festival Grounds II, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Global Development, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Interactive, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts International Marketing, Inc.
(1)
MGM Resorts International Operations, Inc.
(1)
MGM Resorts Land Holdings, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Manufacturing Corp.
(1)
MGM Resorts Mississippi, LLC, dba Gold Strike Tunica
(1)
MGM Resorts Regional Operations, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Retail
(1)
MGM Resorts Satellite, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Sub 1, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Sub B, LLC
(1)
MGM Resorts Venue Management, LLC
(1)
MGM Yonkers, Inc., dba Empire City Casino
(1)
MH, Inc., dba Shadow Creek
(1)
Mirage Laundry Services Corp.
(1)
Mirage Resorts, LLC
(1)
MMNY Land Company, Inc.
(1)
New Castle, LLC, dba Excalibur Hotel & Casino
(1)
New York-New York Hotel & Casino, LLC, dba New York-New York Hotel & Casino
(1)
New York-New York Tower, LLC
(1)
Northfield Park Associates LLC, dba MGM Northfield Park
(1)
Park District Holdings, LLC
(1)
Park MGM, LLC, dba Park MGM Las Vegas
(1)
Park Theater, LLC
(1)
PRMA, LLC
(1)
PRMA Land Development Company
(1)
Project CC, LLC
(1)
Ramparts, LLC, dba Luxor Hotel & Casino
(1)
Signature Tower I, LLC
(1)
Signature Tower 2, LLC
(1)
Signature Tower 3, LLC
(1)
The Mirage Casino-Hotel, LLC, dba The Mirage Casino-Hotel
(1)
- 2 -
41086.01500


The Signature Condominiums, LLC
(1)
Tower B, LLC
(1)
Tower C, LLC
(1)
Vdara Condo Hotel, LLC
(1)
Vendido, LLC
(1)
VidiAd
(1)
Vintage Land Holdings, LLC
(1)
_______________________________
(1)    Guarantor of the MGM Notes and the Mandalay Notes.
(2)    Issuer of the Mandalay Notes and guarantor of the MGM Notes.
- 3 -
41086.01500

Exhibit 23.1
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement No. 333-253680 on Form S-3 and Registration Statement Nos. 333-
00187, 333-22957, 333-42729, 333-73155, 333-77061, 333-50880, 333-105964, 333-124864, 333-160117, and 333-198011 on Form S-8, of
our reports dated February 25, 2022, relating to the financial statements of MGM Resorts International and the effectiveness of MGM Resorts
International’s internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International for the
year ended December 31, 2021.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Las Vegas, Nevada
February 25, 2022

Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATION
I, William J. Hornbuckle, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant
and have:
a)    designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)    designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)    evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)    disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and  
5.    The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)    all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)    any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
February 25, 2022
 
/s/ WILLIAM J.
HORNBUCKLE
William J. Hornbuckle
Chief Executive Officer and
President

Exhibit 31.2
CERTIFICATION
I, Jonathan S. Halkyard, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant
and have:
a)    designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)    designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)    evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)    disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)    all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)    any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
February 25, 2022
 
/s/ JONATHAN S.
HALKYARD
Jonathan S. Halkyard
Chief Financial Officer and
Treasurer

Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the Annual Report of MGM Resorts International (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2021 as filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, William J. Hornbuckle, Chief Executive Officer and President of the Company, certify,
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge, that:
(1)    The Report fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)    The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and result of operations of the Company.
 
/s/ WILLIAM J. HORNBUCKLE
William J. Hornbuckle
Chief Executive Officer and President
February 25, 2022
 
A signed original of this certification has been provided to the Company and will be retained by the Company and furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission or its staff upon request.

Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the Annual Report of MGM Resorts International (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2021 as filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Jonathan S. Halkyard, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer of the Company, certify,
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge, that:
(1)    The Report fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)    The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and result of operations of the Company.
 
/s/ JONATHAN S. HALKYARD
Jonathan S. Halkyard
Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
February 25, 2022
 
A signed original of this certification has been provided to the Company and will be retained by the Company and furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission or its staff upon request.
    

Exhibit 99.1
DESCRIPTION OF REGULATION AND LICENSING
The gaming industry is highly regulated, and we must maintain our licenses and pay gaming taxes to continue our operations. Each of our casinos is subject
to extensive regulation under the laws and regulations of the jurisdiction in which it is located. These laws and regulations generally concern the responsibility,
financial stability and character of the owners, managers, and persons with financial interest in the gaming operations. Violations of laws in one jurisdiction could
result  in  disciplinary  action  in  other  jurisdictions. Any  material  changes,  new  laws  or  regulations,  or  material  differences  in  interpretations  by  courts  or
governmental authorities could adversely affect our business and operating results.
In addition to gaming regulations, our businesses are subject to various federal, state, and local laws and regulations of the countries and states in which we
operate. These laws and regulations include, but are not limited to, restrictions and conditions concerning alcoholic beverages, smoking, environmental matters,
employment and immigration, currency transactions, taxation, zoning and building codes, land use, marketing and advertising, lending, privacy, telemarketing,
regulations  applicable  under  the  Office  of  Foreign  Asset  Control,  the  Foreign  Corrupt  Practices  Act  and  the  various  reporting  and  anti-money  laundering
regulations. Such laws and regulations could change or could be interpreted differently in the future, or new laws and regulations could be enacted. Any material
changes, new laws or regulations, or material differences in interpretations by courts or governmental authorities could adversely affect our business and operating
results.
Gaming Regulation Overview
In the jurisdictions in which we operate, gaming laws and regulations require, among other things:
•
the prevention of unsavory or unsuitable persons from having direct or indirect involvement with gaming at any time or in any capacity;
•
the establishment and maintenance of responsible accounting practices and procedures;
•
the maintenance of effective controls over the financial practices of licensees, including the establishment of minimum internal control procedures for
internal fiscal affairs and the safeguarding of assets and revenues;
•
reliable record keeping and the filing of periodic reports with our gaming regulators;
•
the prevention of cheating and fraudulent practices;
•
the qualification, licensing or registration of certain employees, vendors and other persons with a financial interest in or control or influence over
gaming operations;
•
the payment of gaming taxes, licensing fees and other regulatory fees;
•
maintenance of responsible gaming programs; and
•
compliance with community benefits agreements in our host and surrounding communities, where applicable.
Typically, regulatory environments in the jurisdictions in which we operate are established by legislation and are administered by a regulatory agency or
agencies  with  the  authority  to  interpret  their  gaming  enabling  legislation  and  regulations  promulgated  thereunder  and  have  broad  discretion  and  authority  to
regulate the affairs of owners, managers, and persons with financial interests in gaming operations. Gaming regulators in the various jurisdictions in which we
operate, among other things:
•
adopt regulations under their gaming enabling legislation;
•
investigate and enforce gaming laws and regulations;
•
impose disciplinary sanctions for violations, including fines and penalties;
•
review the character and fitness of participants in gaming operations and make determinations regarding their suitability or qualification for licensure;
•
grant licenses for participation in gaming operations;
•
collect and review reports and information submitted by participants in gaming operations;
•
review and approve transactions, such as acquisitions or change-of-control transactions of gaming industry participants, securities offerings and debt
transactions engaged in by such participants; and
•
establish and collect taxes and fees.

Any changes in the laws, regulations, and supervisory procedures of a gaming jurisdiction in which we operate could have an adverse effect on our business
and operating results.
Licensing, Suitability and Qualification Determinations
Gaming laws and regulations require us, each of our subsidiaries engaged in gaming operations, certain of our directors, officers and employees, and in some
cases, certain of our shareholders and holders of our debt securities, to obtain licenses or findings of suitability or qualification from gaming regulators. Licenses or
findings of suitability or qualification typically require a determination that the applicant satisfies specific criteria set forth in the applicable gaming laws and
regulations. Gaming regulators have broad discretion in determining whether an applicant qualifies for licensing or should be deemed suitable or qualified. Subject
to certain administrative proceeding requirements, gaming regulators have the authority to deny any application or limit, condition, restrict, revoke or suspend any
license, registration, finding of suitability, qualification or approval, or fine any person licensed, registered or found suitable or approved, for any cause deemed
reasonable  by the  gaming  regulator.  The  criteria  used  in  determining  whether  to  grant  or  renew  a  license  or  finding  of suitability  or  qualification  vary  from
jurisdiction-to-jurisdiction but generally include such factors as:
•
the good character, honesty and integrity of the applicant;
•
the  financial  stability,  integrity  and  responsibility  of  the  applicant,  including  whether  the  gaming  operation  in  the  jurisdiction  is  adequately
capitalized to pay winning wagers as and when due, meet ongoing operating expenses, pay all local, state and federal taxes as and when due, make
necessary capital and maintenance expenditures in a timely manner, and make all long-term and short-term debt payments and satisfy capital lease
obligations as and when due;
•
the quality of the applicant’s gaming facility and non-gaming amenities;
•
the total amount of the investment in the applicant’s gaming facility and non-gaming amenities;
•
the effect on competition and the general impact on the host and surrounding communities;
•
the amount of revenue to be derived by the applicable jurisdiction through the operation of the applicant’s gaming facility; and
•
the applicant’s practices with respect to minority and local hiring and training of its workforce.
In evaluating individual applicants, gaming regulators consider, among other things, the individual’s good character, honesty and integrity, financial stability,
criminal and financial history, and the character of those with whom the individual associates.
Many jurisdictions  limit  the number of licenses  granted  to operate  gaming facilities  within the jurisdiction,  and some jurisdictions  limit  the number of
licenses granted to any one gaming operator. For example, in Maryland, state law allows us to hold an interest in only one video lottery operation. Licenses under
gaming laws are generally not transferable, although some jurisdictions permit a transfer with the prior approval of the jurisdiction’s gaming regulator(s). Licenses
in many of the jurisdictions in which we conduct gaming operations are granted for limited durations and require renewal from time to time. There can be no
assurance that any of our licenses will be renewed.
A gaming license is generally a revocable privilege. Many jurisdictions have statutory or regulatory provisions that govern the required action that may be
taken in the event that a license is revoked or not renewed. For example, under New Jersey gaming laws, a conservator may be appointed by the New Jersey
Casino Control Commission (“NJCCC”) to assume complete operational control of the casino and the approved hotel facility upon the revocation of a casino
license, and the conservator may, at the direction of the NJCCC and after appropriate prior consultation with the former licensee as to the reasonableness of such
terms  and  conditions,  endeavor  to  and  be  authorized  to  sell,  assign,  convey  or  otherwise  dispose  of  in  bulk,  subject  to  any  and  all  valid  liens,  claims,  and
encumbrances, all the property of a former licensee relating to the casino and the approved hotel.
In addition to us and our direct and indirect subsidiaries engaged in gaming operations, gaming regulators may investigate any individual or entity having a
material relationship to, or material involvement with, any of these entities to determine whether such individual is suitable or should be licensed as a business
associate of a gaming licensee. Certain jurisdictions require that any change in our directors or officers, including the directors or officers of our subsidiaries, must
be approved by the requisite gaming regulator(s). Our officers, directors and certain key employees must also file applications with gaming regulators and may be
required to be licensed or be found suitable or qualified in many jurisdictions. Gaming regulators have broad discretion to deny an application for licensing.
Qualification and suitability determinations require submission of detailed personal and financial information followed by a thorough background investigation.
The applicant has the burden of demonstrating suitability or qualification for licensure, and the applicant ordinarily must pay all the costs of the investigation. In
addition to a gaming regulator’s authority to deny an application
2

for licensure or a finding of suitability or qualification, gaming regulators also generally have the authority to condition or limit licensure or a finding of suitability
or qualification, or disapprove of a change in an individual’s corporate position.
If  a  gaming  regulator  finds  that  an  officer,  director  or  key  employee  fails  to  qualify  or  is  unsuitable  for  licensing  or  unsuitable  to  continue  having  a
relationship  with  us,  we  would  ordinarily  have  to  sever  all  relationships  with  such  person.  In  addition,  gaming  regulators  may  require  us  to  terminate  the
employment of any person who refuses to file appropriate applications.
In many jurisdictions, any of our shareholders or holders of our debt securities may be required to file an application, be investigated, and qualify or have his,
her or its suitability determined. For example, under Nevada gaming laws, any beneficial holder of our voting securities, regardless of the number of shares owned,
may be required to file an application, be investigated, and have his or her suitability as a beneficial holder of the voting securities determined if either the Nevada
Gaming Commission (the “NGC”) has reason to believe that such ownership would otherwise be inconsistent with the declared policies of the State of Nevada, or
the  person  engages  in  certain  statutorily  proscribed  activities  which  influence  or  affect  the  affairs  of  a  holding  company  of  a  Nevada  gaming  licensee.  The
applicant must pay all costs of investigation incurred by the NGC and the Nevada Gaming Control Board (“NGCB”) in conducting any such investigation.
Furthermore, any person required by a gaming regulator to be found suitable, who is found unsuitable by the gaming regulator, shall not be able to hold
directly or indirectly the beneficial ownership of any voting security or the beneficial or record ownership of any nonvoting security or any debt security of any
public corporation which is registered with the gaming regulator (or otherwise subject to a finding of suitability or qualification as holding company of a gaming
licensee), such as MGM Resorts International, beyond the time prescribed by the gaming regulator. A finding of unsuitability by a particular gaming regulator
impacts that person’s ability to associate or affiliate with gaming licensees in that particular jurisdiction and could impact the person’s ability to associate or
affiliate with gaming licensees in other jurisdictions.
Many  jurisdictions  also  require  any  person  who  acquires  beneficial  ownership  of  more  than  a  certain  percentage  of  our  voting  securities  and,  in  some
jurisdictions, our non-voting securities, typically 5%, to report the acquisition to gaming regulators, and gaming regulators may require such holders to apply for
qualification or a finding of suitability. For example, Nevada gaming laws require any person who acquires more than 5% of any class of our voting securities to
report the acquisition to the NGC. Additionally, Nevada gaming laws require that beneficial owners of more than 10% of any class of our voting securities apply to
the NGC for a finding of suitability within 30 days after the Chair of the NGCB mails the written notice requiring such filing.
However, many jurisdictions permit an “institutional investor” to apply for a waiver that allows the “institutional investor” to acquire, in many cases, up to
15% of our voting securities without applying for qualification or a finding of suitability. The gaming laws and regulations of a particular jurisdiction typically
define who may be considered an “institutional investor,” and typically provide particular categories of persons who may be considered such an investor, e.g., a
retirement fund administered by a public agency for the exclusive benefit of federal, state, or local public employees; investment company registered under the
Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80a-1 et seq.); licensed life insurance company or property and casualty insurance company; banking and other
chartered or licensed lending institution; and investment advisor registered under The Investment Advisors Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. § 80b-1 et seq.). Additionally, a
person satisfying the applicable “institutional investor” definition must also generally have acquired and hold the securities in the ordinary course of business as an
institutional investor, and not for the purpose of causing, directly or indirectly, the election of a majority of the members of our board of directors, any change in
our  corporate  charter,  bylaws,  management,  policies  or  operations,  or  those  of  any  of  our  gaming  affiliates,  or  the  taking  of  any  other  action  which  gaming
regulators find to be inconsistent with holding our voting securities for investment purposes only. An application for a waiver as an institutional investor generally
requires the submission of detailed information about the company and its regulatory filings, the name of each person that beneficially owns more than 5% of the
institutional investor’s securities or other equivalent and a certification made under oath or penalty for perjury, that the securities were acquired and are held for
investment purposes only. Even if a waiver is granted, an institutional investor generally may not take any action inconsistent with its status when the waiver was
granted without once again becoming subject to the foregoing reporting and application obligations. A change in the investment intent of an institutional investor
must be reported to certain gaming regulators immediately if such investment intent changes.
Generally, any person who beneficially owns our voting securities and fails or refuses to apply for a finding of suitability or qualification within the time
prescribed by applicable law after being ordered to do so, or who refuses or fails to cooperate with any regulatory investigation or fails to pay the investigative
costs incurred in connection with investigation of its application, may be found unsuitable or not qualified. The same restrictions apply to a record owner if the
record  owner,  after  request,  fails  to  identify  the  beneficial  owner.  Any  security  holder  found  unsuitable  and  who  holds,  directly  or  indirectly,  any  beneficial
ownership of our common stock beyond such period of time as may be prescribed by the applicable gaming regulators may be guilty of a criminal offense. We will
be subject to disciplinary action if, after we receive notice that a person is unsuitable to be a shareholder or to have any other relationship with us or any of our
subsidiaries, we or any of our subsidiaries:
•
pay that person any dividend or interest upon any of our voting securities;
•
allow that person to exercise, directly or indirectly, any voting right conferred through securities held by that person;
•
pay remuneration in any form to that person for services rendered or otherwise; or
•
fail to pursue all lawful efforts to require such unsuitable person to relinquish his or her voting securities including if necessary, the immediate purchase
of the voting securities for cash at fair market value.
3

Gaming regulators may, either as required by applicable law or in their discretion, also require the holder of any debt security to file an application, be
investigated, and be found suitable or qualified to hold the debt security. In such cases, some jurisdictions permit the holder to seek an institutional investor waiver
in accordance with applicable law. If a gaming regulator determines that a person is unsuitable or not qualified to own the debt security, the gaming regulator may,
either as required by applicable law or in its discretion, limit the ability of the issuer to pay any dividend, interest, or any other distribution whatsoever to the
unsuitable or not qualified person.
Many jurisdictions also require that manufacturers and distributors of gaming equipment and suppliers of certain goods and services to gaming industry
participants be registered or licensed and require us to purchase and lease gaming equipment, supplies and services only from properly registered or licensed
suppliers.
Additionally, the ability of a lender to foreclose on pledged assets, including gaming equipment, is subject to compliance with applicable gaming laws. For
example,  under  New  Jersey  gaming  laws,  generally,  no  person  is  permitted  to  hold  an  ownership  interest  in  or  manage  a  casino  or  own  any  gaming  assets,
including gaming devices, without being licensed. Consequently, any lender who desires to enforce a security interest must file the necessary applications for
licensure, be investigated, and either be found qualified by the NJCCC or obtain interim casino authorization (“ICA”) prior to obtaining any ownership interest.
Similarly, any prospective purchaser of an ownership interest in a casino or of gaming assets must file the necessary applications for licensure, be investigated, and
either found qualified by the NJCCC or obtain ICA prior to obtaining any ownership interest or gaming assets.
Violations of Gaming Laws
If we or our subsidiaries violate applicable gaming laws or regulations, our gaming licenses could be limited, conditioned, suspended or revoked by gaming
regulators, and we and any other persons involved could be subject to substantial fines. Additionally, a trustee, conservator or other person can be appointed by
gaming regulators to operate our gaming properties, or in some jurisdictions, take title to our gaming assets in the jurisdiction, and under certain circumstances,
earnings generated during such appointment could be forfeited to the applicable jurisdictions, or even sell the gaming assets if the gaming license for that property
is revoked or not renewed. Violations  of gaming laws or regulations  in one jurisdiction  could result  in  disciplinary  action  in other jurisdictions. As a result,
violations by us of applicable gaming laws or regulations could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, prospects and results of operations.
Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements
We are required periodically to submit detailed financial and operating reports and furnish any other information about us and our subsidiaries which gaming
regulators may require. In some jurisdictions, regulators have authority to compel the production of documents or inspect records maintained on the premises of the
casino.  Under  federal  law,  we  are  required  to  record  and  submit  detailed  reports  of  currency  transactions  involving  greater  than  $10,000  at  our  casinos  and
Suspicious Activity Reports if the facts presented so warrant. Some jurisdictions also require the maintenance of a log that records aggregate cash transactions in
particular amounts. We are required to maintain a current stock ledger which may be examined by gaming regulators at any time. We may also be required to
disclose to gaming regulators upon request the identities of the holders of our equity, debt or other securities. If any securities are held in trust by an agent or by a
nominee, the record holder may be required to disclose the identity of the beneficial owner to gaming regulators. Failure to make such disclosure may be grounds
for finding the record holder unsuitable. Gaming regulators may also require certificates for our stock or that of one or more of our subsidiaries to bear a legend
indicating that the securities are subject to specified gaming laws or transfer restrictions. In certain jurisdictions, gaming regulators have the power to impose
additional restrictions on the holders of our securities at any time.
Review and Approval of Transactions
Substantially all material loans, leases, sales of securities and similar financing transactions by us and our subsidiaries must be reported to, or approved by,
gaming regulators. Neither we nor any of our subsidiaries may make a public offering of securities without the prior approval of certain gaming regulators if the
securities or the proceeds therefrom are intended to be used to construct, acquire or finance gaming facilities in such jurisdictions, or to retire or extend obligations
incurred for such purposes. Such approval, if given, does not constitute a recommendation or approval of the investment merits of the securities subject to the
offering. Changes in control through merger, consolidation, stock or asset acquisitions, management or consulting agreements, or otherwise, require prior approval
of gaming regulators in certain jurisdictions. Entities seeking to acquire control of us or one of our subsidiaries must satisfy gaming regulators with respect to a
variety of stringent standards prior to assuming control. Gaming regulators may also require controlling stockholders, officers, directors and other persons having a
material relationship or involvement with the entity proposing to acquire control to be investigated and licensed as part of the approval process relating to the
transaction.
Certain gaming laws and regulations in jurisdictions we operate in establish that certain corporate acquisitions opposed by management, repurchases of
voting securities and corporate defensive tactics affecting us or our subsidiaries may be injurious to stable and productive corporate gaming, and as a result, prior
approval may be required before we may make exceptional repurchases of voting securities (such as repurchases which treat holders differently) above the current
market price and before a corporate acquisition opposed by management can be consummated. In certain jurisdictions, the gaming regulators also require prior
approval of a plan of recapitalization proposed by the board of directors of a publicly traded corporation which is registered with the gaming
4

authority in response to a tender offer made directly to the registered corporation’s stockholders for the purpose of acquiring control of the registered corporation.
Because licenses under gaming laws are generally not transferable, we may not grant a security interest in our gaming licenses, and our ability to grant a
security interest in any of our gaming assets is limited and may be subject to receipt of prior approval from gaming regulators. A pledge of the stock or other equity
interest in a subsidiary holding a gaming license and the foreclosure of such a pledge may be ineffective without the prior approval of gaming regulators in certain
jurisdictions. Moreover, our subsidiaries holding gaming licenses may be unable to guarantee a security issued by an affiliated or parent company pursuant to a
public offering, or pledge their assets to secure payment of the obligations evidenced by the security issued by an affiliated or parent company, without the prior
approval of certain gaming regulators.
Some  jurisdictions  also  require  us  to  file  a  report  or  notice  with  the  gaming  regulator  within  a  prescribed  period  of  time  following  certain  financial
transactions or the transfer or offering of certain securities. Were they to deem it appropriate, certain gaming regulators reserve the right to order such transactions
rescinded.
Certain jurisdictions require the establishment of a compliance committee with one or more independent members and the implementation of a compliance
review and reporting system or plan created for the purpose of monitoring activities related to our continuing qualification. These plans generally require periodic
reports to senior management of our company and to our gaming regulators.
Certain jurisdictions require that an independent audit committee oversee the functions of surveillance and internal audit departments at our casinos.
License Fees and Gaming Taxes
We pay substantial license fees, contributions to responsible gaming programs, and taxes in many jurisdictions, including the counties, cities, and any related
agencies, boards, commissions, or authorities, in which our operations are conducted, in connection with our casino gaming operations, computed in various ways
depending on the type of gaming or activity involved. Depending upon the particular fee or tax involved, these fees and taxes are payable either daily, monthly,
quarterly or annually. License fees and taxes are based upon such factors as:
•    a percentage of the gross revenues received;
•    the number of gaming devices and table games operated; and
•    the particular county in which the casino is located.
A live entertainment tax is also paid in certain jurisdictions by casino operations where entertainment is furnished in connection with the selling or serving of
food or refreshments or the selling of merchandise. The tax rates applicable to our business and operations are subject to change.
Operational Requirements
In many jurisdictions, we are subject to certain requirements and restrictions on how we must conduct our gaming operations. In some jurisdictions, we are
required to make a good faith effort to procure goods and services from local suppliers and minority-owned, women-owned and veteran-owned businesses in
connection with our construction projects.
Some jurisdictions also require us to make a good faith effort to meet workforce diversity and local labor participation goals in our operations and to procure
goods and services from local suppliers and minority-owned, women-owned and veteran-owned businesses.
Some of our gaming operations are subject to hours of operations restrictions. Additionally, some of our operations are subject to restrictions on the number
of gaming positions we may have.
In 1994, the Mississippi Gaming Commission adopted a regulation requiring as a condition of licensure or license renewal that a gaming establishment’s
plan include a 500-car parking facility in close proximity to the casino complex and infrastructure facilities which will amount to at least 25% of the casino cost.
Amendments to the Mississippi gaming regulations impose additional non-gaming infrastructure requirements on new casino projects in Mississippi. To the extent
applicable, our Mississippi casinos are in compliance with these regulations.
Racetracks
We operate Yonkers Raceway, a standardbred harness racing track, and Empire City Casino, a video lottery gaming operation, in Yonkers, New York. The
operations are regulated by the New York State Gaming Commission. We also operate Northfield Park, a standardbred harness racing track, and MGM Northfield
Park, a video lottery gaming operation, in Northfield, Ohio. The racing operations are regulated by the Ohio State Racing Commission, and the video lottery
gaming operations are regulated by the Ohio Lottery Commission. In addition to laws and regulations affecting the video lottery operations at these tracks, there
exist extensive laws and regulations governing the operation of racetracks, the horse races that are run at those tracks, and pari-mutuel wagering
5

conducted at the tracks. Regulation of horse racing is typically administered separately from our other gaming operations, with separate licenses and license fee
structures. Racing regulations may limit or dictate the number of days on which races may be or must be held. Additionally, in both New York and Ohio, the video
lottery operations are contingent upon us holding a valid license to hold live horse racing meets at each racing track.
Online Gaming and Sports Betting
In 2013, Nevada legalized real money online poker within the State. The NGC then adopted regulations and established licensing requirements for the
operation of real money online poker within the State. In 2013, New Jersey also legalized real money online casino gaming within the State. The New Jersey
Division  of  Gaming  Enforcement  (“NJDGE”)  then  adopted  regulations  and  established  licensing  requirements  for  the  operation  of  real  money  online  casino
gaming in the State. Marina District Development Company, LLC (“MDDC”), our New Jersey subsidiary that operates Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa in Atlantic
City, has been issued an Internet Gaming Permit for real money online gaming in New Jersey.
In  2017,  Mississippi  legalized  on-premises  sports  betting  at  licensed  casinos  subject  to  the  prior  approval  of  the  Executive  Director  of  the  Mississippi
Gaming Commission (“MGC”). In June 2018, the MGC adopted regulations for the operation of sports books at licensed casinos in Mississippi. The regulations
also  permit  mobile  betting  if  the  player  is  physically  located  within  a  casino  and  hotel  facility  approved  by  the  Executive  Director.  In  July  2018,  our  two
Mississippi operating subsidiaries, Beau Rivage Resorts, LLC and MGM Resorts Mississippi, LLC, obtained approval from the Executive Director to offer sports
betting at their respective casino properties, and their respective sports books began operations on August 1, 2018.
In 2018, New Jersey legalized on-premises and online sports betting conducted by licensed casinos and existing and certain former horse race tracks. The
regulation of sports betting in New Jersey is similar to the manner in which the NJDGE regulates online casino gaming and casinos. The NJDGE regulates the
types of wagers that may be placed, but in-play wagering may be permitted. However, wagering on certain events, such as collegiate events in which New Jersey
colleges participate, is prohibited. A casino licensed to offer online sports betting currently may offer no more than three individually branded websites. MDDC
has been issued a Sports Wagering License for on-premises sports betting at Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa and online sports betting in New Jersey.
In 2019, Michigan legalized real money online casino gaming and online sports betting for commercial and Indian casinos within the State. On-premises
sports betting commenced on March 11, 2020 under regulations promulgated by the Michigan Gaming Control Board. Online sports betting and casino gaming
commenced on January 22, 2021.
The  gaming  and  other  laws  and  regulations  to  which  we  are  subject  could  change  or  could  be  interpreted  differently  in  the  future,  or  new  laws  and
regulations could be enacted. Any such material changes, new laws or regulations, or material differences in interpretations by courts or governmental authorities
could adversely affect our business and operating results. For example, in 2018, the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”) reversed its previously-issued opinion
published in 2011, which stated that interstate transmissions of wire communications that do not relate to a “sporting event or contest” fall outside the purview of
the Wire Act of 1961 (“Wire Act”). The DOJ’s updated opinion concluded instead that the Wire Act was not uniformly limited to gaming relating to sporting
events or contests and that certain of its provisions apply to non-sports-related wagering activity. In June 2019, a federal district court in New Hampshire ruled that
the DOJ’s new interpretation of the Wire Act was erroneous and vacated the DOJ’s new opinion. The DOJ appealed the decision of the district court to the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. In January 2021, the Court of Appeals largely affirmed the district court’s decision finding that the Wire Act applies only to
interstate wire communications related to “sporting events or contests”.
Macau S.A.R. Laws and Regulations
MGM Grand Paradise is regulated as a gaming operator under applicable Macau law and our ownership interest in MGM Grand Paradise is subject to
continuing regulatory scrutiny. We are required to be approved by the Macau government (gaming authorities) to own an interest in a gaming operator. Authorized
gaming operators must pay periodic fees and taxes, and gaming rights are not transferable, unless approved by the Macau government. MGM Grand Paradise must
periodically submit detailed financial and operating reports to the Macau gaming authorities and furnish any other information that the Macau gaming authorities
may require. No person may acquire any rights over the shares or assets of MGM Grand Paradise without first obtaining the approval of the Macau gaming
authorities. The transfer or creation of encumbrances over ownership of shares representing the share capital of MGM Grand Paradise or other rights relating to
such shares, and any act involving the granting of voting rights or other stockholders’ rights to persons or entities other than the original owners, would require the
approval of the Macau government and the subsequent report of such acts and transactions to the Macau gaming authorities. The stock of MGM Grand Paradise
and its casinos, assets and equipment shall not be subject to any liens or encumbrances, except under authorization by the Macau government.
MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession contract requires approval of the Macau government for transfers of shares, or of any rights over such shares, in any
of the direct or indirect stockholders in MGM Grand Paradise, including us, provided that such shares or rights are directly or indirectly equivalent to an amount
that is equal to or higher than 5% of the share capital in MGM Grand Paradise. Under the subconcession contract, this approval requirement does not apply to
securities  that are listed  and tradable  on a stock market.  Since MGM Grand Paradise’s securities  are not listed and tradable  on a stock market this approval
requirement applies to transfers of MGM Grand Paradise’s shares. The Macau government must also give their prior approval to changes in control of MGM
Grand Paradise through a merger, consolidation, stock or asset acquisition, management or consulting agreement or any act or conduct by any person whereby he
or she obtains control. Entities seeking to acquire control of a registered corporation must satisfy the Macau government concerning a variety of stringent standards
prior to assuming control.
6

The subconcession contract requires the Macau gaming authorities’ prior approval of any recapitalization plan, any increase of the capital stock by public
subscription, any issue of preferential shares or any creation, issue or transformation of types or series of shares representative of MGM Grand Paradise capital
stock, as well as any change in the constituent documents (i.e., articles of association) of MGM Grand Paradise. The Chief Executive of Macau could also require
MGM Grand Paradise to increase its share capital if he deemed it necessary.
The Macau gaming authorities may investigate any individual who has a material relationship to, or material involvement with, MGM Grand Paradise to
determine whether MGM Grand Paradise’s suitability and/or financial capacity is affected by that individual. MGM Grand Paradise shareholders with 5% or more
of the share capital and directors must apply for and undergo a finding of suitability process and maintain due qualification during the subconcession term, and
accept the persistent and long-term inspection and supervision exercised by the Macau government. MGM Grand Paradise is required to immediately notify the
Macau government should MGM Grand Paradise become aware of any fact that may be material to the appropriate qualification of any shareholder who owns 5%
or more of the share capital, or any director or key employee. Changes in approved corporate positions must be reported to the Macau gaming authorities. The
Macau gaming authorities have jurisdiction to deny an application for a finding of suitability.
The Macau gaming authorities also have the power to supervise gaming operators in order to assure the financial stability of corporate gaming operators and
their affiliates.
MGM Macau and MGM Cotai were constructed and are operated under MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession contract. This subconcession excludes the
following gaming activities: mutual bets, gaming activities provided to the public, interactive gaming and games of chance or other gaming, betting or gambling
activities on ships or planes. MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession is exclusively governed by Macau law. MGM Grand Paradise is subject to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the courts of Macau in case of any potential dispute or conflict relating to our subconcession.
MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession contract expires on June 26, 2022. Unless the subconcession is extended, on that date, the casino area premises and
gaming related equipment subject to reversion in MGM Macau and MGM Cotai will automatically be transferred to the Macau government without compensation
to MGM Grand Paradise and MGM Resorts International will cease to generate any revenues from these operations. Beginning on April 20, 2017, the Macau
government may redeem the subconcession by giving MGM Grand Paradise at least one year prior notice and by paying fair compensation or indemnity.
The amount of such compensation or indemnity will be determined based on the amount of gaming and non-gaming revenue generated by MGM Grand
Paradise,  excluding  the  convention  and  exhibition  facilities,  during  the  taxable  year  prior  to  the  redemption,  before  deducting  interest,  depreciation  and
amortization, multiplied by the number of remaining years before expiration of the subconcession.
The Macau government also has the right to unilaterally terminate, without compensation to MGM Grand Paradise, the subconcession at any time upon the
occurrence  of  fundamental  non-compliance  by  MGM  Grand  Paradise  with  applicable  Macau  laws  or  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  basic  obligations  under  the
subconcession contract. If the default is curable, the Macau gaming authorities are required to give MGM Grand Paradise prior notice to cure the default, though no
specific cure period for that purpose is provided.
Under the subconcession, MGM Grand Paradise Limited is obligated to pay to the Macau S.A.R. an annual premium with a fixed portion and a variable
portion based on the number and type of gaming tables employed and gaming machines operated. The fixed portion of the premium is equal to 30 million patacas
(approximately  $3.7  million,  based  on  exchange  rates  at  December  31,  2021).  The  variable  portion  is  equal  to  300,000  patacas  per  gaming  table  reserved
exclusively for certain kinds of games or players, 150,000 patacas per gaming table not so reserved and 1,000 patacas per electrical or mechanical gaming machine,
including slot machines (approximately $37,364, $18,682 and $125, respectively, based on exchange rates at December 31, 2021), subject to a minimum of forty-
five million patacas (approximately $5.6 million, based on exchange rates at December 31, 2021). MGM Grand Paradise Limited also has to pay a special gaming
tax of 35% of gross gaming revenues and applicable withholding taxes. It must also contribute 1.6% and 2.4% (a portion of which must be used for promotion of
tourism in Macau) of its gross gaming revenue to a public foundation designated by the Macau S.A.R. government and to the Macau S.A.R, respectively, as special
levy.
Currently, the gaming tax in Macau is calculated as a percentage of gross gaming revenue. However, gross gaming revenue does not include deductions for
credit losses. As a result, if MGM Grand Paradise issues markers to its customers in Macau and is unable to collect on the related receivables from them, it has to
pay taxes on its winnings from these customers even though it was unable to collect the related receivables.
MGM Grand Paradise has received from the Macau government a concession to use a 10.67 acre parcel of land for MGM Macau (the “MGM Macau Land
Contract”), and a concession to use an approximately 17.75 acre site parcel of land for MGM Cotai (the “MGM Cotai Land Contract”). The land concessions will
expire on April 6, 2031 and on January 8, 2038, respectively, and are renewable. MGM Grand Paradise is obligated to pay rent annually for the term of the MGM
Macau Land Contract and of the MGM Cotai Land Contract. The rent amounts may be revised every five years by the Macau government, according to the
provisions of the Macau Land law.
MGM Grand Paradise received an exemption from Macau’s corporate income tax on profits generated by the operation of casino games of chance for a
period of five-years starting at January 1, 2007. In October 2011, MGM Grand Paradise was granted an extension of this exemption for an additional five years.
The exemption was further extended on September 7, 2016 through March 31, 2020, and further extended again on March 24, 2020 effective from April 1, 2020
through June 26, 2022.
7
