  
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C.  20549
 
 
FORM 10-K
 
(Mark One)
[X]
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017
 
OR
 
[  ]
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
For the transition period from                      to                     
 
Commission File No. 001-10362
 
 
MGM R ESORTS I NTERNATIONAL
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
 
DELAWARE
 
88-0215232
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer 
Identification Number)
 
3600 Las Vegas Boulevard South - Las Vegas, Nevada  89109
(Address of principal executive office)                                             (Zip Code)
 
(702) 693-7120
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
 
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 
 
Title of each class
   
Name of each exchange 
on which registered
 
 
Common Stock, $0.01 Par Value
   
New York Stock Exchange
 
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
 
None
 
 
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.    Yes    X       No           
 
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.     Yes              No    X  
 
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days:
    Yes     X       No          
 
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  Registrant  has  submitted  electronically  and  posted  on  its  corporate  website,  if  any,  every  Interactive  Data  File  required  to  be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to submit and post such files).     Yes     X       No          
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of the Registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K:          
 
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging
growth company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act (check one):
 
    Large accelerated filer    X  
 Accelerated filer         
 Non-accelerated filer         
  Smaller reporting company            Emerging Growth Company___
 
 
 
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised
financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.        ___
 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act):     Yes              No     X  
 
The aggregate market value of the Registrant’s Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the Registrant as of June 30, 2017 (based on the closing price on the New York
Stock Exchange Composite Tape on June 30, 2017) was $17.9 billion.  As of February 23, 2018, 566,367,426 shares of Registrant’s Common Stock, $0.01 par value, were
outstanding.
 
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
Portions of the Registrant’s definitive Proxy Statement for its 2018 Annual Meeting of Stockholders are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Form 10-K.
 
 
 

 
PART I
 
ITEM 1.
BUSINESS
 
MGM Resorts International is referred to as the “Company,” “MGM Resorts,” or the “Registrant,” and together with its subsidiaries may also be referred
to as “we,” “us” or “our.” MGM China Holdings Limited together with its subsidiaries is referred to as “MGM China.” Except where the context indicates
otherwise, “MGP” refers to MGM Growth Properties LLC together with its consolidated subsidiaries.
 
Overview
 
MGM Resorts International is a Delaware corporation incorporated in 1986 that acts largely as a holding company and, through subsidiaries, owns and
operates integrated casino, hotel, and entertainment resorts across the United States and in Macau. As discussed further below, we lease certain of our real estate
assets from MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP (the “Operating Partnership”), which is a consolidated subsidiary.
 
We believe we own or invest in several of the finest casino resorts in the world and we continually reinvest in our resorts to maintain our competitive
advantage. We make significant investments in our resorts through newly remodeled hotel rooms, restaurants, entertainment and nightlife offerings, as well as other
new features and amenities. We believe we operate the highest quality resorts in each of the markets in which we operate. Ensuring our resorts are the premier
resorts in their respective markets requires capital investments to maintain the best possible experiences for our guests.
 
MGM Growth Properties
On April 25, 2016, MGM Growth Properties LLC (“MGP”), a consolidated subsidiary, completed its initial public offering (“IPO”). MGP is organized as an
umbrella partnership REIT (commonly referred to as an “UPREIT”) structure in which substantially all of its assets are owned by, and substantially all of its
businesses are conducted through the Operating Partnership. MGP has two classes of authorized and outstanding voting common shares (collectively, the “shares”):
Class A shares and a single Class B share. We own MGP’s Class B share, which does not provide its holder any rights to profits or losses or any rights to receive
distributions from operations of MGP or upon liquidation or winding up of MGP. MGP’s Class A shareholders are entitled to one vote per share, while we, as the
owner of the Class B share, are entitled to an amount of votes representing a majority of the total voting power of MGP’s shares so long as our and our controlled
affiliates’ (excluding MGP and its subsidiaries) aggregate beneficial ownership of the combined economic interests in MGP and the Operating Partnership does not
fall below 30%. The sole general partner of the Operating Partnership is also a subsidiary of MGP.
MGP used the proceeds from its IPO to purchase operating partnership units in the Operating Partnership. Concurrently, we contributed the real estate assets
associated with The Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New York, Monte Carlo, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit and Beau
Rivage  to  the  Operating  Partnership  in  exchange  for  operating  partnership  units.  A  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the  Operating  Partnership  (the  “landlord”)
subsequently leased the properties to a subsidiary of ours (the “tenant”) pursuant to a long-term triple-net master lease agreement (the “master lease”).  
In August 2016, we completed the acquisition of Boyd Gaming Corporation’s (“Boyd Gaming”) ownership interest in Borgata, at which time Borgata
became a consolidated subsidiary of ours. Subsequently, MGP acquired Borgata’s real property from us, and in October 2017, MGP also acquired the long-term
leasehold interest and real property associated with MGM National Harbor from us. In connection with these transactions, we entered into amendments to the
master lease for our subsidiary to lease back the real estate assets of Borgata and MGM National Harbor from the landlord.
As of December 31, 2017, we owned 73.4% of the Operating Partnership units, and MGP held the remaining 26.6% ownership interest in the Operating
Partnership.  
 
Resort Operations
 
General
 
Most of our revenue is cash-based, through customers wagering with cash or paying for non-gaming services with cash or credit cards. We rely heavily on
the ability of our resorts to generate operating cash flow to fund capital expenditures, provide excess cash flow for future development, acquisitions or investments
and repay debt financings.
 
2

 
Our results of operations do not tend to be seasonal in nature, though a variety of factors may affect the results of any interim period, including the timing of
major  conventions,  the  amount  and  timing  of  marketing  and special  events  for  our  high-end  gaming  customers,  and  the  level  of play  during  major  holidays,
including New Year and Lunar New Year. While our results do not depend on key individual customers, a significant portion of our operating income is generated
from high-end gaming customers, which can cause variability in our results. In addition, our success in marketing to customer groups such as convention customers
and the finan cial health of customer segments such as business travelers or high-end gaming customers from a specific country or region can affect our results.
 
All of our casino resorts operate 24 hours a day, every day of the year, with the exception of Grand Victoria which operates 22 hours a day, every day of the
year. At our domestic resorts, our primary casino and hotel operations are owned and managed by us. Other resort amenities may be owned and operated by us,
owned by us but managed by third parties for a fee, or leased to third parties. We utilize third-party management for specific expertise in operations of restaurants
and nightclubs. We lease space to retail and food and beverage operators, particularly for branding opportunities.
 
Our Operating Resorts
 
We have provided certain information below about our resorts as of December 31, 2017. Except as otherwise indicated, we own and operate the resorts
shown below.
 
 
 
Number of
  
Approximate
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Guestrooms
  Casino   Square    
 
  
Gaming
 
Name and Location
 
and Suites
  
Footage (1)
  
Slots (2)
  
Tables (3)
 
Domestic Resorts:
    
       
       
       
 
Las Vegas
  
    
    
    
  
Bellagio
  
3,933   
155,000   
1,797   
148 
MGM Grand Las Vegas (4)
  
6,161   
167,000   
1,625   
127 
Mandalay Bay (5)
  
4,752   
155,000   
1,232   
72 
The Mirage
  
3,044   
93,000   
1,244   
77 
Luxor
  
4,397   
101,000   
1,056   
58 
Excalibur
  
3,981   
93,000   
1,013   
51 
New York-New York
  
2,024   
81,000   
1,172   
70 
Monte Carlo
  
2,992   
90,000   
675   
45 
Circus Circus Las Vegas
  
3,764   
95,000   
1,245   
43 
Other
  
    
    
    
  
MGM Grand Detroit (Detroit, Michigan) (6)
  
400   
127,000   
3,543   
126 
Beau Rivage (Biloxi, Mississippi)
  
1,740   
81,000   
1,797   
80 
Gold Strike (Tunica, Mississippi)
  
1,133   
48,000   
1,194   
59 
Borgata (Atlantic City, New Jersey)
  
2,767   
160,000   
3,030   
187 
MGM National Harbor (Prince George's County, Maryland) (7)
  
308   
123,000   
2,818   
129 
Subtotal
  
41,396   
1,569,000   
23,441   
1,272 
MGM China:
  
    
    
    
  
MGM Macau – 55.95% owned (Macau S.A.R.)
  
582   
346,000   
1,019   
427 
Other Operations:
  
    
    
    
  
CityCenter – 50% owned (Las Vegas, Nevada) (8)
  
5,891   
139,000   
1,564   
126 
Grand Victoria – 50% owned (Elgin, Illinois) (9)
  
—   
30,000   
1,088   
42 
Subtotal
  
5,891   
169,000   
2,652   
168 
Grand total
  
47,869   
2,084,000   
27,112   
1,867
 
 
(1)
Casino square footage is approximate and includes the gaming floor, race and sports, high limit areas and casino specific walkways, and excludes casino cage and other non-gaming space
within the casino area.
(2)
Includes slot machines, video poker machines and other electronic gaming devices.
(3)
Includes blackjack (“21”), baccarat, craps, roulette and other table games; does not include poker.
(4)
Includes 1,164 rooms at The Signature at MGM Grand Las Vegas.
(5)
Includes 1,117 rooms at the Delano and 424 rooms at the Four Seasons Hotel.
(6)
Our local investors have an ownership interest of approximately 3% of MGM Grand Detroit.
(7)
Our local investors have a non-voting economic interest in MGM National Harbor. Refer to Note 2 for further description of such interest.
(8)
Includes Aria with 4,004 rooms and Mandarin Oriental Las Vegas with 392 rooms. Vdara includes 1,495 condo-hotel units, which are predominantly being utilized as company-owned
hotel rooms. The other 50% of CityCenter is owned by Infinity World Development Corp.
(9 )
The other 50% of Grand Victoria is owned by an affiliate of Hyatt Gaming, which also operates the resort.
3

 
 
More  detailed  information  about  each  of  our  operating  resorts  can  be  found  in  Exhibit  99.1  to  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  which  Exhibit  is
incorporated herein by reference.  
 
Reportable Segments
 
We have two reportable segments based on the similar characteristics of the operating segments: domestic resorts and MGM China. We currently own and
operate 14 resorts in the United States. MGM China’s operations consist of the MGM Macau resort and casino (“MGM Macau”) and MGM Cotai, an integrated
casino,  hotel,  and  entertainment  resort  on  the  Cotai  Strip  in  Macau  that  opened  on  February  13,  2018.  We  have  additional  business  activities  including  our
investments in unconsolidated affiliates, and certain other corporate and management operations. CityCenter Holdings, LLC (“CityCenter”) is our most significant
unconsolidated affiliate, which we also manage for a fee. See “Executive Overview” in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations and Note 17 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our segments.
 
       Domestic Resorts
 
Over half of the net revenue from our domestic resorts is derived from non-gaming operations, including hotel, food and beverage, entertainment and other
non-gaming amenities. We market to different customers and utilize our significant convention and meeting facilities to allow us to maximize hotel occupancy and
customer volumes which also leads to better labor utilization. Our operating results are highly dependent on the volume of customers at our resorts, which in turn
affects the price we can charge for our hotel rooms and other amenities.
 
Our casino operations feature a variety of slots, table games, and race and sports book wagering. In addition, we offer our premium players access to high-
limit rooms and lounge experiences where players may enjoy an upscale atmosphere.
 
MGM China
 
We  own  approximately  56%  of  MGM  China,  which  owns  MGM  Grand  Paradise,  S.A.  (“MGM  Grand  Paradise”),  the  Macau  company  that  owns  and
operates the MGM Macau and MGM Cotai casino resorts and the related gaming subconcession and land concessions. We believe our ownership interest in MGM
China plays an important role in extending our reach internationally and will foster future growth and profitability. Macau is the world’s largest gaming destination
in terms of revenue and we expect future growth in the Asian gaming market to drive additional visitation at MGM Macau and MGM Cotai.
 
Our current MGM China operations relate to MGM Macau and MGM Cotai, discussed further below. MGM China’s revenues are generated primarily from
gaming  operations  which  are  conducted  under  a  gaming  subconcession  held  by  MGM  Grand  Paradise.  The  Macau  government  has  granted  three  gaming
concessions and each of these concessionaires has granted a subconcession. The MGM Grand Paradise gaming subconcession was granted by Sociedade de Jogos
de Macau, S.A., and expires in 2020. The Macau government currently prohibits additional concessions and subconcessions, but does not place a limit on the
number  of  casinos  or  gaming  areas  operated  by  the  concessionaires  and  subconcessionaires,  though  additional  casinos  require  government  approval  prior  to
commencing operations.
 
In October 2012, MGM Grand Paradise formally accepted the terms and conditions of a land concession contract from the government of Macau to develop
MGM  Cotai  on  an  approximately  18  acre  site  on the  Cotai  Strip.  The  land  concession  contract  became  effective  when  the  Macau  government  published  the
agreement in the Official Gazette of Macau on January 9, 2013 and has an initial term of 25 years. MGM Cotai is an integrated casino, hotel and entertainment
resort that opened on February 13, 2018. The Gaming Inspection and Coordination Bureau of Macau (“DICJ”) approved 100 gaming tables for the opening of
MGM Cotai and 25 additional gaming tables effective for operation on January 1, 2019, for a total of 125 gaming tables in aggregate. In addition, the DICJ
approved the initial transfer of 77 gaming tables from MGM Macau to MGM Cotai. We expect total development costs of our Cotai project to be approximately
$3.4 billion, excluding development fees eliminated in consolidation, capitalized interest and land-related costs.
 
Customers and Competition
 
Our  casino  resorts  operate  in  highly  competitive  environments.  We  compete  against  gaming  companies,  as  well  as  other  hospitality  companies  in  the
markets  in  which  we  operate,  neighboring  markets,  and  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  including  non-gaming  resort  destinations  such  as  Hawaii.  Our  gaming
operations compete to a lesser extent with state-sponsored lotteries, off-track wagering, card parlors, online gambling and other forms of legalized gaming in the
United States and internationally.  
 
4

 
Our primary methods of successful competition include:
 
•
Locating our resorts in desirable leisure and business travel markets and operating at superior sites within those markets;
 
•
Constructing and maintaining high-quality resorts and facilities, including luxurious guestrooms, state-of-the-art convention facilities and premier
dining, entertainment, retail and other amenities;
 
•
Recruiting, training and retaining well-qualified and motivated employees who provide superior customer service;
 
•
Providing unique, “must-see” entertainment attractions; and
 
•
Developing distinctive and memorable marketing, promotional and customer loyalty programs.
 
       Domestic Resorts
 
Our customers include premium gaming customers; leisure and wholesale travel customers; business travelers, and group customers, including conventions,
trade associations, and small meetings. We have a complete portfolio of resorts which appeal to the upper end of each market segment and also cater to leisure and
value-oriented tour and travel customers. Many of our resorts have significant convention and meeting space which we utilize to drive business to our resorts
during mid-week and off-peak periods.
 
Our Las Vegas casino resorts compete for customers with a large number of other hotel casinos in the Las Vegas area, including major hotel casinos on or
near the Las Vegas Strip, major hotel casinos in the downtown area, which is about five miles from the center of the Las Vegas Strip, and several major hotel
casinos elsewhere in the Las Vegas area. Our Las Vegas Strip resorts also compete, in part, with each other. Major competitors, including new entrants, have either
recently expanded their hotel room capacity or have plans to expand their capacity or construct new resorts in Las Vegas. Also, the growth of gaming in areas
outside Las Vegas has increased the competition faced by our operations in Las Vegas.
 
Outside Nevada, our resorts primarily compete with other hotel casinos in their markets and for customers in surrounding regional gaming markets, where
location is a critical factor to success. In addition, we compete with gaming operations in surrounding jurisdictions and other leisure destinations in each region.
 
       MGM China
 
The  three  primary  customer  bases  in  the  Macau  gaming  market  are  VIP  casino  gaming  operations,  main  floor  gaming  operations  and  slot  machine
operations. VIP gaming play is sourced both internally and externally. Externally sourced VIP gaming play is obtained through external gaming promoters who
offer VIP players various services, such as extension of credit as well as complimentary hotel, food and beverage services. Gaming promoters are compensated
through payment of revenue-sharing arrangements and rolling chip turnover based commissions. In-house VIP players also typically receive a commission based
on  the  program  in  which  they  participate.  Unlike  gaming  promoters  and  in-house  VIP  players,  main  floor  players  do  not  receive  commissions.  The  profit
contribution from the main floor segment exceeds the VIP segment due to commission costs paid to gaming promoters. Gaming revenues from the main gaming
floors have grown significantly in recent years and we believe this customer base represents the most potential for sustainable growth in the future. To target
premium main floor players in order to grow revenue and improve yield, we have introduced premium gaming lounges and stadium-style electronic table games
terminals,  which  include  both  table  games  and  slots,  to  the  main  floor  gaming  area.  The  amenities  create  a  dedicated  exclusive  gaming  space  for  the  use  of
premium main floor players.  
 
Our  key  competitors  in  Macau  include  five  other  gaming  concessionaires  and  subconcessionaires.  If  the  Macau  government  were  to  grant  additional
concessions or subconcessions, we would face additional competition which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or
cash flows. Additionally, we face competition at our Macau and Cotai properties from concessionaires who have expanded their operations, primarily on the Cotai
Strip, with several openings having occurred during 2016 and another casino resort expected to open in 2019.
 
We encounter competition from major gaming centers located in other areas of Asia and around the world, including Singapore, Korea, Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia, Vietnam, Cambodia, the Philippines, Russia, cruise ships in Asia that offer gaming and from unlicensed gaming operations in the region.
 
       Corporate and Other
 
Much like our domestic resorts, our unconsolidated affiliates compete through the quality of amenities, the value of the experience offered to guests and the
location of their resorts. We manage and own 50% of CityCenter, which includes Aria casino resort. Aria appeals to the upper end of each segment in the Las
Vegas market and competes with our domestic casino resorts and other resorts on the Las Vegas Strip. Grand Victoria, our other unconsolidated affiliate, mainly
competes for customers against casino resorts in the Chicago metropolitan market.
5

 
 
Marketing
 
Our marketing efforts are conducted through various means, including our loyalty programs. We advertise on radio, television, internet and billboards and in
newspapers and magazines in selected cities throughout the United States and overseas, as well as by direct mail, email and through the use of social media. We
also advertise through our regional marketing offices located in major U.S. and foreign cities. Our direct marketing efforts utilize advanced analytic techniques that
identify customer preferences and help predict future customer behavior, allowing us to make more relevant offers to customers, influence incremental visits, and
help build lasting customer relationships.  
 
M life Rewards, our customer loyalty program, is a tiered program and allows customers to qualify for benefits across our participating resorts and in both
gaming and non-gaming areas, encouraging customers to keep their total spend within our casino resorts. We also offer the Golden Lion Club for gaming focused
customers, in addition to M life Rewards, at MGM Macau and MGM Cotai. The structured rewards systems based on member value and tier level ensure that
customers can progressively access the full range of services that the resorts provide. Our loyalty programs focus on building a rewarding relationship with our
customers, encouraging members to increase both visitation and spend.
 
Strategy
 
We strive to be the recognized global leader in entertainment and hospitality, embracing innovation and diversity to inspire excellence. The quality of our
resorts  and  amenities  can  be  measured  by  our  success  in  winning  numerous  awards,  both  domestic  and  globally,  including  several  Four  and  Five  Diamond
designations from the American Automobile Association as well as multiple Four and Five Star designations from Forbes Travel Guide, as well as numerous
certifications of our Corporate Social Responsibility efforts.
 
Our strategic objectives include:
 
•
Operational enhancements. Drive continuous improvements in operational performance to support enterprise-wide increases in revenue, market share,
cash flow, and margins;
 
•
Financial strength. Accelerate financial performance through optimal capital structure and disciplined investment of cash flows;
 
•
Corporate social responsibility. Continue to solidify the Company’s reputation as a global leader in the principles of Corporate Social Responsibility;
 
•
Geographic expansion. Execute a targeted approach to domestic and international expansion to increase global brand presence; and
 
•
Business model innovation. Explore the evolution of the existing business model into new lines of business and key adjacencies.
 
Technology
 
Collectively we utilize various types of technology to maximize revenue, drive efficiency in our operations, and serve our customers more effectively.
Information Technology continues to automate operations in an effort to control costs related to operations and implement leading edge solutions for all major lines
of business. To aid this process, data and analytics are utilized to support making timely and accurate business decisions. A cloud first strategy is applied when
possible to enable our technology solution delivery and speed to market.
 
Technology is focused to enhance the guest experience. We implemented a Mobile Check-In process which has been well-received by our guests and are
developing a self-service Check-In workstation program at select locations. Another area of concentration includes increasing our wireless network capabilities
within our convention offerings with next generation equipment to further subscribe to our guests’ needs. We also continue to enhance our eCommerce platform
which provides our guests and business partners a premier digital experience where they have the ability to create an all-inclusive experience from accommodations
to dining and entertainment with real time recommendations provided based on the preference.
 
Employees and Management
 
We believe that knowledgeable, friendly and dedicated employees are a primary success factor in the hospitality industry. Therefore, we invest heavily in
recruiting, training, motivating and retaining exceptional employees, and we seek to hire and promote the strongest management team possible. We have numerous
programs, both at the corporate and business unit level, designed to achieve these objectives. We believe our internal development programs, such as the MGM
Resorts University and various leadership and management training programs, are best in class among our industry peers.
6

 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility
 
We  seek  to  conduct  our  business  in  an  ethical  and  socially  responsible  way,  through  sustainable  business  practices,  which  we  regard  as  essential  to
maximizing shareholder value, while enhancing community quality and environmental stewardship. Our corporate social responsibility efforts are overseen by the
Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of our Board of Directors.  
 
Diversity and inclusion. Diversity and inclusion are fundamental to our Company’s value system, our people philosophy, our cultural life and therefore, our
competitive advantage as an employer and destination of choice for our global customer base. Our inclusion initiative at our resorts fosters employee engagement,
individual  responsibility,  team  collaboration,  leadership  competency,  high  performance  and  innovation.  Our diversity  and  inclusion  initiative  has  been  widely
recognized for many years through numerous awards and accolades.
 
Philanthropy and community engagement. Our host community and social investments are prioritized to strengthen the communities where our employees
live, work and care for their families. Our community platform features three main programs: our Corporate Giving Program, our employee-driven MGM Resorts
Foundation and our Employee Volunteer Program. Through these channels, we make financial and in-kind donations, contribute volunteer service and participate
in civic and non-profit organizations and issues that advance the quality of life in our communities. Key investment areas include hunger relief, diversity, public
education, health and wellness and environmental sustainability.
 
Environmental  sustainability. We  continue  to  gain  recognition  for  our  comprehensive  environmental  responsibility  initiatives  in  energy  and  water
conservation, recycling and waste management, sustainable supply chain and green building. Certain of our casino resorts in Nevada and our casino resort in
Michigan  were  the  first  in  each  state  to  earn  certification  from  Green  Key,  the  largest  international  program  evaluating  environmental  sustainability  in  hotel
operations. We received certifications at all of our domestic resorts and Aria and Vdara at CityCenter. Aria, Vdara, Bellagio, Delano, and Mandalay Bay, Mirage,
and MGM Grand Detroit have all received “Five Green Key,” the highest possible rating. Many major travel service providers recognize the Green Key designation
and identify our resorts for their continued commitment to sustainable hotel operations. 
 
In  addition,  we  believe  that  incorporating  the  tenets  of  environmental  sustainability  in  our  business  decisions  advances  a  platform  for  innovation  and
operational efficiency. CityCenter (Aria, Vdara, Veer and Mandarin Oriental Las Vegas) is one of the world’s largest private sustainable developments. With six
LEED ® Gold certifications from the U.S. Green Building Council (the “Council”), CityCenter serves as the standard for combining luxury and environmental
responsibility  within  the  large-scale  hospitality  industry.  Also,  MGM  National  Harbor,  The  Park,  and  T-Mobile  Arena  have  all  been  awarded  LEED ® Gold
certification by the Council.
 
At MGM China, we incorporate the same commitment to environmental preservation. Our efforts to improve energy efficiency, indoor air quality, and
environmental stewardship have resulted in MGM China being included in the Hang Seng Corporate Sustainability Benchmark Index on the Hong Kong Stock
Exchange. MGM Cotai, our new integrated resort, has achieved the China Green Building (Macau) Design label from the China Green Building and Energy Saving
(Macau) Association.
 
The  construction  of  MGM  Springfield  will  further  position  MGM  Resorts  as  a  leader  in  sustainable  resort  operations,  and  by  adopting  innovative
technologies in the design and operating practices of this resort, we are advancing our commitment to protecting our planet in new regions.
 
Development and Leveraging Our Brand and Management Assets
 
In allocating resources, our financial strategy is focused on managing a proper mix of investing in existing resorts, spending on new resorts and other
developments or initiatives and repaying long-term debt or returning capital to shareholders. We believe there are reasonable investments for us to make in new
initiatives and at our current resorts that will provide profitable returns.
 
We regularly evaluate possible expansion and acquisition opportunities in domestic and international markets. Opportunities we evaluate may include the
ownership, management and operation of gaming and other entertainment facilities in Nevada, or in states other than Nevada, or outside of the United States. We
leverage our management expertise and well-recognized brands through strategic partnerships and international expansion opportunities. We feel that several of our
brands are well-suited to new projects in both gaming and non-gaming developments. We may undertake these opportunities either alone or in cooperation with
one or more third parties.
 
7

 
MGM Springfield
 
We  were  awarded  a  casino  license  to  build  and  operate  MGM  Springfield  in  Springfield,  Massachusetts.  MGM  Springfield  is  being  developed  on
approximately  14 acres of land in downtown Springfield. Plans for the resort currently  include a casino with approximately  2,550 slots and 120 table games
including poker; a 250-room hotel; 100,000 square feet of retail and restaurant space; 44,000 square feet of meeting and event space; and a 3,500-space parking
garage, with an expected development and construction cost of approximately $960 million, excluding capitalized interest and land-related costs. Construction of
MGM Springfield is expected to be completed in the third quarter of 2018.
 
Intellectual Property
 
Our principal intellectual property consists of trademarks for, among others, Bellagio, The Mirage, Borgata, Mandalay Bay, MGM, MGM Grand, MGM
Resorts International, Luxor, Excalibur, New York-New York, Circus Circus and Beau Rivage, all of which have been registered or allowed in various classes in
the  United  States.  In  addition,  we  have  also  registered  or  applied  to  register  numerous  other  trademarks  in  connection  with  our  properties,  facilities  and
development projects in the United States and in various other foreign jurisdictions. These trademarks are brand names under which we market our properties and
services. We consider these brand names to be important to our business since they have the effect of developing brand identification. We believe that the name
recognition, reputation and image that we have developed attract customers to our facilities. Once granted, our trademark registrations are of perpetual duration so
long as they are used and periodically renewed. It is our intent to pursue and maintain our trademark registrations consistent with our goals for brand development
and identification, and enforcement of our trademark rights.
 
Employees and Labor Relations
 
As of December 31, 2017, we had approximately 51,000 full-time and 17,000 part-time employees domestically, of which 6,000 and 2,000, respectively,
support  the  Company’s  management  agreements  with  CityCenter.  In  addition,  we  had  approximately  9,000  employees  at  MGM  China.  We  had  collective
bargaining agreements with unions covering approximately 36,000 of our employees as of December 31, 2017. Collective bargaining agreements with three unions
covering a significant number of our employees in Las Vegas are scheduled to expire in the first half of 2018. We began negotiations with all three unions in the
first  quarter  of  2018.  In  addition,  Beau  Rivage  is  currently  engaged  in  negotiations  for  an  initial  collective  bargaining  agreement  with  a  council  of  unions
representing various hotel and food and beverage constituencies, Borgata will be engaged in negotiations with three unions in 2018, and MGM National Harbor is
in negotiations with one union. As of December 31, 2017, none of the employees of MGM China are part of a labor union and the resorts are not party to any
collective bargaining agreements.
 
Regulation and Licensing
 
The gaming industry is highly regulated, and we must maintain our licenses and pay gaming taxes to continue our operations. Each of our casinos is subject
to extensive regulation under the laws, rules and regulations of the jurisdiction in which it is located. These laws, rules and regulations generally concern the
responsibility, financial stability and character of the owners, managers, and persons with financial interest in the gaming operations. Violations of laws in one
jurisdiction could result in disciplinary action in other jurisdictions.  
 
A more detailed description of the gaming regulations to which we are subject is contained in Exhibit 99.2 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which
Exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
 
Our businesses are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations affecting businesses in general. These laws and regulations
include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  restrictions  and  conditions  concerning  alcoholic  beverages,  smoking,  employees,  currency  transactions,  taxation,  zoning  and
building codes (including regulations under the Americans with Disabilities Act, which requires all public accommodations to meet certain federal requirements
related to access and use by persons with disabilities) , construction, land use and marketing and advertising. We also deal with significant amounts of cash in our
operations and are subject to various reporting and anti-money laundering regulations. Such laws and regulations could change or could be interpreted differently in
the  future,  or  new  laws  and  regulations  could  be  enacted.  Material  changes,  new  laws  or  regulations,  or  material  differences  in  interpretations  by  courts  or
governmental authorities could adversely affect our operating results.
 
In addition, we are subject to certain federal, state and local environmental laws, regulations and ordinances, including the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water
Act, the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.
Under various federal, state and local laws and regulations, an owner or operator of real property may be held liable for the costs of removal or remediation of
certain hazardous or toxic substances or wastes located on its property, regardless of whether or not the present owner or operator knows of, or is responsible for,
the presence of such substances or wastes. We have not identified any issues associated with our properties that could reasonably be expected to have an adverse
effect on us or the results of our operations.
8

 
 
Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
 
This Form 10-K and our 2017 Annual Report to Stockholders contain “forward-looking statements”  within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements can be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “seeks,” “believes,” “estimates,”
“expects,” “will,” “may” and similar references to future periods. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements we make
regarding expected market growth in Macau, our ability to generate significant cash flow and execute on ongoing and future projects, amounts we will spend in
capital expenditures and investments, the opening of strategic resort developments, the estimated costs and components associated with those developments, our
expectations with respect to future cash dividends on our common stock, dividends and distributions we will receive from MGM China, the Operating Partnership
or CityCenter and amounts projected to be realized as deferred tax assets. The foregoing is not a complete list of all forward-looking statements we make.
 
Forward-looking  statements  are  based  on  our  current  expectations  and  assumptions  regarding  our  business,  the  economy  and  other  future  conditions.
Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks, and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict.
Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements. They are neither statements of historical fact nor guarantees or
assurances of future performance. Therefore, we caution you against relying on any of these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, regional, national or global political, economic, business,
competitive, market, and regulatory conditions and the following:
 
 
•
our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments, including the fixed component of our rent payments to MGP, could adversely
affect our development options and financial results and impact our ability to satisfy our obligations;
 
•
current and future economic, capital and credit market conditions could adversely affect our ability to service or refinance our indebtedness and to
make planned expenditures;
 
•
restrictions and limitations in the agreements governing our senior credit facility and other senior indebtedness could significantly affect our ability to
operate our business, as well as significantly affect our liquidity;
 
•
the fact that we are required to pay a significant portion of our cash flows as fixed and percentage rent under the master lease, which could adversely
affect our ability to fund our operations and growth, service our indebtedness and limit our ability to react to competitive and economic changes;
 
•
significant  competition  we  face  with  respect  to  destination  travel  locations  generally  and  with  respect  to  our  peers  in  the  industries  in  which  we
compete;
 
•
the fact that our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and the cost of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations could adversely
affect our business;
 
•
the impact on our business of economic and market conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate and in the locations in which our customers
reside;
 
•
our ability to sustain continued improvement efforts;
 
•
our ability to pay ongoing regular dividends is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and certain other limitations;
 
•
a significant number of our domestic gaming facilities are leased and could experience risks associated with leased property, including risks relating to
lease termination, lease extensions, charges and our relationship with the lessor, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial
position or results of operations;
 
•
financial, operational, regulatory or other potential challenges that may arise with respect to MGP, as our sole lessor for a significant portion of our
properties, may adversely impair our operations;
 
•
the fact that MGP has adopted a policy under which certain transactions with us, including transactions involving consideration in excess of $25
million, must be approved in accordance with certain specified procedures;
 
•
restrictions on our ability to have any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, other than through
MGM China;
 
•
the ability of the Macau government to terminate MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession under certain circumstances without compensating MGM
Grand  Paradise,  exercise  its  redemption  right  with  respect  to  the  subconcession,  or  refuse  to  grant  MGM  Grand  Paradise  an  extension  of  the
subconcession in 2020;
 
•
the dependence of MGM Grand Paradise upon gaming promoters for a significant portion of gaming revenues in Macau;
 
•
changes to fiscal and tax policies;
 
•
our ability to recognize our foreign tax credit deferred tax asset and the variability of the valuation allowance we may apply against such deferred tax
asset;
 
•
extreme weather conditions or climate change may cause property damage or interrupt business;
 
•
the concentration of a majority of our major gaming resorts on the Las Vegas Strip;
 
•
the fact that we extend credit to a large portion of our customers and we may not be able to collect such gaming receivables;
9

 
 
•
the potential occurrence of impairments to goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets or long-lived assets which could negat ively affect future profits;
 
•
the susceptibility of leisure and business travel, especially travel by air, to global geopolitical events, such as terrorist attacks, other acts of violence or
acts of war or hostility;
 
•
the fact that co-investing in properties, including our investment in CityCenter, decreases our ability to manage risk;
 
•
the fact that future construction, development, or expansion projects will be subject to significant development and construction risks;
 
•
our ability to commence operations at MGM Springfield on the required timeline;
 
•
the fact that our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all possible losses that our properties could suffer, our insurance costs may increase
and we may not be able to obtain similar insurance coverage in the future;
 
•
the fact that a failure to protect our trademarks could have a negative impact on the value of our brand names and adversely affect our business;
 
•
the risks associated with doing business outside of the United States and the impact of any potential violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or
other similar anti-corruption laws;
 
•
risks related to pending claims that have been, or future claims that may be brought against us;
 
•
the fact that a significant portion of our labor force is covered by collective bargaining agreements;
 
•
the sensitivity of our business to energy prices and a rise in energy prices could harm our operating results;
 
•
the potential that failure to maintain the integrity of our computer systems and internal customer information could result in damage to our reputation
and/or subject us to fines, payment of damages, lawsuits or other restrictions on our use or transfer of data;
 
•
the potential reputational harm as a result of increased scrutiny related to our corporate social responsibility efforts;
 
•
the potential failure of future efforts to expand through investments in other businesses and properties or through alliances or acquisitions, or to divest
some of our properties and other assets;
 
•
increases in gaming taxes and fees in the jurisdictions in which we operate; and
 
•
the potential for conflicts of interest to arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors of MGM China, which is a publicly traded
company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
 
Any forward-looking statement made by us in this Form 10-K or our 2017 Annual Report to Stockholders speaks only as of the date on which it is made.
Factors or events that could cause our actual results to differ may emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all of them. We undertake no
obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, except as may be required
by law. If we update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be made that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other
forward-looking statements.
 
You should also be aware that while we from time to time communicate with securities analysts, we do not disclose to them any material non-public
information, internal forecasts or other confidential business information. Therefore, you should not assume that we agree with any statement or report issued by
any analyst, irrespective of the content of the statement or report. To the extent that reports issued by securities analysts contain projections, forecasts or opinions,
those reports are not our responsibility and are not endorsed by us.  
 
Executive Officers of the Registrant
 
The following table sets forth, as of March 1, 2018, the name, age and position of each of our executive officers. Executive officers are elected by and serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Directors.
 
Name
 
Age
 
Position
James J. Murren
 
56
 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Robert H. Baldwin
 
67
 Chief Customer Development Officer
William J. Hornbuckle
 
60
 President
Corey I. Sanders
 
54
 Chief Operating Officer
Daniel J. D’Arrigo
 
49
 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Phyllis A. James
 
65
 Executive Vice President, Chief Diversity and Corporate Responsibility Officer
John M. McManus
 
50
 Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary
Robert C. Selwood
 
62
 Executive Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer
 
Mr. Murren has served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Company since December 2008 and as President from December 1999 to December
2012. He served as Chief Operating Officer from August 2007 through December 2008. He was Chief Financial Officer from January 1998 to August 2007 and
Treasurer from November 2001 to August 2007.
10

 
 
Mr. Baldwin has served as Chief Customer Development Officer since August 2015. He served as Chief Design and Construction Officer from August 2007
to August 2015, Chief Executive Officer of Mirage Resorts from June 2000 to August 2007 and President and Chief Executive Officer of Bellagio, LLC from June
1996 to March 2005.
 
Mr. Hornbuckle has served as President since December 2012. He served as Chief Marketing Officer from August 2009 to August 2014 and President and
Chief Operating Officer of Mandalay Bay Resort & Casino from April 2005 to August 2009.  
 
Mr.  Sanders  has  served  as  Chief  Operating  Officer  since  September  2010.  He  served  as  Chief  Operating  Officer  for  the  Company’s  Core  Brand  and
Regional  Properties  from  August  2009  to  September  2010,  as  Executive  Vice  President—Operations  from  August  2007  to  August  2009,  as  Executive  Vice
President and Chief Financial Officer for MGM Grand Resorts from April 2005 to August 2007.
 
Mr. D’Arrigo has served as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer since August 2007 and as Treasurer from September 2009 to June 2016.
He  served  as  Senior  Vice  President—Finance  of  the  Company  from  February  2005  to  August  2007  and  as  Vice  President—Finance  of  the  Company  from
December 2000 to February 2005.
 
Ms. James has served as Executive Vice President, Chief Diversity and Corporate Responsibility Officer since October 2016. She served as Executive Vice
President and Special Counsel—Litigation from July 2010 to October 2016 and as Chief Diversity Officer since 2009. She served as Senior Vice President, Senior
Counsel and then Deputy General Counsel of the Company from March 2002 to July 2010.
 
Mr. McManus has served as Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary since July 2010. He served as Senior Vice President, Acting General
Counsel and Secretary of the Company from December 2009 to July 2010. He served as Senior Vice President, Deputy General Counsel and Assistant Secretary
from September 2009 to December 2009. He served as Senior Vice President, Assistant General Counsel and Assistant Secretary of the Company from July 2008
to September 2009. He served as counsel to various operating subsidiaries from May 2001 to July 2008.
 
Mr. Selwood has served as Executive Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer since August 2007. He served as Senior Vice President—Accounting of
the Company from February 2005 to August 2007 and as Vice President—Accounting of the Company from December 2000 to February 2005.
 
Available Information
 
We maintain a website at www.mgmresorts.com that includes financial and other information for investors. We provide access to our SEC filings, including
our annual report on Form 10-K and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q (including related filings in XBRL format), filed and furnished current reports on Form 8-K,
and amendments to those reports on our website, free of charge, through a link to the SEC’s EDGAR database. Through that link, our filings are available as soon
as reasonably practicable after we file or furnish the documents with the SEC.
 
These filings are also available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov . In addition, the public may read and copy any materials that we file with the SEC at
the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, D.C. 20549, and may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by
calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330.
 
Because of the time differences between Macau and the United States, we also use our corporate website as a means of posting important information about
MGM China.
 
References in this document to our website address do not incorporate by reference the information contained on the websites into this Annual Report on
Form 10-K.
 
 
11

 
ITEM 1A.
RISK FACTORS
 
You should be aware that the occurrence of any of the events described in this section and elsewhere in this report or in any other of our filings with the
SEC could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In evaluating us, you should consider carefully,
among other things, the risks described below.
 
Risks Relating to Our Substantial Indebtedness
 
 
•
Our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments, including the fixed component of our rent payments to MGP, could adversely
affect our operations and financial results and impact our ability to satisfy our obligations . As of December 31, 2017, we had approximately $13.0
billion of principal amount of indebtedness outstanding, including $373 million of borrowings outstanding and $1.1 billion of available borrowing
capacity  under  our  senior  secured  credit  facility,  and  $2.3  billion  and  $2.1  billion  of  debt  outstanding  under  the  MGM  China  and  the  Operating
Partnership  credit  facilities,  respectively.  In  addition,  the  Operating  Partnership  has  $1.9  billion  of  senior  notes  outstanding.  Any  increase  in  the
interest rates applicable to our existing or future borrowings would increase the cost of our indebtedness and reduce the cash flow available to fund our
other liquidity needs. We do not guarantee MGM China’s or the Operating Partnership’s obligations under their respective debt agreements and, to the
extent MGM China or the Operating  Partnership  were to cease  to produce cash flow sufficient  to service  their indebtedness,  our ability  to make
additional investments into such entities is limited by the covenants in our existing senior secured credit facility.
 
In addition, our substantial indebtedness and significant financial commitments could have important negative consequences on us, including:
 
 
•
increasing our exposure to general adverse economic and industry conditions;
 
•
limiting our flexibility to plan for, or react to, changes in our business and industry;
 
•
limiting our ability to borrow additional funds for working capital requirements, capital expenditures, debt service requirements,
execution of our business strategy or other general operating requirements;
 
•
making it more difficult for us to make payments on our indebtedness; or
 
•
placing us at a competitive disadvantage compared to less-leveraged competitors.
 
Moreover, our businesses are capital intensive. For our owned, leased and managed resorts to remain attractive and competitive, we must periodically
invest significant capital to keep the properties well-maintained, modernized and refurbished (and, under the master lease we are required to spend an
aggregate  amount  of  at  least  1%  of  actual  adjusted  net  revenues  from  the  properties  subject  to  the  master  lease  on  capital  expenditures  at  those
properties).  Such  investments  require  an  ongoing  supply  of  cash  and,  to  the  extent  that  we  cannot  fund  expenditures  from  cash  generated  by
operations, funds must be borrowed or otherwise obtained. Similarly, development projects, including our development project in Massachusetts, and
acquisitions  could  require  significant  capital  commitments,  the  incurrence  of  additional  debt,  guarantees  of  third-party  debt,  or  the  incurrence  of
contingent liabilities, any or all of which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
 
 
•
Current and future economic, capital and credit market conditions could adversely affect our ability to service or refinance our indebtedness and to
make  planned  expenditures .  Our  ability  to  make  payments  on,  and  to  refinance,  our  indebtedness  and  to  fund  planned  or  committed  capital
expenditures and investments depends on our ability to generate cash flow in the future, receive distributions from our unconsolidated affiliates or
subsidiaries,  including  CityCenter,  MGM  China  and  the  Operating  Partnership,  borrow  under  our  senior  secured  credit  facility  or  incur  new
indebtedness. If regional and national economic conditions deteriorate we could experience decreased revenues from our operations attributable to
decreases in consumer spending levels and could fail to generate sufficient cash to fund our liquidity needs or fail to satisfy the financial and other
restrictive covenants in our debt instruments. We cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or continue to
receive distributions from our unconsolidated affiliates or subsidiaries, including CityCenter, MGM China and the Operating Partnership. We cannot
assure you that future  borrowings will be available  to us under our senior secured credit facility  in an amount sufficient  to enable  us to pay our
indebtedness or to fund our other liquidity needs. We cannot assure you that we will be able to access the capital markets in the future to borrow
additional indebtedness on terms that are favorable to us.
 
We have a significant amount of indebtedness maturing in 2019, and thereafter. Our ability to timely refinance and replace our indebtedness in the
future will depend upon the economic and credit market conditions discussed above. If we are unable to refinance our indebtedness on a timely basis,
we might be forced to seek alternate forms of financing, dispose of certain assets or minimize capital expenditures and other investments. There is no
assurance that any of these alternatives would be available to us, if at all, on satisfactory terms, on terms that would not be disadvantageous to us, or on
terms that would not require us to breach the terms and conditions of our existing or future debt agreements.
 
12

 
 
•
The agreements governing our senior secured credit facility and other senior indebtedness contain restrictions and limitations that could significantly
a ffect our ability to operate our business, as well as significantly affect our liquidity, and therefore could adversely affect our results of operations .
Covenants governing our senior secured credit facility and certain of our debt securities restrict, am ong other things, our ability to:
 
 
•
pay dividends or distributions, repurchase or issue equity, prepay certain debt or make certain investments;
 
•
incur additional debt;
 
•
incur liens on assets;
 
•
sell assets or consolidate with another company or sell all or substantially all of our assets;
 
•
enter into transactions with affiliates;
 
•
allow certain subsidiaries to transfer assets; and
 
•
enter into sale and lease-back transactions.
 
Our ability to comply with these provisions may be affected by events beyond our control. The breach of any such covenants or obligations not
otherwise waived or cured could result in a default under the applicable debt obligations and could trigger acceleration of those obligations, which in
turn could trigger cross-defaults under other agreements governing our long-term indebtedness. In addition, our senior secured credit facility requires
us to satisfy certain financial covenants, including a maximum total net leverage ratio, a maximum first lien net leverage ratio and a minimum interest
coverage ratio. Any default under our senior secured credit facility or the indentures governing our other debt could adversely affect our growth, our
financial condition, our results of operations and our ability to make payments on our debt.
 
In addition, MGM Grand Paradise and MGM China are co-borrowers under an amended and restated credit facility and the Operating Partnership is a
borrower under its senior secured credit facility, all of which contain covenants that restrict the respective borrower’s ability to engage in certain
transactions. In particular, these credit agreements require MGM China and the Operating Partnership to satisfy certain financial covenants and impose
certain operating and financial restrictions on them and their respective subsidiaries (including, with respect to MGM China, MGM Grand Paradise).
These  restrictions  include,  among  other  things,  limitations  on  their  ability  to  pay  dividends  or  distributions  to  us,  incur  additional  debt,  make
investments or engage in other businesses, merge or consolidate with other companies, or transfer or sell assets.
 
 
•
We are required to pay a significant portion of our cash flows as fixed and percentage rent under the master lease, which could adversely affect our
ability to fund our operations and growth, service our indebtedness and limit our ability to react to competitive and economic changes . For the second
lease year commencing April 1, 2017, we were required to make annual rent payments of $662 million under the master lease.  In October 2017,
subsequent to MGP’s acquisition of MGM National Harbor’s real property, annual rent payments under the master lease increased to $757 million,
prorated for the remainder of the second lease year . The master lease also provides for fixed annual escalators of 2% on the base rent in the second
through sixth years and the possibility for additional 2% increases thereafter subject to the tenant meeting an adjusted net revenue to rent ratio, as well
as potential increases in percentage rent in year six and every five years thereafter based on a percentage of average actual annual net revenue during
the preceding five year period. As a result, our ability to fund our own operations, raise capital, make acquisitions, make investments, service our debt
and otherwise respond to competitive and economic changes may be adversely affected. For example, our obligations under the master lease may:
 
 
•
make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to our indebtedness and to obtain additional indebtedness; 
 
•
increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions or a downturn in our business;
 
•
require  us  to  dedicate  a  substantial  portion  of  our  cash  flow  from  operations  to  making  rent  payments,  thereby  reducing  the
availability  of  our  cash  flow  to  fund  working  capital,  capital  expenditures,  development  projects  and  other  general  corporate
purposes;
 
•
limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry in which we operate; 
 
•
restrict our ability to make acquisitions, divestitures and engage in other significant transactions; and
 
•
cause us to lose our rights with respect to all of the properties leased under the master lease if we fail to pay rent or other amounts or
otherwise default on the master lease, given that all of the properties we lease from MGP under the master lease are effectively
cross-collateralized as a result of the master lease being a single unitary lease.
 
Any of the above factors could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
 
13

 
Risks Related to our Business
 
 
•
We face significant competition with respect to destination travel locations generally and with respect to our peers in the industries in which we
compete, and failure to compete effectively could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow .
The hotel, resort and casino industries are highly competitive. We do not believe that our competition is limited to a particular geographic area, and
hotel, resort and gaming operations in other states or countries could attract our customers. To the extent that new casinos enter our markets or hotel
room capacity is expanded by others in major destination locations, competition will increase. Major competitors, including potential new entrants,
may also expand their hotel room capacity, expand their range of amenities, improve their level of service, or construct new resorts in Las Vegas,
Macau or in the domestic regional markets in which we operate, all of which could attract our customers. Also, the growth of gaming in areas outside
Las Vegas, including California, has increased the competition faced by our operations in Las Vegas and elsewhere.
 
In addition, competition could increase if changes in gaming restrictions in the United States and elsewhere result in the addition of new gaming
establishments  located  closer  to  our customers  than  our  casinos.  For example,  while  our  Macau  operations  compete  to  some  extent  with  casinos
located elsewhere in or near Asia, certain countries in the region have legalized casino gaming (including Japan) and others (such as Taiwan and
Thailand) may legalize casino gaming (or online gaming) in the future (including, for example, a recent proposal by China to allow gambling on
Hainan Island). Furthermore,  currently  MGM Grand Paradise holds one of only six gaming concessions  authorized by the Macau government  to
operate  casinos  in  Macau.  If  the  Macau  government  were  to  allow  additional  competitors  to  operate  in  Macau  through  the  grant  of  additional
concessions or if current concessionaires and subconcessionaires open additional facilities, we would face increased competition.  
 
Most jurisdictions where casino gaming is currently permitted place numerical and/or geographical limitations on the issuance of new gaming licenses.
Although a number of jurisdictions in the United States and foreign countries are considering legalizing or expanding casino gaming, in some cases
new gaming operations may be restricted to specific locations and we expect that there will be intense competition for any attractive new opportunities
(which may include acquisitions of existing properties) that do arise. Furthermore, certain jurisdictions, including Nevada and New Jersey, have also
legalized forms of online gaming and other jurisdictions, including Illinois, have legalized video gaming terminals. The expansion of online gaming
and other types of gaming in these and other jurisdictions may further compete with our operations by reducing customer visitation and spend in our
casino resorts.
 
In addition to competition with other hotels, resorts and casinos, we compete with destination travel locations outside of the markets in which we
operate. Our failure to compete successfully in our various markets and to continue to attract customers could adversely affect our business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow.
 
 
•
Our businesses are subject to extensive regulation and the cost of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations may adversely affect our
business and results of operations . Our ownership and operation of gaming facilities is subject to extensive regulation by the countries, states and
provinces in which we operate. These laws, regulations and ordinances vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but generally concern the responsibility,
financial stability and character of the owners and managers of gaming operations as well as persons financially interested or involved in gaming
operations.  As  such,  our  gaming  regulators  can  require  us  to  disassociate  ourselves  from  suppliers  or  business  partners  found  unsuitable  by  the
regulators or, alternatively, cease operations in that jurisdiction. In addition, unsuitable activity on our part or on the part of our domestic or foreign
unconsolidated affiliates or subsidiaries in any jurisdiction could have a negative effect on our ability to continue operating in other jurisdictions. The
regulatory environment in any particular jurisdiction may change in the future and any such change could have a material adverse effect on our results
of operations. In addition, we are subject to various gaming taxes, which are subject to possible increase at any time by various federal, state, local and
foreign legislatures and officials. Increases in gaming taxation could also adversely affect our results. For a summary of gaming and other regulations
that affect our business, see “Regulation and Licensing” and Exhibit 99.2 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
 
Further, our directors, officers, key employees and investors in our properties must meet approval standards of certain state and foreign regulatory
authorities. If state regulatory authorities were to find such a person or investor unsuitable, we would be required to sever our relationship with that
person or the investor may be required to dispose of his, her or its interest in the property. State regulatory agencies may conduct investigations into
the conduct or associations of our directors, officers, key employees or investors to ensure compliance with applicable standards. Certain public and
private issuances of securities and other transactions also require the approval of certain regulatory authorities.
 
14

 
In Macau, current laws and regulations co ncerning gaming and gaming concessions are, for the most part, fairly recent and there is little precedent on
the interpretation of these laws and regulations. These laws and regulations are complex, and a court or administrative or regulatory body may in the
future render an interpretation of these laws and regulations, or issue new or modified regulations, that differ from MGM China’s interpretation, which
could have a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, MGM China’s activities in Macau are
subject to administrative review and approval by various government agencies. We cannot assure you that MGM China will be able to obtain all
necessary approvals, and any such failure to do so may materially affect its long-term business strategy and operations. Macau laws permit redress to
the courts with respect to administrative actions; however, to date such redress is largely untested in relation to gaming issues.
 
In addition to gaming regulations, we are also subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations affecting businesses in general.
These laws and regulations include, but are not limited to, restrictions and conditions concerning alcoholic beverages, environmental matters, smoking,
employees, currency transactions, taxation, zoning and building codes, and marketing and advertising. For instance, we are subject to certain federal,
state  and  local  environmental  laws,  regulations  and  ordinances,  including  the  Clean  Air  Act,  the  Clean  Water  Act,  the  Resource  Conservation
Recovery Act, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990. Under various federal,
state and local environmental laws and regulations, an owner or operator of real property may be held liable for the costs of removal or remediation of
certain hazardous or toxic substances or wastes located on its property, regardless of whether or not the present owner or operator knows of, or is
responsible for, the presence of such substances or wastes. Such laws and regulations could change or could be interpreted differently in the future, or
new laws and regulations could be enacted. For example, Illinois has enacted a ban on smoking in nearly all public places, including bars, restaurants,
work places, schools and casinos. Similarly, in October 2014, casinos in Macau, including MGM China, implemented a smoking ban which prohibits
smoking on all mass market gaming floors and, in 2015, the Macau Health Bureau announced that they will promote the submission of a bill proposing
a full smoking ban in casinos, including in VIP rooms. The likelihood or outcome of similar legislation in other jurisdictions and referendums in the
future cannot be predicted, though any smoking ban would be expected to negatively impact our financial performance.
 
We also deal with significant amounts of cash in our operations and are subject to recordkeeping and reporting obligations as required by various anti-
money laundering laws and regulations. For instance, we are subject to regulation under the Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act of
1970, commonly known as the “Bank Secrecy Act,” which, among other things, requires us to report to the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) any
currency  transactions  in  excess  of  $10,000  that  occur  within  a  24-hour  gaming  day,  including  identification  of  the  individual(s)  involved  in  the
currency transaction. We are also required to report certain suspicious activity where we know, suspect or have reason to suspect transactions, among
other things, involve funds from illegal activity or are intended to evade federal regulations or avoid reporting requirements or have no business or
lawful purpose. In addition, under the Bank Secrecy Act we are subject to various other rules and regulations involving reporting, recordkeeping and
retention. Our compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act is subject to periodic examinations by the IRS. Any such laws and regulations could change or
could  be  interpreted  differently  in  the  future,  or  new  laws  and  regulations  could  be  enacted.  Any  violations  of  the  anti-money  laundering  laws,
including the Bank Secrecy Act, or regulations by any of our properties could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or
cash flows.
 
 
•
Our business is affected by economic and market conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate and in the locations in which our customers reside
. Our business is particularly sensitive to reductions in discretionary consumer spending and corporate spending on conventions, trade shows and
business development. Economic contraction, economic uncertainty or the perception by our customers of weak or weakening economic conditions
may cause a decline in demand for hotels, casino resorts, trade shows and conventions, and for the type of luxury amenities we offer. In addition,
changes in discretionary consumer spending or consumer preferences could be driven by factors such as the increased cost of travel, an unstable job
market, perceived or actual disposable consumer income and wealth, outbreaks of contagious diseases or fears of war and acts of terrorism or other
acts of violence. Consumer preferences also evolve over time due to a variety of factors, including demographic changes, which, for instance, have
resulted in recent growth in consumer demand for non-gaming offerings. Our success depends in part on our ability to anticipate the preferences of
consumers and timely react to these trends, and any failure to do so may negatively impact our results of operations. Aria, Bellagio and MGM Grand
Las Vegas in particular may be affected by economic conditions in the Far East, and all of our Nevada resorts are affected by economic conditions in
the United States, and California in particular. A recession, economic slowdown or any other significant economic condition affecting consumers or
corporations generally is likely to cause a reduction in visitation to our resorts, which would adversely affect our operating results. For example, the
prior recession and downturn in consumer and corporate spending had a negative impact on our results of operations.
 
15

 
In addition, since we expect a significant number of customers to come to MGM Macau from mainland China, general economic and market condit
ions  in  China  could  impact  our  financial  prospects.  Any  slowdown  in  economic  growth  or  changes  to  China’s  current  restrictions  on  travel  and
currency  conversion  or  movements,  including  market  impacts  resulting  from  China’s  recent  anti-corruption  campaign  a nd  related  tightening  of
liquidity provided by non-bank lending entities and cross-border currency monitoring (including increased restrictions on Union Pay withdrawals and
other ATM limits on the withdrawal of patacas imposed by the government), could dis rupt the number of visitors from mainland China to MGM
Macau and/or the amounts they are willing to spend in the casino. For example, from 2008 through 2010, China readjusted its visa policy toward
Macau  and  limited  the  number  of  visits  that  some  mainland Chinese  citizens  may  make  to  Macau  in  a  given  time  period.  In  addition,  effective
October 2013, China banned “zero ‑fare” tour groups involving no or low up-front payments and compulsory shopping, which were popular among
visitors to Macau from mainland Chi na, and in December 2014 the Chinese government tightened the enforcement of visa transit rules for those
seeking to enter Macau at the Gongbei border (including requirements to present an airplane ticket to a destination country, a visa issued by such des
tination country and a valid Chinese passport). Most recently, in July 2017, the Chinese government, along with Macau authorities, implemented new
facial recognition technology on ATM machines in Macau to strictly enforce the “know you r customer” regulatio ns for mainland Chinese bank
cardholders. It is unclear whether these and other measures will continue to be in effect, become more restrictive, or be readopted in the future. These
developments have had, and any future policy developments that may be impl emented may have, the effect of reducing the number of visitors to
Macau from mainland China, which could adversely impact tourism and the gaming industry in Macau.
Furthermore, our operations in Macau may be impacted by competition for limited labor resources. Our success in Macau will be impacted by our
ability to retain and hire employees. We compete with a large number of casino resorts for a limited number of employees and we anticipate that such
competition will grow in light of new developments in Macau. While we seek employees from other countries to adequately staff our resorts, certain
Macau government policies limit our ability to import labor in certain job classifications (for instance, the Macau government requires that we only
hire Macau residents as dealers in our casinos) and any future government policies that freeze or cancel our ability to import labor could cause labor
costs to increase. Finally, because additional  casino projects are under construction  and are to be developed in the future,  existing  transportation
infrastructure may need to be expanded to accommodate increased visitation to Macau. If transportation facilities to and from Macau are inadequate to
meet the demands of an increased volume of gaming customers visiting Macau, the desirability of Macau as a gaming destination, as well as the results
of operations at our development in Cotai, Macau, could be negatively impacted.
 
 
•
We  may  not  be  able  to  sustain  our  continuous  improvement  efforts. In  2015,  we  commenced  an  initiative  for  sustained  growth  and  margin
enhancement, focused on improving our business processes to optimize scale for greater efficiency and lower costs throughout our business. While we
believe these initiatives will continue to result in Adjusted EBITDA benefit, our optimization efforts may fail to achieve expected results or we may
not  be  able  to  sustain  our  historic  efforts  to  produce  continuous  improvements.  In  addition,  while  we  expect  to  continue  to  explore  additional
opportunities to drive further improvement to our business processes, we may not be able to achieve the historic Adjusted EBITDA benefits at the
same rate (or at all) and we may not be able to institutionalize the continuous improvement business practices that developed in connection with
implementing the Profit Growth Plan.
 
 
•
Our ability to pay ongoing regular dividends to our stockholders is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and may be limited by our
holding company structure, existing and future debt agreements entered into by us or our subsidiaries and state law requirements. We intend to pay
ongoing regular quarterly cash dividends on our common stock. However, our board of directors may, in its sole discretion, change the amount or
frequency of dividends or discontinue the payment of dividends entirely. In addition, our ability to pay dividends is restricted by certain covenants in
our  credit  agreement,  and  because  we  are  a  holding  company  with  no  material  direct  operations,  we  are  dependent  on  receiving  cash  from  our
operating  subsidiaries  to  generate  the  funds  from  operations  necessary  to  pay  dividends  on  our  common  stock.  We  expect  our  subsidiaries  will
continue to generate significant cash flow necessary to maintain quarterly dividend payments on our common stock; however, their ability to generate
funds will be subject to their operating results, cash requirements and financial condition, any applicable provisions of state law that may limit the
amount  of  funds  available  to  us,  and  compliance  with  covenants  and  financial  ratios  related  to  existing  or  future  agreements  governing  any
indebtedness  at  such  subsidiaries  and  any  limitations  in  other  agreements  such  subsidiaries  may  have  with  third  parties.  In  addition,  each  of  the
companies in our corporate chain must manage its assets, liabilities and working capital in order to meet all of their respective cash obligations. As a
consequence of these various limitations and restrictions, future dividend payments may be reduced or eliminated. Any change in the level of our
dividends or the suspension of the payment thereof could adversely affect the market price of our common stock.
 
 
•
A significant number of our domestic gaming facilities are leased and could experience risks associated with leased property, including risks relating
to lease termination, lease extensions, charges and our relationship with the lessor, which could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial position or results of operations.  We lease eleven of our
16

 
 
destination resorts and The Park from a subsidiary of MGP pursuant to the master lease. The master lease has a term of ten years with up to four
additional five year extensions, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions. The master lease is commonly known as a triple-net lease. Accordingly, in
addition to rent, we are required to pay the following, among other things: (1) all facility maintenance, (2) all insurance required in connection with the
leased properties and the business conducted on the leased properties, (3) taxes levied on or wi th respect to the leased properties (other than taxes on
the income of the lessor), (4) all capital expenditures, and (5) all utilities and other services necessary or appropriate for the leased properties and the
business conducted on the leased propertie s. We are responsible for paying these expenses notwithstanding the fact that many of the benefits received
in exchange for such costs shall accrue in part to MGP as owner of the associated facilities. In addition, if some of our leased facilities should p rove to
be unprofitable or experience other issues that would warrant ceasing operations, or if we should otherwise decide to exit a particular property, we
would remain obligated for lease payments and other obligations under the master lease even if we d ecided to cease operations at those locations
unless we are able to transfer the rights with respect to a particular property in accordance with the requirements of the master lease. Our ability to
transfer our obligations under the master lease to a third -party with respect to individual properties, should we decide to withdraw from a particular
location, is limited to non-Las Vegas properties and no more than two Las Vegas gaming properties, and is subject to identifying a willing third-party
who meets th e requirements for a transferee set forth in the master lease. We may be unable to find an appropriate transferee willing   to assume the
obligations under the master lease with respect to any such property. In addition, we could incur special charges relati ng to the closing of such
facilities  including  sublease  termination  costs,  impairment  charges  and  other  special  charges  that  would reduce  our net  income  and  could  have  a
material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations . Furthermore, our obligation to pay rent as well as the other costs
described above is absolute in virtually all circumstances, regardless of the performance of the properties and other circumstances that might abate rent
in leases that now place these ri sks on the tenant, such as certain events of casualty and condemnation.
 
 
•
Any financial, operational, regulatory or other potential challenges that may arise with respect to MGP, as our sole lessor for a significant portion of
our properties, may adversely impair our operations . We lease a substantial number of the properties that we operate and manage, which represents a
significant portion of our operations, from MGP under the master lease. If MGP has financial, operational, regulatory or other challenges, there can be
no assurance that MGP will be able to comply with its obligations under the master lease or its other agreements with us. Failure on the part of MGP to
fulfill its commitments could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
 
 
•
James J. Murren, our Chairman, Daniel J. Taylor, one of our directors, and William J. Hornbuckle, Elisa C. Gois, and John M. McManus, members of
our senior management, may have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their positions at MGP . James J. Murren serves as our Chairman
and as the Chairman of MGP. In addition, Daniel J. Taylor, one of our directors, is also a director of MGP and William J. Hornbuckle, Elisa C. Gois,
and John M. McManus, members of our senior management, are also directors of MGP. While we have procedures in place to address such situations
and the organizational documents with respect to MGP contain provisions that reduce or eliminate duties (including fiduciary duties) to any MGP
shareholder to the fullest extent permitted by law, these overlapping positions could nonetheless create, or appear to create, potential conflicts of
interest when our or MGP's management and directors pursue the same corporate opportunities, such as potential acquisition targets, or face decisions
that could have different implications for us and MGP. Further, potential conflicts of interest could arise in connection with the resolution of any
dispute between us and MGP (or its subsidiaries) regarding the terms of the agreements governing the separation and the relationship, between us and
MGP, such  as under the  master  lease.  Potential  conflicts  of interest  could also arise  if we and  MGP enter into  any commercial  or  other adverse
arrangements with each other in the future.
 
 
•
Despite our ability to exercise control over the affairs of MGP as a result of our ownership of the single outstanding Class B share of MGP, MGP has
adopted a policy under which certain transactions with us, including transactions involving consideration in excess of $25 million, must be approved
in accordance with certain specified procedures, which could affect our ability to execute our operational and strategic objectives.  We own the single
outstanding Class B share of MGP. The Class B Share is a non-economic interest in MGP which does not provide its holder any rights to profits or
losses or any rights to receive distributions from operations of MGP or upon liquidation or winding up of MGP, and which represents a majority of the
voting power of MGP’s shares so long as the holder of the Class B share and its controlled affiliates’ (excluding MGP) aggregate beneficial ownership
of  the  combined  economic  interests  in  MGP  and  the  Operating  Partnership  does  not  fall  below  30%.  We,  therefore,  have  the  ability  to  exercise
significant control over MGP’s affairs, including control over the outcome of all matters submitted to MGP’s shareholders for approval.
 
MGP’s operating agreement, however, provides that whenever a potential conflict of interest exists or arises between us or any of our affiliates (other
than MGP and its subsidiaries), on the one hand, and MGP or any of its subsidiaries, on the other hand, any resolution or course of action by MGP’s
board of directors in respect of such conflict of interest shall be conclusively deemed to be fair and reasonable to MGP if it is (i) approved by a
majority of a conflicts committee which
17

 
consists  solely  of  “independent”  directors  (which  MGP  refers  to  as  “Special  Approval”)  (such  independence  determined in  accordance  with  the
NYSE’s listing standards, the standards established by the Exchange Act to serve on an audit committee of a board of directors and certain additional
independence  requirements  in our operating  agreement),  (ii)  determined  by MGP’s boa rd of directors  to be fair  and reasonable  to MGP or (iii)
approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the voting power of MGP’s outstanding voting shares (excluding voting shares
owned by us and our affiliates). Furthermore, M GP’s operating agreement provides that any transaction with a value, individually or in the aggregate,
over $25 million between us or any of our affiliates (other than MGP and its subsidiaries), on the one hand, and MGP or any of its subsidiaries, on the
o ther hand (any such transaction (other than the exercise of rights by us or any of our affiliates (other than MGP and its subsidiaries) under any of the
material agreements entered into on the closing day of MGP’s formation transactions), a “Threshold Tran saction”), shall be permitted only if (i)
Special Approval is obtained or (ii) such transaction is approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of the voting power of
MGP’s outstanding voting shares (excluding voting shares owned by us and our affiliates).
 
As a result, certain transactions, including any Threshold Transactions that we may want to pursue with MGP and that could have significant benefit to
us may require Special Approval. There can be no assurance that the required approval will be obtained with respect to these transactions either from a
conflicts committee comprised of independent MGP directors or the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares not held by us and our affiliates. The
failure to obtain such requisite consent could materially affect our ability and the cost to execute our operational and strategic objectives.
 
 
•
We have agreed not to have any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, other than through MGM
China . In connection with the initial public offering of MGM China, the holding company that indirectly owns and operates MGM Macau, we entered
into a Deed of Non-Compete Undertakings with MGM China and Ms. Ho, Pansy Catilina Chiu King (“Ms. Ho”) pursuant to which we are restricted
from having any interest or involvement in gaming businesses in the People’s Republic of China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, other than through
MGM China. While gaming is currently prohibited in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, if it is legalized in the future our ability to compete in these
locations could be limited until the earliest of (i) March 31, 2020, (ii) the date MGM China’s ordinary shares cease to be listed on The Stock Exchange
of Hong Kong Limited or (iii) the date when our ownership of MGM China shares is less than 20% of the then-issued share capital of MGM China.
 
 
•
The  Macau  government  can  terminate  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  subconcession  under  certain  circumstances  without  compensating  MGM  Grand
Paradise , exercise its redemption right with respect to the subconcession, or refuse to grant MGM Grand Paradise an extension of the subconcession
in 2020 , any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business , financial condition , results of operations and cash flows . The Macau
government  has  the  right  to  unilaterally  terminate  the  subconcession  in  the  event  of  fundamental  non-compliance  by  MGM  Grand  Paradise  with
applicable Macau laws or MGM Grand Paradise’s basic obligations under the subconcession contract. MGM Grand Paradise has the opportunity to
remedy any such non-compliance with its fundamental obligations under the subconcession contract within a period to be stipulated by the Macau
government.  Upon  such  termination,  all  of  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  casino  area  premises  and  gaming-related  equipment  would  be  transferred
automatically to the Macau government without compensation to MGM Grand Paradise, and we would cease to generate any revenues from these
operations. We cannot assure you that MGM Grand Paradise will perform all of its obligations under the subconcession contract in a way that satisfies
the requirements of the Macau government.
 
Furthermore,  under  the  subconcession  contract,  MGM  Grand  Paradise  is  obligated  to  comply  with  any  laws  and  regulations  that  the  Macau
government might promulgate in the future. We cannot assure you that MGM Grand Paradise will be able to comply with these laws and regulations
or that these laws and regulations would not adversely affect our ability to construct or operate our Macau businesses. If any disagreement arises
between MGM Grand Paradise and the Macau government regarding the interpretation of, or MGM Grand Paradise’s compliance with, a provision of
the subconcession contract, MGM Grand Paradise will be relying on a consultation and negotiation process with the Macau government. During any
consultation or negotiation, MGM Grand Paradise will be obligated to comply with the terms of the subconcession contract as interpreted by the
Macau  government.  Currently,  there  is  no  precedent  concerning  how  the  Macau  government  will  treat  the  termination  of  a  concession  or
subconcession upon the occurrence of any of the circumstances mentioned above. The loss of the subconcession would require us to cease conducting
gaming operations in Macau, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
 
In addition, the subconcession contract expires on March 31, 2020. Unless the subconcession is extended, or legislation with regard to reversion of
casino premises is amended, all of MGM Grand Paradise’s casino premises and gaming-related equipment will automatically be transferred to the
Macau government on that date without compensation to us, and we will cease to generate any revenues from such gaming operations. Beginning on
April 20, 2017, the Macau government may redeem the subconcession contract by providing us at least one year’s prior notice. In the event the Macau
government
18

 
exercises t his redemption right, MGM Grand Paradise is entitled to fair compensation or indemnity. The amount of such compensation or indemnity
will be determined based on the amount of gaming and non-gaming revenue generated by MGM Grand Paradise, excluding the conv ention and
exhibition facilities, during the taxable year prior to the redemption, before deducting interest, depreciation and amortization, multiplied by the number
of remaining years before expiration of the subconcession. We cannot assure you that MGM G rand Paradise will be able to renew or extend the
subconcession contract on terms favorable to MGM Grand Paradise or at all. We also cannot assure you that if the subconcession is redeemed, the
compensation paid to MGM Grand Paradise will be adequate to co mpensate for the loss of future revenues.
 
 
•
MGM Grand Paradise is dependent upon gaming promoters for a significant portion of gaming revenues in Macau . Gaming promoters, who promote
gaming and draw high-end customers to casinos, are responsible for a significant portion of MGM Grand Paradise’s gaming revenues in Macau. With
the rise in gaming in Macau and the recent reduction in the number of licensed gaming promoters in Macau and in the number of VIP rooms operated
by licensed gaming promoters, the competition for relationships with gaming promoters has increased. While MGM Grand Paradise is undertaking
initiatives to strengthen relationships with gaming promoters, there can be no assurance that it will be able to maintain, or grow, relationships with
gaming promoters. In addition, continued reductions in, and new regulations governing, the gaming promoter segment may result in the closure of
additional VIP rooms in Macau, including VIP rooms at MGM Macau. If MGM Grand Paradise is unable to maintain or grow relationships with
gaming promoters, or if gaming promoters are unable to develop or maintain relationships with our high-end customers (or if, as a result of recent
market conditions in Macau, gaming promoters encounter difficulties attracting patrons to come to Macau or experience decreased liquidity limiting
their ability to grant credit to patrons), MGM Grand Paradise’s ability to grow gaming revenues will be hampered. Furthermore, if existing VIP rooms
at MGM Macau are closed there can be no assurance that MGM Grand Paradise will be able to locate acceptable gaming promoters to run such VIP
rooms in the future in a timely manner, or at all.
 
In  addition,  the  quality  of  gaming  promoters  is  important  to  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  and  our  reputation  and  ability  to  continue  to  operate  in
compliance with gaming licenses. While MGM Grand Paradise strives for excellence in associations with gaming promoters, we cannot assure you
that  the  gaming  promoters  with  whom  MGM  Grand  Paradise  is  or  becomes  associated  will  meet  the  high  standards  insisted  upon.  If  a  gaming
promoter falls below MGM Grand Paradise’s standards, MGM Grand Paradise or we may suffer reputational harm or possibly sanctions from gaming
regulators with authority over our operations.
 
We also grant credit lines to certain gaming promoters and any adverse change in the financial performance of those gaming promoters may impact the
recoverability of these loans.
 
 
•
We are subject to taxation by various governments and agencies and the rate of taxation in the jurisdictions in which we operate could change in the
future. We are subject to tax by various governments and agencies, both in the U.S. and in Macau. Changes in the rates of taxation, the amount of taxes
we owe and the time when income is subject to taxation, the Macau income tax exemption or the imposition of foreign withholding taxes could
increase our overall rate of taxation. Any of these changes could materially impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash
flows.
 
 
•
The future recognition of our foreign tax credit deferred tax asset is uncertain, and the amount of valuation allowance we may apply against such
deferred  tax  asset  may  change  materially  in  future  periods. We  currently  have  significant  deferred  tax  assets  resulting  from  foreign  tax  credit
carryforwards that are available to reduce potential taxable foreign-sourced income in future periods. We evaluate our foreign tax credit deferred tax
asset for recoverability and record a valuation allowance to the extent that we determine it is not more likely than not such asset will be recovered. This
evaluation is based on all available evidence, including assumptions concerning future U.S. operating profits and our initial interpretations of the U.S.
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) in the absence of regulatory or other clarifying guidance. As a result, significant judgment is required in
assessing the possible need for a valuation allowance and changes to our assumptions could result in a material change in the valuation allowance with
a corresponding impact on the provision for income taxes in the period including such change.
 
 
•
Extreme  weather  conditions  or  climate  change  may  cause  property  damage  or  interrupt  business,  which  could  harm  our  business  and  results  of
operations . Certain of our casino properties are located in areas that may be subject to extreme weather conditions, including, but not limited to,
hurricanes in the United States and severe typhoons in Macau. Such extreme weather conditions may interrupt our operations, damage our properties,
and reduce the number of customers who visit our facilities in such areas. In addition, our operations could be adversely impacted by a drought or other
cause of water shortage. A severe drought of extensive duration experienced in Las Vegas or in the other regions in which we operate could adversely
affect our business and results of operations. Although we maintain both property and business interruption insurance coverage for certain extreme
weather conditions, such coverage is subject to deductibles and limits on maximum benefits, including limitation on the coverage period for business
interruption, and we cannot assure you that
19

 
 
we will be able to fully insure such losses or fully collect, if at all, on claims re sulting from such extreme weather conditions. Furthermore, such
extreme weather conditions may interrupt or impede access to our affected properties and may cause visits to our affected properties to decrease for an
indefinite period, which would have a ma terial adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
 
 
•
Because a majority of our major gaming resorts are concentrated on the Las Vegas Strip, we are subject to greater risks than a gaming company that
is  more  geographically  diversified .  Given  that  a  majority  of  our  major  resorts  are  concentrated  on  the  Las  Vegas  Strip,  our  business  may  be
significantly affected by risks common to the Las Vegas tourism industry. For example, the cost and availability of air services and the impact of any
events that disrupt air travel to and from Las Vegas can adversely affect our business. We cannot control the number or frequency of flights to or from
Las Vegas, but we rely on air traffic for a significant portion of our visitors. Reductions in flights by major airlines as a result of higher fuel prices or
lower demand can impact the number of visitors to our resorts. Additionally, there is one principal interstate highway between Las Vegas and Southern
California, where a large number of our customers reside. Capacity constraints of that highway or any other traffic disruptions may also affect the
number of customers who visit our facilities.
 
 
•
We extend credit to a large portion of our customers and we may not be able to collect gaming receivables . We conduct a portion of our gaming
activities on a credit basis through the issuance of markers which are unsecured instruments. Table games players typically are issued more markers
than slot players, and high-end players typically are issued more markers than patrons who tend to wager lower amounts. High-end gaming is more
volatile than other forms of gaming, and variances in win-loss results attributable to high-end gaming may have a significant positive or negative
impact on cash flow and earnings in a particular quarter. Furthermore, the loss or a reduction in the play of the most significant of these high-end
customers could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We issue markers to those customers
whose level of play and financial resources warrant, in the opinion of management, an extension of credit. In addition, MGM Grand Paradise extends
credit to certain gaming promoters and those promoters can extend credit to their customers. Uncollectible receivables from high-end customers and
gaming promoters could have a significant impact on our results of operations.
 
While gaming debts evidenced by markers and judgments on gaming debts are enforceable under the current laws of Nevada, and Nevada judgments
on gaming debts are enforceable in all states under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the U.S. Constitution, other jurisdictions may determine that
enforcement of gaming debts is against public policy. Although courts of some foreign nations will enforce gaming debts directly and the assets in the
U.S. of foreign debtors may be reached to satisfy a judgment, judgments on gaming debts from United States courts are not binding on the courts of
many foreign nations.
 
Furthermore, we expect that MGM Macau will be able to enforce its gaming debts only in a limited number of jurisdictions, including Macau. To the
extent MGM Macau gaming customers and gaming promoters are from other jurisdictions, MGM Macau may not have access to a forum in which it
will be able to collect all of its gaming receivables because, among other reasons, courts of many jurisdictions do not enforce gaming debts and MGM
Macau may encounter forums that will refuse to enforce such debts. Moreover, under applicable law, MGM Macau remains obligated to pay taxes on
uncollectible winnings from customers.
 
Even where gaming debts are enforceable, they may not be collectible. Our inability to collect gaming debts could have a significant negative impact
on our operating results.
 
 
•
We may incur impairments to goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets, or long-lived assets which could negatively affect our future profits . We
review  our  goodwill,  intangible  assets  and  long-lived  assets  on  an  annual  basis  and  during  interim  reporting  periods  in  accordance  with  the
authoritative guidance. Significant negative trends, reduced estimates of future cash flows, disruptions to our business, slower growth rates or lack of
growth have resulted in write-downs and impairment charges in the past and, if one or more of such events occurs in the future, additional impairment
charges or write-downs may be required in future periods. For instance, in 2015, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $1.5 billion to reduce
the historical carrying value of goodwill related to the MGM China reporting unit. If we are required to record additional impairment charges or write-
downs, this could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated results of operations.
 
•
Leisure and business travel , especially travel by air , are particularly susceptible to global geopolitical events , such as terrorist attacks, other acts of
violence or acts of war or hostility . We are dependent on the willingness of our customers to travel by air. Since most of our customers travel by air to
our Las Vegas and Macau properties, any terrorist act or other acts of violence, outbreak of hostilities, escalation of war, or any actual or perceived
threat to the security of travel by air could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Furthermore, although we
have  been  able  to  purchase  some  insurance  coverage  for  certain  types  of  terrorist  acts,  insurance  coverage  against  loss  or  business  interruption
resulting from war and some forms of terrorism continues to be unavailable.
20

 
 
 
•
Co-investing in our properties, including our investment in CityCenter, decreases our ability to manage risk . In addition to acquiring or developing
hotels and resorts or acquiring companies that complement our business directly, we have from time to time invested, and expect to continue to invest,
as a co-investor. Co-investors often have shared control over the operation of the property. Therefore, the operation of such properties is subject to
inherent risk due to the shared nature of the enterprise and the need to reach agreements on material matters. In addition, investments with other
investors  may  involve  risks  such  as  the  possibility  that  the  co-investor  might  become  bankrupt  or  not  have  the  financial  resources  to  meet  its
obligations, or have economic or business interests or goals that are inconsistent with our business interests or goals, or be in a position to take action
contrary to our instructions or requests or contrary to our policies or objectives. Consequently, actions by a co-investor might subject hotels and resorts
owned by such entities to additional risk. Further, we may be unable to take action without the approval of our co-investors. Alternatively, our co-
investors could take actions binding on the property without our consent. Additionally, should a co-investor become bankrupt, we could become liable
for its share of liabilities.
 
For instance, CityCenter, which is 50% owned and managed by us, has a significant amount of indebtedness, which could adversely affect its business
and its ability to meet its obligations. If CityCenter is unable to meet its financial commitments and we and our co-investor are unable to support future
funding requirements, as necessary, such event could have adverse financial consequences to us. In addition, the agreements governing CityCenter’s
indebtedness subject CityCenter and its subsidiaries to significant financial and other restrictive covenants, including restrictions on its ability to incur
additional  indebtedness,  place  liens  upon  assets,  make  distributions  to  us,  make  certain  investments,  consummate  certain  asset  sales,  enter  into
transactions with affiliates (including us) and merge or consolidate with any other person or sell, assign, transfer, lease, convey or otherwise dispose of
all  or  substantially  all  of  its  assets.  The  CityCenter  credit  facility  also  includes  certain  financial  covenants  that  require  CityCenter  to  maintain  a
maximum total net leverage ratio (as defined in CityCenter’s credit facility) for each quarter. We cannot be sure that CityCenter will be able to meet
this test in the future or that the lenders will waive any failure to meet the test.
 
 
•
Any of our future construction, development or expansion projects will be subject to significant development and construction risks, which could have
a material adverse impact on related project timetables, costs and our ability to complete the projects .
 
Any of our future construction, development or expansion projects will be subject to a number of risks, including:
 
 
•
lack of sufficient, or delays in the availability of, financing;
 
•
changes to plans and specifications;
 
•
engineering problems, including defective plans and specifications;
 
•
shortages of, and price increases in, energy, materials and skilled and unskilled labor, and inflation in key supply markets;
 
•
delays in obtaining or inability to obtain necessary permits, licenses and approvals;
 
•
changes in laws and regulations, or in the interpretation and enforcement of laws and regulations, applicable to gaming, leisure,
residential, real estate development or construction projects;
 
•
labor disputes or work stoppages;
 
•
availability of qualified contractors and subcontractors;
 
•
disputes with and defaults by contractors and subcontractors;
 
•
personal injuries to workers and other persons;
 
•
environmental, health and safety issues, including site accidents and the spread of viruses;
 
•
weather interferences or delays;
 
•
fires, typhoons and other natural disasters;
 
•
geological, construction, excavation, regulatory and equipment problems; and
 
•
other unanticipated circumstances or cost increases.
 
The occurrence of any of these development and construction risks could increase the total costs, delay or prevent the construction, development,
expansion or opening or otherwise affect the design and features of any future projects which we might undertake. For instance, we currently expect
the total development costs of our Cotai project to be approximately $3.4 billion, excluding development fees eliminated in consolidation, capitalized
interest  and  land-related  costs,  and  we  currently  expect  total  development  costs  of  our  Massachusetts  project  to  be  approximately  $960  million,
excluding  capitalized  interest  and  land-related  costs.  While  we  believe  that  the  overall  budgets  for  these  developments  are  reasonable,  these
development costs are estimates and the actual development costs may be higher than expected. We cannot guarantee that our construction costs or
total project costs for future projects, including our development in Massachusetts, will not increase beyond amounts initially budgeted or that the
expected design and features of current or future projects will not
21

 
change. In additio n, the regulatory approvals associated with our development projects may require us to open future casino resorts by a certain
specified time and to the extent we are unable to meet those deadlines, and any such deadlines are not extended, we may lose our regulatory approval
to open a casino resort in a proposed jurisdiction, or incur payment penalties in connection with any delays which could have an adverse effect on our
results of operations and financial condition.
 
We  also  make  significant  capital  expenditures  to  maintain  and  upgrade  our  resorts,  which  may  disrupt  operations  and  displace  revenue  at  the
properties, including revenue lost while rooms, restaurants and meeting spaces are under renovation and out of service.
 
 
•
We are required to commence gaming operations at MGM Springfield no later than September 2019, one year from the opening date approved by the
Massachusetts  Gaming  Commission.  If  we  are  unable  to  meet  this  deadline,  the  Massachusetts  Gaming  Commission  may  suspend  or  revoke  our
gaming license. Pursuant to the Gaming Act, we are required to commence gaming operations at MGM Springfield no later than September 2019, one
year from the opening date approved by the Massachusetts Gaming Commission (the “MGC”). If MGM Springfield fails to begin gaming operations
by September 2019 or receive an extension, MGM Springfield is subject to suspension or revocation of its gaming license by the MGC and may, after
being found by the MGC after a hearing to have acted in bad faith in its application, be assessed a fine of up to $50,000,000. Failure to meet the
deadline could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows from this property.
 
 
•
Our  insurance  coverage  may  not  be  adequate  to  cover  all  possible  losses  that  our  properties  could  suffer.  In  addition,  our  insurance  costs  may
increase and we may not be able to obtain similar insurance coverage in the future . Although we have “all risk” property insurance coverage for our
operating properties, which covers damage caused by a casualty loss (such as fire, natural disasters, acts of war, or terrorism or other acts of violence),
each policy has certain exclusions. In addition, our property insurance coverage is in an amount that may be significantly  less than the expected
replacement cost of rebuilding the facilities if there was a total loss. Our level of insurance coverage also may not be adequate to cover all losses in the
event of a major casualty. In addition, certain casualty events, such as labor strikes, nuclear events, acts of war, loss of income due to cancellation of
room reservations or conventions due to fear of terrorism or other acts of violence, loss of electrical power due to catastrophic events, rolling blackouts
or otherwise, deterioration or corrosion, insect or animal damage, and pollution, may not be covered at all under our policies. Therefore, certain acts
could expose us to substantial uninsured losses.
 
In addition to the damage caused to our properties by a casualty loss, we may suffer business disruption as a result of these events or be subject to
claims by third parties that may be injured or harmed. While we carry business interruption insurance and general liability insurance, this insurance
may not be adequate to cover all losses in any such event.
 
We renew our insurance policies (other than our builder’s risk insurance) on an annual basis. The cost of coverage may become so high that we may
need to further reduce our policy limits, further increase our deductibles, or agree to certain exclusions from our coverage.
 
 
•
Any  failure  to  protect  our  trademarks  could  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  value  of  our  brand  names  and  adversely  affect  our  business .  The
development of intellectual property is part of our overall business strategy, and we regard our intellectual property to be an important element of our
success. While our business as a whole is not substantially dependent on any one trademark or combination of several of our trademarks or other
intellectual  property,  we  seek  to  establish  and  maintain  our  proprietary  rights  in  our  business  operations  through  the  use  of  trademarks.  We  file
applications for, and obtain trademarks in, the United States and in foreign countries where we believe filing for such protection is appropriate. Despite
our efforts to protect our proprietary rights, parties may infringe our trademarks and our rights may be invalidated or unenforceable. The laws of some
foreign countries do not protect proprietary  rights to as great an extent as the laws of the United States. Monitoring the unauthorized use of our
intellectual property is difficult. Litigation may be necessary to enforce our intellectual property rights or to determine the validity and scope of the
proprietary rights of others. Litigation of this type could result in substantial costs and diversion of resource. We cannot assure you that all of the steps
we have taken to protect our trademarks in the United States and foreign countries will be adequate to prevent imitation of our trademarks by others.
The unauthorized use or reproduction of our trademarks could diminish the value of our brand and its market acceptance, competitive advantages or
goodwill, which could adversely affect our business.
 
22

 
 
•
We are subject to risks associated with doing business outside of the United States . Our operations outside of the United States are subject to risks that
are inherent in conducting business under non-United States laws, regulations and customs. In particular, the risks associated with the operation of
MGM Macau or any f uture operations in which we may engage in any other foreign territories, include:
 
 
•
changes in laws and policies that govern operations of companies in Macau or other foreign jurisdictions;
 
•
changes in non-United States government programs;
 
•
possible failure by our employees or agents to comply with anti-bribery laws such as the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices
Act and similar anti-bribery laws in other jurisdictions;
 
•
general economic conditions and policies in China, including restrictions on travel and currency movements;
 
•
difficulty in establishing, staffing and managing non-United States operations;
 
•
different labor regulations;
 
•
changes in environmental, health and safety laws;
 
•
outbreaks of diseases or epidemics;
 
•
potentially negative consequences from changes in or interpretations of tax laws;
 
•
political instability and actual or anticipated military and political conflicts;
 
•
economic instability and inflation, recession or interest rate fluctuations; and
 
•
uncertainties regarding judicial systems and procedures.
 
These risks, individually or in the aggregate, could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
 
We are also exposed to a variety of market risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. If the United States dollar
strengthens in relation to the currencies of other countries, our United States dollar reported income from sources where revenue is denominated in the
currencies of other such countries will decrease.
 
 
•
Any violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or any other similar anti-corruption laws could have a negative impact on us . A significant portion
of our revenue is derived from operations outside the United States, which exposes us to complex foreign and U.S. regulations inherent in doing cross-
border business and in each of the countries in which we transact business. We are subject to compliance with the United States Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act (“FCPA”) and other similar anti-corruption laws, which generally prohibit companies and their intermediaries from making improper
payments to foreign government officials for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business. While our employees and agents are required to comply
with  these  laws,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  our  internal  policies  and  procedures  will  always  protect  us  from  violations  of  these  laws,  despite  our
commitment to legal compliance and corporate ethics. Violations of these laws by us or our non-controlled ventures may result in severe criminal and
civil sanctions as well as other penalties against us, and the SEC and U.S. Department of Justice continue to vigorously pursue enforcement of the
FCPA. The occurrence or allegation of these types of risks may adversely affect our business, performance, prospects, value, financial condition, and
results of operations.
 
 
•
We face risks related to pending claims that have been , or future claims that may be , brought against us . Claims have been brought against us and
our subsidiaries in various legal proceedings, and additional legal and tax claims arise from time to time. We may not be successful in the defense or
prosecution of our current or future legal proceedings, which could result in settlements or damages that could significantly impact our business,
financial condition, results of operations and reputation. Please see the further discussion in “Legal Proceedings” and Note 12 in the accompanying
consolidated financial statements.
 
 
•
A significant portion of our labor force is covered by collective bargaining agreements. Work stoppages and other labor problems could negatively
affect our business and results of operations. As of December 31, 2017, approximately 36,000 of our employees are covered by collective bargaining
agreements. The collective bargaining agreements covering most of our Las Vegas union employees expire in 2018. A prolonged dispute with the
covered employees or any labor unrest, strikes or other business interruptions in connection with labor negotiations or others could have an adverse
impact  on our operations.  Further, adverse publicity  in the marketplace  related  to union messaging  could further  harm our reputation  and reduce
customer demand for our services. Also, wage and/or benefit increases resulting from new labor agreements may be significant and could also have an
adverse  impact  on  our  results  of  operations.  For  instance,  Beau  Rivage  is  currently  engaged  in  negotiations  for  an  initial  collective  bargaining
agreement with a council of unions representing various hotel and food and beverage constituencies, Borgata will be engaged in negotiations with
three unions in 2018, and MGM National Harbor is in negotiations with one union . In addition, to the extent that our non-union employees join
unions, we would have greater exposure to risks associated with labor problems. Furthermore, we may have, or acquire in the future, multi-employer
plans that are classified as “endangered,” “seriously endangered,” or “critical” status. For instance, Borgata’s most significant plan as of December 31,
2017 is the Legacy Plan of the National Retirement Fund, which has
23

 
 
been listed in “critical status” and is subject to a rehabilitation plan. Plans in these classifications must adopt measures to improve their funded status
through a funding improvement or rehabilitation p lan, which may require additional contributions from employers (which may take the form of a
surcharge on benefit contributions) and/or modifications to retiree benefits. In addition, while Borgata has no current intention to withdraw from these
plans, a w ithdrawal in the future could result in the incurrence of a contingent liability that would be payable in an amount and at such time (or over a
period of time) that would vary based on a number of factors at the time of (and after) withdrawal. Any such add itional costs may be significant.
 
 
•
Our business is particularly sensitive to energy prices and a rise in energy prices could harm our operating results . We are a large consumer of
electricity and other energy and, therefore, higher energy prices may have an adverse effect on our results of operations. Accordingly, increases in
energy costs may have a negative impact on our operating results. Additionally, higher electricity and gasoline prices that affect our customers may
result in reduced visitation to our resorts and a reduction in our revenues.
 
 
•
The failure to maintain the integrity of our computer systems and internal customer information could result in damage of reputation and/or subject us
to fines, payment of damages, lawsuits or restrictions on our use or transfer of data. We collect and store information relating to our employees,
guests, and others for various business purposes, including marketing and promotional purposes. The collection and use of personal data are governed
by privacy laws and regulations enacted in the United States and other jurisdictions around the world. Privacy laws and regulations continue to evolve
and on occasion may be inconsistent from one jurisdiction to another. Various federal, state and foreign legislative or regulatory bodies may enact or
adopt new or additional laws and regulations concerning privacy, data retention, data transfer, and data protection issues. For example, the European
Union has adopted a data protection regulation, known as the General Data Protection Regulation, which will become fully enforceable in May 2018
that includes operational and compliance requirements that are different from those currently in place and that also include significant penalties for
non-compliance.
 
Compliance with applicable privacy laws and regulations may increase our operating costs and/or adversely impact our ability to market our products,
properties and services to our guests. In addition, non-compliance with applicable privacy laws and regulations by us (or in some circumstances non-
compliance by third parties engaged by us), including accidental loss, inadvertent disclosure, unapproved dissemination or a breach of security on
systems storing our data may result in damage of reputation and/or subject us to fines, payment of damages, lawsuits or restrictions on our use or
transfer  of  data.  We  rely  on  proprietary  and  commercially  available  systems,  software,  tools  and  monitoring  to  provide  security  for  processing,
transmission and storage of customer and employee information, such as payment card and other confidential or proprietary information. Our data
security measures are reviewed and evaluated regularly; however, they might not protect us against increasingly sophisticated and aggressive threats
including, but not limited to, computer malware, viruses, and hacking and phishing attacks by third parties. In addition, while we maintain cyber risk
insurance to assist in the cost of recovery from a significant cyber event, such coverage may not be sufficient .
 
We also rely extensively on computer systems to process transactions, maintain information and manage our businesses. Disruptions in the availability
of our computer systems, through cyber-attacks or otherwise, could impact our ability to service our customers and adversely affect our sales and the
results of operations. For instance, there has been an increase in criminal cyber security attacks against companies where customer and company
information has been compromised and company data has been destroyed. Our information systems and records, including those we maintain with our
third-party service providers, may be subject to cyber security breaches in the future. In addition, our third-party information system service providers
face risks relating to cyber security similar to ours, and we do not directly control any of such parties’ information security operations. A significant
theft, loss or fraudulent use of customer or company data maintained by us or by a third-party service provider could have an adverse effect on our
reputation, cause a material disruption to our operations and management team, and result in remediation expenses, regulatory penalties and litigation
by customers and other parties whose information was subject to such attacks, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results
of operations and cash flows.
 
 
•
We are subject to risks related to corporate social responsibility and reputation. Many factors influence our reputation and the value of our brands
including the perception held by our customers, business partners, other key stakeholders and the communities in which we do business. Our business
faces increasing scrutiny related to environmental, social and governance activities and risk of damage to our reputation and the value of our brands if
we fail to act responsibly in a number of areas, such as environmental stewardship, supply chain management, climate change, diversity and inclusion,
workplace conduct, human rights, philanthropy and support for local communities. Any harm to our reputation could impact employee engagement
and retention and the willingness of customers and our partners to do business with us, which could have a material adverse effect on our business,
results of operations and cash flows.
 
24

 
 
•
We may seek to expand through investments in other businesses and properties or through alliances or acquisitions, and we may also seek to divest
some of our properties and other assets, any of which may be unsuccessful . We intend to consider strategic and compl ementary acquisitions and
investments  in  other  businesses,  properties  or  other  assets.  Furthermore,  we  may  pursue  any  of  these  opportunities  in  alliance  with  third  parties,
including MGP. Acquisitions and investments in businesses, properties or assets, as well as these alliances, are subject to risks that could affect our
business, including risks related to:
 
 
•
spending cash and incurring debt;
 
•
assuming contingent liabilities;
 
•
unanticipated issues in integrating information, communications and other systems;
 
•
unanticipated incompatibility of purchasing, logistics, marketing and administration methods;
 
•
retaining key employees; and
 
•
consolidating corporate and administrative infrastructures.
 
We cannot assure you that we will be able to identify opportunities or complete transactions on commercially reasonable terms or at all, or that we will
actually realize any anticipated benefits from such acquisitions, investments or alliances. In addition, even if we are able to successfully integrate new
assets and businesses, the integration of such assets and businesses may result in unanticipated costs, competitive responses, loss or customer or other
business relationships and the diversion of management attention.
 
In addition, we periodically review our business to identify properties or other assets that we believe either are non-core, no longer complement our
business, are in markets which may not benefit us as much as other markets or could be sold at significant premiums. From time to time, we may
attempt  to  sell  these  identified  properties  and  assets.  There  can  be  no  assurance,  however,  that  we  will  be  able  to  complete  dispositions  on
commercially reasonable terms or at all.
 
 
•
If the jurisdictions in which we operate increase gaming taxes and fees , our results could be adversely affected . State and local authorities raise a
significant amount of revenue through taxes and fees on gaming activities. From time to time, legislators and government officials have proposed
changes in tax laws, or in the administration of such laws, affecting the gaming industry. Periods of economic downturn or uncertainty and budget
deficits may intensify such efforts to raise revenues through increases in gaming taxes. If the jurisdictions in which we operate were to increase gaming
taxes  or  fees,  depending  on  the  magnitude  of  the  increase  and  any  offsetting  factors,  our  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations  could  be
materially adversely affected. For instance, income generated from gaming operations of MGM Grand Paradise currently has the benefit of a corporate
tax exemption in Macau, which exempts us from paying the 12% complementary tax on profits generated by the operation of casino games. This
exemption is effective through March 31, 2020, which also runs concurrent with the end of the term of the current gaming subconcession. Due to the
uncertainty  concerning  taxation  after  the  subconcession  renewal  process,  we  cannot  assure  you  that  any  extensions  of  the  tax  exemption  will  be
granted beyond March 31, 2020.
 
 
•
Conflicts of interest may arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors of MGM China , the holding company for MGM Grand
Paradise which owns and operates MGM Macau . As a result of the initial public offering of shares of MGM China common stock, MGM China now
has stockholders who are not affiliated with us, and we and certain of our officers and directors who also serve as officers and/or directors of MGM
China may have conflicting fiduciary obligations to our stockholders and to the minority stockholders of MGM China. Decisions that could have
different implications for us and MGM China, including contractual arrangements that we have entered into or may in the future enter into with MGM
China, may give rise to the appearance of a potential conflict of interest or an actual conflict of interest.
 
ITEM 1B.  
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
 
None.
25

 
ITEM 2.
PROPERTIES
 
Our principal executive offices are located at Bellagio. Our significant land holdings are described below; unless otherwise indicated, all properties are
indirectly owned by us. We also own or lease various other improved and unimproved properties in Las Vegas and other locations in the United States and certain
foreign countries.
 
Domestic resorts and other land
The  following  table  lists  our  domestic  resorts  land  holdings,  ground  leases  and  other  land  holdings  on  a  consolidated  basis,  including  land  held  in
connection with our proposed development properties and land and ground leases held by a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership, which we lease pursuant to the
terms of the master lease. 
 
 
 Approximate  
Name and Location
 
Acres
 
Notes
Las Vegas, Nevada operations
 
 
  
Bellagio
 
77
 Approximately two acres of the site are subject to two ground leases.
MGM Grand Las Vegas
 
102
  
Mandalay Bay
 
124
  
The Mirage
 
77
  
Luxor
 
73
 Includes 15 acres of land located across the Las Vegas Strip from Luxor.
Excalibur
 
51
  
New York-New York
 
23
 
Includes three acres of land related to The Park entertainment district
development located between Monte Carlo and New York-New York.
Monte Carlo
 
21
  
Circus Circus Las Vegas
 
102
 Includes 34 acres of land located north of Circus Circus Las Vegas.
Other domestic operations
 
 
  
MGM Grand Detroit (Detroit, Michigan)
 
27
  
Beau Rivage (Biloxi, Mississippi)
 
42
 10 acres are subject to a tidelands lease.
Gold Strike (Tunica, Mississippi)
 
24
  
MGM National Harbor (Prince George's County, Maryland)
 
23
 All 23 acres are subject to a ground lease.
Borgata (Atlantic City, New Jersey)
 
46
 11 acres are subject to ground leases.
Other
 
 
  
T-Mobile Arena (Las Vegas, Nevada)
 
17
 
Located adjacent to New York-New York and leased under a 50 year ground
lease to Las Vegas Arena Company.
MGM Springfield (Springfield, Massachusetts)
 
14
  
Tunica, Mississippi
 
388
 
We own an undivided 50% interest in this land with an unaffiliated, gaming
company.
Atlantic City, New Jersey
 
125
 Approximately 74 acres are suitable for development.
Shadow Creek Golf Course (North Las Vegas, Nevada)
 
310
 Includes 66 acres of land adjacent to the golf course.
Fallen Oak Golf Course (Saucier, Mississippi)
 
511
  
Primm Valley Golf Club (Stateline, California)
 
573
 
Located at the California state line, four miles from Primm, Nevada.
Includes 125 acres of land adjacent to the golf club.
 
The land and substantially all of the assets of MGM Grand Las Vegas and Bellagio secure the obligations under our senior credit facility. In addition, the
senior credit facility is secured by a pledge of the equity or limited liability company interests of the subsidiaries that own MGM Grand Las Vegas and Bellagio.
26

 
MGM China
 
MGM Macau occupies an approximately 10 acre site and MGM Cotai occupies an approximately 18 acre site, both of which are possessed under separate
25-year land use right agreements with the Macau government. The MGM China credit facility is secured by MGM Grand Paradise’s interest in the Cotai and
MGM Macau land use rights, and MGM China, MGM Grand Paradise and their guarantor subsidiaries have granted a security interest in substantially all of their
assets to secure the facility. As of December 31, 2017, approximately $2.3 billion was outstanding under the MGM China credit facility. These borrowings are non-
recourse to us.
 
Operating Partnership
 
In connection with the initial public offering of MGP, the Borgata transaction and the MGM National Harbor transaction, the real estate assets of The
Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New York, Monte Carlo, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit, Borgata, Beau Rivage and
MGM National Harbor were transferred to a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership in which we have a controlling interest. All of these properties, other than
MGM National Harbor, secure the obligations under the Operating Partnership’s credit agreement and are leased by us under an amended master lease that expires
in 2046 (after giving effect to our renewal options). These borrowings are non-recourse to us.
Unconsolidated Affiliates
 
CityCenter occupies approximately 67 acres of land between Bellagio and Monte Carlo. The main site, along with substantially all of CityCenter’s assets,
serves as collateral for CityCenter’s senior credit facility. As of December 31, 2017, CityCenter had not drawn on its $125 million revolving credit facility and had
$1.6 billion in term loans outstanding. These borrowings are non-recourse to us.
 
The Las Vegas Arena Company leases under a long-term ground lease approximately 17 acres of land owned by us and located between Frank Sinatra Drive
and New York-New York, adjacent to the Las Vegas Strip. Substantially all of the assets of Las Vegas Arena Company are used as collateral for its senior secured
credit facility. In connection with this senior secured credit facility, we and Anschutz Entertainment Group, Inc. (“AEG”) each entered into a repayment guarantee
for the term loan B. As of December 31, 2017, the outstanding principal balance under term loan A was $129 million and the outstanding principal balance under
term loan B was $50 million. See Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for discussion of our repayment guarantee.
 
Other than as described above, none of our properties are subject to any major encumbrance.
 
ITEM 3.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
 
October 1 litigation. The Company and/or certain of its subsidiaries have been named as defendants in a number of lawsuits related to the October 1, 2017
shooting in Las Vegas. The matters involve in large degree the same legal and factual issues, in each case being filed on behalf of individuals who are seeking
damages for emotional distress, physical injury, medical expenses, economic damages and/or wrongful death based on assertions that the Company and/or certain
of its subsidiaries were negligent. Lawsuits were first filed in October 2017 and include actions filed by multiple individuals in the District Court of Clark County,
Nevada and in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, California. Some of the original actions have been voluntarily dismissed, and plaintiffs’ counsel indicate
they anticipate re-filing the lawsuits in similar form. Additional lawsuits related to this incident may be filed in the future.
 
We are currently unable to reliably predict the developments in, outcome of, and economic costs and other consequences of pending or future litigation
related to this matter. We will continue to investigate the factual and legal defenses, and evaluate these matters based on subsequent events, new information and
future circumstances. We intend to defend against these lawsuits and ultimately believe we should prevail, but litigation of this type is inherently unpredictable.
Although there are significant procedural, factual and legal issues to be resolved that could significantly affect our belief as to the possibility of liability, we
currently believe that it is reasonably possible that we could incur liability in connection with certain of these lawsuits. The foregoing determination was made in
accordance with generally  accepted accounting principles, as codified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 450-20, and is not an admission of any
liability on the part of us or any of our affiliates. Given that these cases are in the early stages and in light of the uncertainties surrounding them, we do not currently
possess sufficient information to determine a range of reasonably possible liability. In the event we incur any liability, we believe it is unlikely we would incur
losses in connection with these claims in excess of our insurance coverage. In addition, our general liability insurance coverage provides, as part of the contractual
“duty to defend”, payment of legal fees and associated costs incurred to defend covered lawsuits that are filed arising from the October 1, 2017 shooting in Las
Vegas. Payment of such fees and costs is in addition to (and not limited by) the limits of the insurance policies and does not erode the total liability coverage
available. The insurance carriers have not expressed any reservation of rights or coverage defenses that indicate they dispute coverage under the applicable policies.
 
27

 
Other. We and our subsidiaries are also defendants in various other lawsuits, most of which relate to routine matters incidental to our business. We do not
believe that the outcome of such pending litigation, considered in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on the Company.
 
ITEM 4.
MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
 
Not applicable.
 
28

 
PART II
 
ITEM 5.
MARKET  FOR  REGISTRANT’S  COMMON  EQUITY,  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER  MATTERS  AND  ISSUER  PURCHASES  OF
EQUITY SECURITIES
 
Common Stock Information
 
Our common  stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange  (“NYSE”) under the symbol “MGM.” The following  table sets forth, for the calendar
quarters indicated, the intra-day high and low sale prices per share of our common stock on the NYSE Composite Tape.  
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
High
  
Low
  
High
  
Low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First quarter
 $
29.97  $
25.15  $
22.97  $
16.18 
Second quarter
  
34.34   
27.01   
25.29   
20.59 
Third quarter
  
34.65   
30.04   
26.49   
22.33 
Fourth quarter
  
34.51   
29.53   
30.62   
25.25
 
 
There were approximately 3,720 record holders of our common stock as of February 23, 2018.
 
The Company implemented a dividend program in February 2017. In March, June and September 2017, the Company paid quarterly dividends of $0.11 per
share, each totaling $63 million. In December 2017, the Company paid a quarterly dividend of $0.11 per share, totaling $62 million. On February 19, 2018 the
Company’s Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend to holders of record on March 9, 2018 of $0.12 per share, totaling $68 million, which will be paid on
March 15, 2018.
 
The amount, declaration and payment of any future dividends will be subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors who will evaluate our dividend
policy from time to time based on factors it deems relevant, and the contractual limitations described below. In addition, as a holding company with no independent
operations, our ability to pay dividends will depend upon the receipt of cash from our operating subsidiaries to generate the funds from operations necessary to pay
dividends on our common stock. Furthermore, our senior credit facility contains financial covenants and restrictive covenants that could restrict our ability to pay
dividends, subject to certain exceptions. In addition, the Operating Partnership and MGM China credit facilities each contain limitations on the ability of the
applicable subsidiary under each credit agreement to pay dividends to us. There can be no assurance that we will continue to pay dividends in the future.
 
29

 
ITEM 6.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
 
The  following  reflects  selected  historical  financial  data  that  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  “Item  7  –  Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-
K. The historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results of operations to be expected in the future.
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
  
2014
  
2013
 
 
 
(In thousands, except per share data)
 
Net revenues
 $ 10,773,904  $
9,455,123  $
9,190,068  $
10,081,984  $
9,809,663 
Operating income (loss)
  
1,715,492   
2,079,787   
(156,232)   
1,323,538   
1,137,281 
Net income (loss)
  
2,096,418   
1,236,878   
(1,039,649)   
127,178   
41,374 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts
   International
  
1,960,286   
1,101,440   
(447,720)   
(149,873)   
(171,734)
Earnings per share:
   
    
    
    
    
 
Basic:
   
    
    
    
    
 
Net income (loss) per share
 $
3.39  $
1.94  $
(0.82)  $
(0.31)  $
(0.35)
Weighted average common shares
  
572,253   
568,134   
542,873   
490,875   
489,661 
Diluted:
   
    
    
    
    
 
Net income (loss) per share
 $
3.35  $
1.92  $
(0.82)  $
(0.31)  $
(0.35)
Weighted average common shares
  
578,795   
573,317   
542,873   
490,875   
489,661 
Dividends declared per common share
 $
0.44  $
—  $
—  $
—  $
— 
At-year end:
   
    
    
    
    
 
Total assets
 $ 29,159,178  $ 28,173,301  $
25,215,178  $
26,593,914  $
25,961,843 
Total debt, including capital leases
  
12,922,712   
13,000,792   
12,713,416   
14,063,563   
13,326,441 
Stockholders' equity
  
11,646,715   
9,969,312   
7,764,427   
7,628,274   
7,860,495 
MGM Resorts International stockholders' equity
  
7,612,652   
6,220,180   
5,119,927   
4,090,917   
4,216,051 
MGM Resorts International stockholders' equity per share
 $
13.44  $
10.83  $
9.06  $
8.33  $
8.60 
Number of shares outstanding
  
566,276   
574,124   
564,839   
491,292   
490,361
 
 
The following events/transactions affect the year-to-year comparability of the selected financial data presented above:
 
Acquisitions, Dispositions, and MGP IPO
 
 
•
In 2016, we recorded a $401 million gain for our share of CityCenter’s gain on the sale of the Shops at Crystals (“Crystals”). The gain included $200
million representing our share of the gain recorded by CityCenter and $201 million representing the reversal of certain basis differences. The basis
differences primarily related to other-than-temporary impairment charges recorded on our investment in CityCenter that were allocated to Crystals’
building assets.
 
•
In 2016, we received proceeds of $1.2 billion and paid $75 million in issuance costs in connection with MGP’s IPO. See Note 1 to the accompanying
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
 
•
In 2016, we recorded a gain of $430 million on the acquisition of Boyd Gaming’s ownership interest in Borgata. Upon acquisition of Borgata on
August 1, 2016, we began consolidating the results of Borgata and ceased recording of Borgata’s results as an equity method investment.
 
•
In 2016, we opened MGM National Harbor, an integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resort in Prince George’s County at National Harbor, which
is a waterfront development located on the Potomac River just outside of Washington, D.C.
 
Other
 
 
•
In 2013, we recorded non-cash impairment charges of $37 million related to our investment in Grand Victoria, $20 million related to our land in Jean
and Sloan, Nevada, and $45 million related to corporate buildings expected to be removed from service.
 
•
In 2013, we recorded a $70 million loss for our share of CityCenter’s non-operating loss on retirement of long-term debt, primarily consisting of
premiums associated with the redemption of the existing first and second lien notes as well as the write-off of previously unamortized debt issuance
costs and a gain of $12 million related to our share of Silver Legacy’s non-operating gain on retirement of long-term debt.
 
•
In 2014, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $29 million related to our investment in Grand Victoria.
30

 
 
•
In 2015, we recorded non-cash impairment charges of $1.5 billion to reduce the historical carrying value of goodwill related to the MGM China
reporting unit and $17 million related to our investment in Grand Victoria.
 
•
In 2015, we recorded an $80 million gain for our share of CityCenter’s gain resulting from the final resolution of its construction litigation and related
settlements.
 
•
In  2015, we recorded  a  gain of  $23 million  related  to  the sale  of  Circus Circus  Reno and  our 50%  interest  in  Silver Legacy  and associated  real
property.
 
•
In 2016, we recorded a $22 million loss related to our redemption of outstanding 7.50% senior notes due 2016 and 10% senior notes due 2016, and a
$16 million loss on the early retirement of debt related to outstanding 7.625% senior notes due 2017.
 
•
In 2016, we recorded a $28 million loss on debt retirement in connection with the amendment and restatement of our senior credit facility.
 
•
In 2016, we recorded a $152 million expense related to our strategic decision to exit the fully bundled sales system of NV Energy, which included $13
million related to our share of CityCenter’s portion of the payment. In 2017, we then recorded a gain of $45 million related to the NV Energy exit fee
modification.
 
•
In 2017, we recorded a $30 million loss on the early retirement of debt related to outstanding 11.375% senior notes due 2018 and a $14 million loss on
the early retirement of debt related to the MGM National Harbor credit facility.
 
•
In 2017, we recorded a gain of $36 million related to the Borgata property tax settlement.
 
•
In 2017, we recorded a $1.4 billion tax benefit related to the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”).
 
 
 
31

 
ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RES ULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
Our primary business is the ownership and operation of casino resorts, which offer gaming, hotel, convention, dining, entertainment, retail and other resort
amenities. We own or invest in several of the finest casino resorts in the world and we continually reinvest in our resorts to maintain our competitive advantage.
Most of our revenue is cash-based, through customers wagering with cash or paying for non-gaming services with cash or credit cards. We rely heavily on the
ability of our resorts to generate operating cash flow to fund capital expenditures, provide excess cash flow for future development and repay debt financings. We
make significant investments in our resorts through newly remodeled hotel rooms, restaurants, entertainment and nightlife offerings, as well as other new features
and amenities.
During the year ended December 31, 2017, Las Vegas visitor volume decreased 2%, Las Vegas Strip REVPAR increased 2% and Las Vegas Strip gaming
revenue increased by 1% compared to the prior year period according to information published by the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority. Results of
operations  for  our  domestic  resorts  during  2017  benefited  from  an  increase  in  operating  margins  resulting  from  increases  in  gaming  revenue  and  REVPAR,
discussed below. Our rooms revenue benefited from robust convention business at our Las Vegas Strip resorts, which allowed us to yield higher room rates across
our portfolio of resorts.
Gross gaming revenue in the Macau market increased 19% in 2017 compared to 2016, primarily as a result of growth on the Cotai Strip. Additionally,
according to statistics published by the Statistics and Census Service of the Macau Government, visitor arrivals increased 5% and overnight visitors increased 10%
in 2017 compared to 2016. As a significant number of MGM Macau’s customers are from mainland China, we believe operating results at MGM Macau are
affected by economic conditions in mainland China as well as certain policy initiatives enacted in mainland China and Macau. We believe a slowdown in China’s
economic growth rate as well as the implementation of policies related to gaming promoters, the Chinese government’s restrictions on travel to Macau and cross-
border currency transactions led to a multi-year decrease in gross gaming revenues for the Macau market, which lasted through the first half of 2016 and primarily
impacted  VIP  casino  gaming  operations  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  main  floor  operations  throughout  the  Macau  market.  Despite  the  impact  of  these  events  and
concerns  over  the  sustainability  of  economic  growth  in  China,  we  expect  the  Macau  market  to  grow  on  a  long-term  basis  due  to  further  development  and
penetration of the mainland China market and infrastructure improvements expected to facilitate more convenient travel to and within Macau. We believe recent
trends reflect stabilization and growth within the Macau market as gross gaming revenue has increased year over year in each month beginning in August 2016 and
continuing through December 2017.
Our results of operations are affected by decisions we make related to our capital allocation, our access to capital and our cost of capital. While we continue
to be focused on improving our financial position and returning capital to shareholders, we are also dedicated to capitalizing on development opportunities. For
instance, we opened MGM Cotai on February 13, 2018. MGM Cotai is an integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resort located on an 18 acre site on the Cotai
Strip in Macau. The Gaming Inspection and Coordination Bureau of Macau (“DICJ”) approved 100 gaming tables for the opening of MGM Cotai and 25 additional
gaming tables effective for operation on January 1, 2019, for a total of 125 gaming tables in aggregate. In addition, the DICJ approved the initial transfer of 77
gaming tables from MGM Macau to MGM Cotai.
Additionally, we were awarded a casino license to build and operate MGM Springfield in Springfield, Massachusetts. MGM Springfield is being developed
on approximately 14 acres of land in downtown Springfield. MGM’s plans for the resort currently include a casino with approximately 2,550 slots and 120 table
games including poker; a 250-room hotel; 100,000 square feet of retail and restaurant space; 44,000 square feet of meeting and event space; and a 3,500 space
parking  garage;  with  an  expected  development  and  construction  cost  of  approximately  $960  million,  excluding  capitalized  interest  and  land-related  costs.
Construction of MGM Springfield is expected to be completed in the third quarter of 2018.
In  August  2015,  we  announced  the  implementation  of  a  Profit  Growth  Plan  for  sustained  growth  and  margin  enhancement.  The  Profit  Growth  Plan’s
initiatives focused on improving business processes to leverage our scale for greater efficiency and lower costs, and to identify areas of opportunity to organically
drive incremental revenue growth. The Profit Growth Plan included a large number of initiatives to optimize operations and in 2017 we transitioned from the Profit
Growth Plan to a continuous improvement approach to explore additional opportunities to drive further improvement.
Formation and Initial Public Offering of MGP
 
On April 25, 2016, MGM Growth Properties LLC (“MGP”), a consolidated subsidiary, completed its initial public offering (“IPO”). MGP is organized as an
umbrella partnership REIT (commonly referred to as an “UPREIT”) structure in which substantially all of its assets are owned by, and substantially all of its
businesses are conducted through the Operating Partnership. MGP has two classes of authorized and outstanding voting common shares (collectively, the “shares”):
Class A shares and a single Class B share.
32

 
We own MGP’s Class B share, which does not provide its holder any rights to profits or losses or any rights to receive distributions from operations of MGP or
upon liquidation or winding up of MGP. MGP’s Class A shareholders are entitled to one vote per share, while we, as the owner of the Class B share, are entitled to
an amount of votes representing a majority of the total voting power of MGP’s shares so long as our and our controlled affiliates’ (excluding MGP’s) aggregate
beneficial ownership of the combined economic interests in MGP and the Operating Partnership does not fall below 30%. The sole general part ner of the Operating
Partnership is also a subsidiary of MGP.
 
In connection with the formation of MGP, MGP used the proceeds from the IPO to purchase operating partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
Concurrently, we contributed the real estate assets associated with The Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New York, Monte Carlo, Excalibur, The Park,
Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit and Beau Rivage to the Operating Partnership in exchange for operating partnership units. A wholly owned subsidiary of
the Operating Partnership (the “landlord”) subsequently leased the properties to a subsidiary of ours (the “tenant”) pursuant to a long-term triple-net master lease
agreement (the “master lease”).  
 
In August 2016, we completed the acquisition of Boyd Gaming Corporation’s (“Boyd Gaming”) ownership interest in Borgata, at which time Borgata
became a consolidated subsidiary of ours. Subsequently, MGP acquired Borgata’s real property from us, and in October 2017, MGP also acquired the long-term
leasehold interest and real property associated with MGM National Harbor from us. Amendments to the master lease agreement provided that we then lease the real
estate assets of Borgata and MGM National Harbor from a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership. As of December 31, 2017, we owned 73.4% of the Operating
Partnership units, and MGP held the remaining 26.6% ownership interest in the Operating Partnership.
 
See Note 1 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding MGP and its subsidiaries, which we consolidate in our financial
statements, and from which we lease certain of our real estate assets pursuant to a master lease agreement. All intercompany transactions, including transactions
under the master lease, have been eliminated in consolidation.
Reportable Segments
We  have  two  reportable  segments:  domestic  resorts  and  MGM  China.  We  currently  own  and  operate  14  resorts  in  the  United  States.  MGM  China’s
operations  consist  of  MGM  Macau  resort  and  MGM  Cotai  on  the  Cotai  Strip  in  Macau.  We  have  additional  business  activities  including  investments  in
unconsolidated  affiliates,  and  certain  other  corporate  and  management  operations.  CityCenter  is  our  most  significant  unconsolidated  affiliate,  which  we  also
manage for a fee. Our operations that are not segregated into separate reportable segments are reported as “corporate and other” operations in our reconciliations of
segment results to consolidated results.
Domestic resorts. At December 31, 2017, our domestic resorts consisted of the following casino resorts:
 
Las Vegas, Nevada:
  
Bellagio,  MGM  Grand  Las  Vegas  (including  The  Signature),  Mandalay  Bay  (including  Delano  and  Four
Seasons), The Mirage, Luxor, New York-New York (including the Park), Excalibur, Monte Carlo and Circus
Circus Las Vegas.
Other:
  
MGM Grand Detroit in Detroit, Michigan; Beau Rivage in Biloxi, Mississippi; Gold Strike Tunica in Tunica,
Mississippi;  Borgata  in  Atlantic  City,  New  Jersey;  and  MGM  National  Harbor  in  Prince  George’s  County,
Maryland.
Over half of the net revenue from our domestic resorts is derived from non-gaming operations including hotel, food and beverage, entertainment and other
non-gaming amenities. We market to different customer groups and utilize our significant convention and meeting facilities to maximize hotel occupancy and
customer volumes which also leads to better labor utilization. Our operating results are highly dependent on demand for our services, and the volume of customers
at our resorts, which in turn affects the price we can charge for our hotel rooms and other amenities. Also, we generate a significant portion of our revenue from our
domestic resorts in Las Vegas, Nevada, which exposes us to certain risks, such as increased competition from new or expanded Las Vegas resorts, and from the
expansion of gaming in the United States generally.
Key performance indicators related to gaming and hotel revenue at our domestic resorts are:
 
•
Gaming revenue indicators: table games drop and slots handle (volume indicators); “win” or “hold” percentage, which is not fully controllable by us.
Our normal table games hold percentage is in the range of 20% to 23% of table games drop and our normal slots hold percentage is in the range of
8.5% to 9% of slots handle; and
33

 
 
•
Hotel  revenue indicators:  hotel  occupancy  (a  volume  indicator);  average  daily  rate  (“ADR,”  a  price  indicator);  and  revenue  per  available  room
(“REVPAR,” a summary measure of hotel results, combining ADR and occupancy rate). Our calculation of ADR, which is the average p rice of
occupied rooms per day, includes the impact of complimentary rooms. Complimentary room rates are determined based on an analysis of retail or
“cash”  rates  for  each  customer  segment  and  each  type  of  room  product  to  estimate  complimentary  rates  which are  consistent  with  retail  rates.
Complimentary rates are reviewed at least annually and on an interim basis if there are significant changes in market conditions. Because the mix of
rooms  provided  on  a  complimentary  basis,  particularly  to  casino  customer s,  includes  a  disproportionate  suite  component,  the  composite  ADR
including complimentary rooms is slightly higher than the ADR for cash rooms, reflecting the higher retail value of suites.
MGM China. We own an approximate 56% controlling interest in MGM China, which owns MGM Grand Paradise, the Macau company that owns and
operates MGM Macau and MGM Cotai, the related gaming subconcession and land concessions. We believe our investment in MGM China plays an important
role in extending our reach internationally and will foster future growth and profitability.
Revenues at MGM Macau are generated from three primary customer segments in the Macau gaming market: VIP casino gaming operations, main floor
gaming operations, and slot machine operations. VIP players play mostly in dedicated VIP rooms or designated gaming areas. VIP customers can be further divided
into customers sourced by in-house VIP programs and those sourced through gaming promoters. A significant portion of our VIP volume is generated through the
use of gaming promoters. Gaming promoters introduce VIP gaming players to MGM Macau, assist these customers with travel arrangements, and extend gaming
credit  to  these  players.  In  exchange  for  their  services,  gaming  promoters  are  compensated  through  payment  of  revenue-sharing  arrangements  or  rolling  chip
turnover based commissions. In-house VIP players also typically receive a commission based on the program in which they participate. MGM Macau main floor
operations primarily consist of walk-in and day trip visitors. Unlike gaming promoters and in-house VIP players, main floor players do not receive commissions.
The profit contribution from the main floor segment exceeds the VIP segment due to commission costs paid to gaming promoters. Gaming revenues from the main
floor segment have become an increasingly significant portion of total gaming revenues in recent years and we believe this segment represents the most potential
for sustainable growth in the future.
VIP gaming at MGM Macau is conducted by the use of special purpose nonnegotiable gaming chips. Gaming promoters purchase these nonnegotiable chips
from MGM Macau and in turn they sell these chips to their players. The nonnegotiable chips allow MGM Macau to track the amount of wagering conducted by
each gaming promoters’ clients in order to determine VIP gaming play. Gaming promoter commissions are based on a percentage of the gross table games win or a
percentage of the table games turnover they generate . They also receive a complimentary allowance based on a percentage of the table games turnover they
generate,  which  can  be  applied  to  hotel  rooms,  food  and  beverage  and  other  discretionary  customers-related  expenses.  The  estimated  portion  of  the  gaming
promoter payments that represent amounts passed through to VIP customers is recorded as a reduction of casino revenue, and the estimated portion retained by the
gaming  promoter  for  its  compensation  is  recorded  as  casino  expense.  In-house  VIP  commissions  are  based  on  a  percentage  of  rolling  chip  turnover  and  are
recorded as a reduction of casino revenue.
In addition to the key performance indicators used by our domestic resorts, MGM Macau utilizes “turnover,” which is the sum of nonnegotiable chip wagers
won by MGM Macau calculated as nonnegotiable chips purchased plus nonnegotiable chips exchanged less nonnegotiable chips returned. Turnover provides a
basis for measuring VIP casino win percentage. Win for VIP gaming operations at MGM Macau is typically in the range of 2.7% to 3.0% of turnover. Win for main
floor gaming operations at MGM Macau is typically in the range of 16-22% of table games drop.
Corporate and other. Corporate and other includes our investments in unconsolidated affiliates and certain management and other operations. See Note 1
and Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for discussion of the Company’s unconsolidated affiliates.
 
Results of Operations
 
The following discussion is based on our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
 
34

 
Summary Financial Results
 
The following table summarizes our operating results:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net revenues
 $
10,773,904  $
9,455,123  $
9,190,068 
Operating income (loss)
  
1,715,492   
2,079,787   
(156,232)
Net income (loss)
  
2,096,418   
1,236,878   
(1,039,649)
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
  
1,960,286   
1,101,440   
(447,720)
 
Summary Operating Results
 
Consolidated net revenues for 2017 increased 14% compared to 2016 due primarily to the full year of operations at Borgata and MGM National Harbor, an
increase in casino revenue, rooms revenue, valet and parking fee revenue at our domestic resorts and an increase in casino revenue at MGM China . Consolidated
net revenues for 2016 increased 3% compared to 2015 due primarily to the Borgata transaction on August 1, 2016, the opening of MGM National Harbor in
December 2016 and an increase in casino revenue, rooms revenue, food and beverage revenue, and other revenue including parking fee revenue at our domestic
resorts, partially offset by a decrease in casino revenue at MGM China . See “Operating Results – Detailed Segment Information” below for additional information
related to segment revenues.
 
Consolidated operating income was $1.7 billion in 2017 compared to $2.1 billion in 2016. The current year period included a full year of operations at
Borgata, which included a benefit of $36 million related to Borgata’s share of a property tax settlement from Atlantic City, a full year of operations at MGM
National Harbor, and a benefit of $45 million related to the modification of the NV Energy exit fee, which included the benefit recognized at our domestic resorts
as well as our 50% share of the benefit recognized at CityCenter. The prior year included a $430 million gain recognized on the Borgata acquisition and a $401
million gain related to the sale of The Shops at Crystals (“Crystals”) at CityCenter, which was offset by charges of $152 million of NV Energy exit expense
associated with the Company’s strategic decision to exit the fully bundled sales system of NV Energy. Operating income at our domestic resorts increased 35%, or
$481 million in 2017 compared to 2016, and benefitted from a full year of contributions from Borgata and MGM National Harbor and a decrease in preopening
expense. See “Operating Results – Details of Certain Charges” below for additional detail on our preopening expense. Corporate expense increased to $357 million
in 2017 from $313 million in 2016, primarily from a $16 million charge for the Operating Partnership’s share of real estate transfer taxes recorded in connection
with  the  MGM  National  Harbor  transaction,  with  the  remainder  of  the  increase  primarily  related  to  corporate  brand  campaign  expenses,  legal  expenses,  and
charitable contributions. Operating income at MGM China decreased 24%, or $62 million, compared to 2016 due primarily to an increase in preopening expense
related to the MGM Cotai project. Income from unconsolidated affiliates was $146 million in 2017 compared to $528 million in 2016, which included the gain
related to the sale of Crystals. See “Operating Results – Income from Unconsolidated Affiliates” for additional detail.
 
Consolidated operating income was $2.1 billion in 2016 compared to an operating loss of $156 million in 2015. Operating income in 2016 was affected by
the items discussed above. Operating loss in 2015 was negatively affected by a $1.5 billion non-cash impairment charge to goodwill recognized in the acquisition
of a controlling interest in MGM China in 2011. The impairment charge resulted from our annual review of our goodwill carrying values and was incurred as a
result of reduced cash flow forecasts for MGM China’s resorts based on market conditions at that time and lower valuation multiples for gaming assets in the
Macau market. Income from unconsolidated affiliates was $528 million in 2016, as discussed above, compared to $258 million in 2015, which included $80 million
related to our share of the gain recognized by CityCenter as a result of the final resolution of its construction litigation and related settlements. Corporate expense
increased to $313 million in 2016 from $275 million in 2015, due primarily to costs incurred to implement initiatives related to the Profit Growth Plan of $23
million, costs associated with the initial public offering of MGP of $25 million, transaction costs incurred in connection with the Borgata transaction, incremental
performance-based compensation expense, and costs associated with a litigation settlement.
 
35

 
Operating Results – Detailed Segment Information
 
The following table presents a detail by segment of consolidated net revenues and Adjusted EBITDA. Management uses Adjusted Property EBITDA as the
primary profit measure for its reportable segments. See “Non-GAAP Measures” for additional information:  
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net Revenues
  
    
    
  
Domestic resorts
 $
8,322,403  $
7,055,718  $
6,497,361 
MGM China
  
1,970,494   
1,920,487   
2,214,767 
Reportable segment net revenues
  
10,292,897   
8,976,205   
8,712,128 
Corporate and other
  
481,007   
478,918   
477,940 
 
 $
10,773,904  $
9,455,123  $
9,190,068 
Adjusted EBITDA
  
    
    
  
Domestic resorts
 $
2,514,819  $
2,063,016  $
1,689,966 
MGM China
  
524,953   
520,736   
539,881 
Reportable segment Adjusted Property EBITDA
  
3,039,772   
2,583,752   
2,229,847 
Corporate and other
  
(202,675)   
211,932   
9,073 
 
 $
2,837,097  $
2,795,684  $
2,238,920
 
 
Domestic resorts. The following table is a reconciliation of domestic resorts net revenues to domestic resorts same-store net revenues:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic resorts net revenues
 $
8,322,403  $
7,055,718  $
6,497,361 
Net revenues related to Borgata
  
(850,766)   
(348,462)   
— 
Net revenues related to MGM National Harbor
  
(717,436)   
(53,005)   
— 
Net revenues related to sold resort operations
  
—   
—   
(78,792)
Domestic resorts same-store net revenues
 $
6,754,201  $
6,654,251  $
6,418,569
 
 
The following table presents detailed net revenues at our domestic resorts:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Casino revenue, net
  
    
    
  
Table games
 $
1,436,065  $
1,051,147  $
880,318 
Slots
  
2,473,720   
1,920,284   
1,720,028 
Other
  
139,647   
83,020   
70,148 
Casino revenue, net
  
4,049,432   
3,054,451   
2,670,494 
Non-casino revenue
  
    
    
  
Rooms
  
2,095,605   
1,965,378   
1,813,838 
Food and beverage
  
1,736,640   
1,578,704   
1,500,039 
Entertainment, retail and other
  
1,273,331   
1,166,477   
1,167,488 
Non-casino revenue
  
5,105,576   
4,710,559   
4,481,365 
 
  
9,155,008   
7,765,010   
7,151,859 
Less: Promotional allowances
  
(832,605)   
(709,292)   
(654,498)
 
 $
8,322,403  $
7,055,718  $
6,497,361
 
 
36

 
The following table presents detailed domestic resorts same-store net revenues:
 
  
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
  
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
  
 
(In thousands)
 
 Casino revenue, net
  
    
    
  
 
Table games
 $
961,118  $
951,836  $
874,879 
 
Slots
  
1,743,873   
1,723,576   
1,693,717 
 
Other
  
68,134   
60,398   
69,114 
 
Casino revenue, net
  
2,773,125   
2,735,810   
2,637,710 
 Non-casino revenue
  
    
    
  
 
Rooms
  
1,935,625   
1,910,765   
1,794,289 
 
Food and beverage
  
1,502,255   
1,511,189   
1,486,175 
 
Entertainment, retail and other
  
1,192,355   
1,143,361   
1,148,877 
 
Non-casino revenue
  
4,630,235   
4,565,315   
4,429,341 
  
  
7,403,360   
7,301,125   
7,067,051 
 Less: Promotional allowances
  
(649,159)   
(646,874)   
(648,482)
  
 $
6,754,201  $
6,654,251  $
6,418,569
 
 
Casino revenue increased 33% in 2017 compared to 2016 . Same-store casino revenue increased 1% in 2017 compared to the prior year due primarily to a
1% increase in both table games revenue and slots revenue.
 
Casino revenue increased 14% in 2016 compared to 2015 . Same-store casino revenue increased 4% compared to prior year due primarily to an increase in
table games revenue. Same-store table games revenue increased 9% in 2016 compared to 2015 due to an increase in same-store table games hold percentage to
23.2% from 20.5% in 2015. On a same-store basis, slots revenue increased 2% compared to the prior year.
 
The following table shows key gaming statistics for the Company’s Las Vegas Strip resorts:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table Games Drop
 $
3,777  $
3,723  $
4,029 
Table Games Win %
  
24.7%  
24.4%  
21.2%
Slot Handle
 $
12,396  $
12,437  $
12,831 
Slot Hold %
   
8.9%   
8.9%   
8.4%
 
Domestic resorts rooms revenue increased 7% in 2017 compared to 2016. On a same-store basis, rooms revenue increased 1% in 2017 compared to 2016 as
a result of a 2% increase in REVPAR at our Las Vegas Strip resorts. Domestic resorts rooms revenue increased 8% in 2016 compared to 2015. On a same-store
basis, rooms revenue increased 6% in 2016 compared to 2015 as a result of a 6% increase in REVPAR at our Las Vegas Strip resorts.
 
The following table shows key hotel statistics for our Las Vegas Strip resorts:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
Occupancy
  
91%  
93%  
93%
Average Daily Rate (ADR)
 $
165  $
157  $
149 
Revenue per Available Room (REVPAR)
  
151   
146   
138
 
 
Food and beverage revenues increased 10% in 2017 compared to 2016 . Same-store food and beverage revenue decreased 1% in 2017 compared to 2016
primarily due to a decrease at Monte Carlo as a result of disruption related to the transformation of Monte Carlo into Park MGM and NoMad Hotel. Food and
beverage revenues increased 5% in 2016 compared to 2015. Same-store food and beverage revenue increased 2% in 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to an
increase in convention and banquet business, and the opening of several new outlets.
 
37

 
Entertainment, retail and other revenues increased 9% in 2017 compared to 2016. Same-store entertainment, retail and other revenues increased 4% in 2017
compared to 2016 due primarily to valet and self-parking fees and ATM commissions. Entertainment, retail and other revenues decreased less than 1% in 2016
compared to 2015, and same-store entert ainment, retail and other revenues decreased less than 1% due primarily to a 5% decrease in entertainment revenue as a
result of our strategic decision to lease MGM Grand Garden Arena to a subsidiary of the Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC effective on January 1, 2016 offset by a
7% increase in other revenue primarily as a result of valet and self-parking fees which were implemented in June 2016.
 
The following table is a reconciliation of domestic resorts Adjusted Property EBITDA to domestic resorts Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA. See
“Non-GAAP Measures” for additional information on domestic resorts Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic resorts Adjusted Property EBITDA
 $
2,514,819  $
2,063,016  $
1,689,966 
          Adjusted Property EBITDA related to Borgata
  
(283,353)   
(81,281)   
— 
          Adjusted Property EBITDA related to MGM National Harbor
  
(134,293)   
(9,596)   
— 
          Adjusted Property EBITDA related to sold resort operations
  
—   
—   
(3,441)
Domestic resorts Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA
 $
2,097,173  $
1,972,139  $
1,686,525
 
Adjusted Property EBITDA at our domestic resorts was $2.5 billion in 2017, an increase of 22% compared to 2016, and was positively impacted by a full
year of operations at Borgata and MGM National Harbor. Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA increased 6% in 2017 compared to 2016. Same-store Adjusted
Property EBITDA margin increased in 2017 by 141 basis points compared to 2016 to 31.0% due to an increase in casino and non-casino revenue as discussed
above as well as a decrease in general and administrative expense related to a decrease in payroll costs and utilities.  
Adjusted Property EBITDA at our domestic resorts was $2.1 billion in 2016, an increase of 22% compared to 2015 due primarily to approximately $244
million  of  incremental  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA  growth  generated  from  the  Company’s  Profit  Growth  Plan  initiatives  as  well  as  $81  million  of  Adjusted
Property EBITDA resulting from the Borgata transaction and $10 million of Adjusted Property EBITDA resulting from the December 2016 opening of MGM
National Harbor as well as an increase in revenues as discussed above. Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA increased 17% in 2016 compared to 2015. Same-
store Adjusted Property EBITDA margin increased in 2016 by 336 basis points compared to 2015 to 29.6%.
MGM China. The following table presents detailed net revenue for MGM China:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Casino revenue, net
  
    
    
  
VIP table games
 $
698,437  $
720,522  $
977,182 
Main floor table games
  
1,054,028   
999,506   
986,063 
Slots
  
179,280   
161,586   
209,098 
Casino revenue, net
  
1,931,745   
1,881,614   
2,172,343 
Non-casino revenue
  
119,686   
119,419   
135,585 
 
  
2,051,431   
2,001,033   
2,307,928 
Less: Promotional allowances
  
(80,937)   
(80,546)   
(93,161)
 
 $
1,970,494  $
1,920,487  $
2,214,767
 
 
Net revenue for MGM China increased 3% in 2017 compared to 2016 primarily as a result of an increase in main floor table games revenue of 5%, which
was partially offset by a 3% decrease in VIP table games revenue. VIP table games volume increased slightly in 2017 compared to 2016 while VIP hold percentage
was 3.2% for both the current and prior year periods. Main floor table games volume decreased 1% and hold percentage increased to 20.2% in 2017 from 18.8% in
2016. Slots revenue increased 11% in 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to an 8% increase in slots volume.
 
MGM China’s Adjusted EBITDA was $525 million in 2017 and $521 million in 2016. Excluding intercompany branding fees of $34 million for both the
years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, Adjusted EBITDA increased 1% compared to 2016. Adjusted EBITDA margin was 26.6% in 2017 compared to 27.1%
in 2016 and decreased in part as a result of a 7% increase in general and administrative expense .
38

 
 
Net revenue for MGM China decreased 13% in 2016 compared to 2015 primarily as a result of a decrease in VIP table games revenue of 26%, which was
slightly offset by a 1% increase in main floor table games revenue. VIP table games turnover decreased 24% compared to the prior year, and VIP table games hold
percentage decreased to 3.2% in 2016 from 3.3% in 2015. Slots revenue decreased 23% in 2016 compared to 2015 due to an 18% decrease in slots volume. Casino
revenue was negatively affected in 2016 by the changes in economic factors and policy initiatives in China that began to take place in 2014, and VIP table games
revenue was further impacted by the new regulatory compliance requirements implemented in late 2015 and in 2016 for gaming promoters and operators, as well as
the curtailing of “proxy” bets as a result of the ban on mobile phone usage at gaming tables, which began in 2016 .
 
MGM China’s Adjusted EBITDA was $521 million in 2016 and $540 million in 2015. Excluding intercompany branding fees of $34 million and $39
million for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, Adjusted EBITDA decreased 4% compared to 2015. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased
274 basis points to 27.1% in 2016 primarily as a result of an increase in main floor table games mix and cost reduction efforts .
 
Corporate and other. Corporate and other revenue includes revenues from other corporate operations, management services and reimbursed costs revenue
primarily related to our CityCenter management agreement. Reimbursed costs revenue represents reimbursement of costs, primarily payroll-related, incurred by us
in connection with the provision of management services and was $402 million, $397 million and $399 million for 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
 
Adjusted EBITDA related to corporate and other in 2017 decreased compared to the prior year due to our share of the gain recognized in 2016 from the sale
of Crystals at CityCenter, the gain on the acquisition of Borgata in 2016 and an increase in stock-based compensation, partially offset by the cessation of equity
method accounting for Borgata subsequent to the acquisition and an increase in corporate expense as described in “Summary Operating Results.” See “Operating
Results – Income from Unconsolidated Affiliates” for further discussion regarding CityCenter and Borgata.
 
Adjusted EBITDA related to corporate and other in 2016 increased due to our share of the gain recognized from the sale of Crystals at CityCenter. See
“Operating Results – Income from Unconsolidated Affiliates” for further discussion. The increase in income from unconsolidated affiliates was partially offset by
an increase in corporate expense and an increase in stock-based compensation.
 
Operating Results – Details of Certain Charges
 
Preopening and start-up expenses consisted of the following:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
MGM China
 $
86,970  $
27,848  $
13,863 
MGM Springfield
  
22,881   
26,210   
19,654 
Monte Carlo rebranding
  
6,498   
589   
— 
MGM National Harbor
  
366   
77,242   
32,837 
Other
  
1,760   
8,186   
4,973 
 
 $
118,475  $
140,075  $
71,327
 
 
Preopening and start-up expenses decreased in 2017 due primarily to a decrease in preopening and start-up expenses at MGM National Harbor (as it opened
in December 2016), partially offset by an increase in preopening and start-up expenses at MGM China related to MGM Cotai (which opened in February 2018) and
at Monte Carlo as part of the property’s on-going rebrand to Park MGM and NoMad Hotel. Preopening and start-up expenses at MGM China include $7 million of
amortization of the Cotai land concession premium in each of the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015. Preopening and start-up expenses at MGM
National Harbor include $15 million and $19 million of rent expense for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, which relates to the ground
lease for the land on which MGM National Harbor was developed. As the property was open for the entirety of 2017, no rent expense relating to the ground lease
was recorded in preopening and start-up expenses at MGM National Harbor for 2017.
 
39

 
Property transactions, net consisted of the following:    
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Grand Victoria investment impairment
 $
—  $
—  $
17,050 
Gain on sale of Circus Circus Reno and Silver Legacy investment
  
—   
—   
(23,002)
Other property transactions, net
  
50,279   
17,078   
41,903 
 
 $
50,279  $
17,078  $
35,951
 
 
See Note 16 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of property transactions, net for the years ended December 31, 2017,
2016 and 2015.
 
Operating Results – Income from Unconsolidated Affiliates
 
The following table summarizes information related to our income from unconsolidated affiliates:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
CityCenter
 $
133,167  $
445,181  $
158,906 
Borgata (through July 31, 2016)
  
—   
61,169   
75,764 
Other
  
12,822   
21,266   
23,213 
 
 $
145,989  $
527,616  $
257,883
 
 
We completed our acquisition of Borgata on August 1, 2016, at which time the subsidiary operating Borgata became a consolidated subsidiary. Prior to the
acquisition, we held a 50% interest in Borgata, which was accounted for under the equity method.
 
In 2017, our share of CityCenter’s operating results, including certain basis difference adjustments, was $133 million, which included a benefit of $4 million
related to our share of the modification of the NV Energy exit fee. At Aria, casino revenues increased 8% in 2017 compared to 2016, due to a 2% increase in table
games drop and an increase in hold percentage to 25.3% in 2017 compared to 24.6% in 2016 as well as a 6% increase in slots revenue. REVPAR increased by 5%
and 2% at Aria and Vdara, respectively, which led to a 4% increase in CityCenter’s rooms revenue in 2017 compared to 2016. CityCenter food and beverage
revenue increased 7% in 2017 due in part to an increase in catering and banquets during the year.
 
In 2016, our share of CityCenter’s operating results, including certain basis difference adjustments, was $445 million, which included $13 million related to
our share of NV Energy exit expense representing CityCenter’s share of a charge associated with our strategic decision to exit the fully bundled sales system of NV
Energy, $41 million related to our share of accelerated depreciation related to the April 2016 closure of the Zarkana theatre, as well as $401 million related to our
share of a gain recognized by CityCenter on the sale of Crystals and the reversal of certain basis differences, compared to $159 million in 2015, which included $80
million related to our share of a gain recognized by CityCenter as a result of the final resolution of its construction litigation and related settlements. At Aria, casino
revenues decreased 2% in 2016 compared to 2015, due to a 7% decrease in table games volume partially offset by an increase in hold percentage to 24.6% in 2016
compared to 23.8% in 2015. The decrease in table games revenue was partially offset by a 2% increase in slots revenue. REVPAR increased by 4% and 8% at Aria
and Vdara, respectively, which led to a 7% increase in CityCenter’s rooms revenue in 2016 compared to 2015.
 
40

 
Non-operating Results
 
Interest expense. The following table summarizes information related to interest on our long-term debt:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Total interest incurred – MGM Resorts (excluding MGM China)
 $
691,475  $
746,467  $
808,733 
Total interest incurred – MGM China
  
88,380   
68,264   
53,644 
Interest capitalized
  
(111,110)   
(119,958)   
(64,798)
 
 $
668,745  $
694,773  $
797,579 
 
   
    
    
 
Cash paid for interest, net of amounts capitalized
 $
658,637  $
661,166  $
776,540 
End-of-year ratio of fixed-to-floating debt
 
73/27  
68/32  
67/33 
End-of-year weighted average interest rate
  
5.2%  
5.4%  
5.9%
 
In 2017, interest cost related to MGM Resorts, excluding MGM China, decreased compared to 2016 primarily as a result of a decrease in the average debt
outstanding related to our senior notes and a decrease in the weighted average interest rate of our senior notes. This was partially offset by an increase in the
average debt outstanding under our credit facilities and an increase in amortization of debt issuance costs. Interest cost related to MGM China increased in 2017
compared to 2016 due to an increase in the average outstanding amounts borrowed under the MGM China credit facility and an increase in the weighted average
interest rate. In 2016, interest cost related to MGM Resorts, excluding MGM China, decreased compared to 2015 primarily as a result of a decrease in the average
long-term debt outstanding, and also due to a decrease in the weighted average interest rate, partially offset by an increase in amortization of debt issuance cost
associated with the MGP related financing transactions in April 2016. Interest cost related to MGM China increased in 2016 compared to 2015 due to an increase in
the average outstanding amounts borrowed under the MGM China credit facility partially offset by a decrease in amortization of debt issuance costs.
 
Capitalized interest in 2017 decreased from 2016 due primarily to the opening of MGM National Harbor in December 2016, partially offset due to the
MGM Cotai and MGM Springfield projects. Capitalized interest in 2016 increased compared to 2015 due primarily to the MGM Cotai, MGM National Harbor, and
MGM Springfield projects.
 
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates.  Non-operating expense from unconsolidated affiliates decreased $18 million in 2017 compared to
2016, and decreased $23 million in 2016 compared to 2015, due primarily to the acquisition of Borgata on August 1, 2016, at which time the subsidiary operating
Borgata became a consolidated subsidiary of our company. Prior to the acquisition, we held a 50% ownership interest in Borgata, which was accounted for under
the equity method.
 
Other, net. Other expense in 2017 primarily consisted of a $30 million loss incurred on the early retirement of debt related to our 11.375% senior notes due
2018, as well as a $14 million loss incurred on the early retirement of debt related to the MGM National Harbor credit facility. Other expense in 2016 primarily
consisted of a $16 million loss on the early retirement of debt related to our 7.625% senior notes due 2017, as well as a $49 million loss incurred on the early
retirement of debt related to our previously outstanding 7.5% senior notes due 2016 and 10% senior notes due 2016 and our prior senior credit facility, recorded in
the second quarter of 2016. The previously discussed losses related to the early retirement of debt recorded in 2016 are primarily responsible for the increase in
other non-operating expense from 2016 to 2015.
 
Income taxes. The following table summarizes information related to our income taxes:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Income (loss) before income taxes
 $
963,755 
 $
1,259,177  $
(1,046,243)
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
  
1,132,663 
  
(22,299)   
6,594 
Effective income tax rate
  
(117.5)%  
1.8%  
0.6%
Federal, state and foreign income taxes paid, net of refunds
 $
181,651 
 $
68,236  $
11,801
 
 
Our effective tax rate in 2017 was favorably impacted by a non-recurring, non-cash income tax benefit of $1.4 billion resulting from the remeasurement of
deferred tax assets and liabilities required as a result of the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”). Our effective tax rate in 2016 was
favorably impacted by income tax benefits attributable to a decrease in valuation allowance on foreign tax credit carryovers and permanent exclusion of a portion
of the gain on the Borgata transaction, partially offset
41

 
by  income  tax  expense  attributable  to  the  remeasurement  of  Macau  deferred  tax  liabilities  resulting  from  a  change  in  assumption  concerning  renewal  of  the
exemption from the Macau complementary tax on gaming profits. Our effective ta x rate in 2015 was unfavorably impacted by the non-cash impairment charge on
MGM China goodwill for which we did not record income tax benefit, partially offset by an income tax benefit for foreign tax credits, net of valuation allowance.
 
Cash taxes paid increased in 2017 compared to 2016 primarily as a result of an increase in federal income taxes paid due to increased U.S. taxable income
and state income taxes attributable to Borgata, which has been consolidated since the August 2016 acquisition of Boyd Gaming’s interest in the company. Cash
taxes paid increased in 2016 compared to 2015 primarily as a result of an increase in federal income taxes paid due to increased U.S. taxable income.
 
Non-GAAP Measures
 
“Adjusted EBITDA” is earnings before interest and other non-operating income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization, preopening and start-up
expenses, NV Energy exit expense, gain on Borgata transaction, goodwill impairment charges, and property transactions, net. “Adjusted Property EBITDA” is
Adjusted EBITDA before corporate expense and stock compensation expense related to the MGM Resorts and MGP stock compensation plans, which are not
allocated to each property. MGM China recognizes stock compensation expense related to its stock-based compensation plan which is included in the calculation of
Adjusted  EBITDA  for  MGM  China.  “Same-store  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA”  is  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA  related  to  the  operating  resorts  which  were
consolidated  by  the  Company  for  both  the  entire  current  and  prior  year  periods  presented.  “Adjusted  EBITDA  margin”  is  Adjusted  EBITDA  divided  by  net
revenues. “Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA margin” is Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA divided by “same-store” net revenues. Adjusted EBITDA
information  is  presented  solely  as  a  supplemental  disclosure  to  reported  GAAP  measures  because  management  believes  these  measures  are  1)  widely  used
measures of operating performance in the gaming industry, and 2) a principal basis for valuation of gaming companies. We present Adjusted Property EBITDA on
a  “same-store”  basis  as  supplemental  information  because  management  believes  that  providing  performance  measures  on  a  “same-store”  basis  is  useful  for
evaluating the period-to-period performance of our domestic casino resorts.
 
We believe that while items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Property EBITDA, Same-Store Adjusted Property EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA
margin, and Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA margin may be recurring in nature and should not be disregarded in evaluation of our earnings performance, it
is useful to exclude such items when analyzing current results and trends compared to other periods because these items can vary significantly depending on
specific  underlying  transactions  or  events  that  may  not  be  comparable  between  the  periods  being  presented.  Also,  we  believe  excluded  items  may  not  relate
specifically to current operating trends or be indicative of future results. For example, preopening and start-up expenses will be significantly different in periods
when we are developing and constructing a major expansion project and will depend on where the current period lies within the development cycle, as well as the
size and scope of the project(s). Property transactions, net includes normal recurring disposals, gains and losses on sales of assets related to specific assets within
our resorts, but also includes gains or losses on sales of an entire operating resort or a group of resorts and impairment charges on entire asset groups or investments
in unconsolidated affiliates,  which may not be comparable  period over period. In addition, capital allocation, tax planning, financing and stock compensation
awards are all managed at the corporate level. Therefore, we use Adjusted Property EBITDA and Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA as the primary measure
of domestic resorts operating performance.
 
Adjusted  EBITDA,  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA,  Same-store  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA,  Adjusted  EBITDA  margin  or  Same-store  Adjusted  Property
EBITDA margin should not be construed as alternatives to operating income or net income, as indicators of our performance; or as alternatives to cash flows from
operating activities, as measures of liquidity; or as any other measure determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. We have significant
uses of cash flows, including capital expenditures, interest payments, taxes and debt principal repayments, which are not reflected in Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted
Property EBITDA, Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, or Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA margin. Also, other companies
in the gaming and hospitality industries that report Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Property EBITDA Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA
margin  or  Same-store  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA  margin  information  may  calculate  Adjusted  EBITDA,  Adjusted  Property  EBITDA,  Same-store  Adjusted
Property EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin or Same-store Adjusted Property EBITDA margin in a different manner.
42

 
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International to Adjusted EBITDA:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,960,286  $
1,101,440  $
(447,720)
Plus: Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
136,132   
135,438   
(591,929)
Net income (loss)
  
2,096,418   
1,236,878   
(1,039,649)
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
  
(1,132,663)   
22,299   
(6,594)
Income (loss) before income taxes
  
963,755   
1,259,177   
(1,046,243)
Non-operating expense
  
    
    
  
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
  
668,745   
694,773   
797,579 
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
  
34,751   
53,139   
76,462 
Other, net
  
48,241   
72,698   
15,970 
 
  
751,737   
820,610   
890,011 
Operating income (loss)
  
1,715,492   
2,079,787   
(156,232)
NV Energy exit expense
  
(40,629)   
139,335   
— 
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
118,475   
140,075   
71,327 
Property transactions, net
  
50,279   
17,078   
35,951 
Goodwill impairment
  
—   
—   
1,467,991 
Gain on Borgata transaction
  
—   
(430,118)   
— 
Depreciation and amortization
  
993,480   
849,527   
819,883 
Adjusted EBITDA
 $
2,837,097  $
2,795,684  $
2,238,920
 
 
 
The following tables present reconciliations of operating income (loss) to Adjusted Property EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2017
 
 
   
    
  
Preopening
  
Property
  
Depreciation
    
 
 
 
Operating
  
NV Energy
  
and   Start-up    
Transactions,
  
and
  
Adjusted
 
 
 
Income   (Loss)    
Exit Expense
  
Expenses
  
Net
  
Amortization
  
EBITDA
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Bellagio
 $
418,581  $
(6,970)  $
—  $
924  $
92,320  $
504,855 
MGM Grand Las Vegas
  
279,205   
(7,424)   
6   
1,752   
70,510   
344,049 
Mandalay Bay
  
169,678   
(8,524)   
—   
590   
96,577   
258,321 
The Mirage
  
140,363   
(4,043)   
—   
304   
39,854   
176,478 
Luxor
  
89,045   
(3,394)   
—   
2,428   
38,489   
126,568 
New York-New York
  
108,102   
(2,025)   
(162)   
720   
28,550   
135,185 
Excalibur
  
97,331   
(2,658)   
—   
485   
18,352   
113,510 
Monte Carlo
  
(30,597)   
(2,461)   
6,532   
33,510   
42,269   
49,253 
Circus Circus Las Vegas
  
55,239   
(3,130)   
452   
940   
16,756   
70,257 
MGM Grand Detroit
  
154,801   
—   
—   
—   
22,747   
177,548 
Beau Rivage
  
62,352   
—   
—   
370   
24,865   
87,587 
Gold Strike Tunica
  
44,402   
—   
—   
91   
9,069   
53,562 
Borgata
  
208,628   
—   
1,430   
1,417   
71,878   
283,353 
MGM National Harbor
  
51,183   
—   
366   
—   
82,744   
134,293 
Domestic Resorts
  
1,848,313   
(40,629)   
8,624   
43,531   
654,980   
2,514,819 
MGM China
  
193,619   
—   
86,970   
6,286   
238,078   
524,953 
Unconsolidated resorts
  
145,989   
—   
—   
—   
—   
145,989 
Management and other operations
  
19,812   
—   
—   
—   
7,925   
27,737 
 
  
2,207,733   
(40,629)   
95,594   
49,817   
900,983   
3,213,498 
Stock compensation
  
(50,365)   
—   
—   
—   
—   
(50,365)
Corporate
  
(441,876)   
—   
22,881   
462   
92,497   
(326,036)
 
 $
1,715,492  $
(40,629)  $
118,475  $
50,279  $
993,480  $
2,837,097
 
43

 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2016
 
 
  
 
    
    
  
Property
    
   
 
 
 
   
    
    
  
Transactions, Net     
    
 
 
   
    
  
Preopening
  
and Gain on
  
Depreciation
    
 
 
 
Operating
  
NV Energy
  
and Start-up
  
Borgata
  
and
  
Adjusted
 
 
 
Income (Loss)
  
Exit Expense
  
Expenses
  
Transaction
  
Amortization
  
EBITDA
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Bellagio
 $
366,543  $
23,815  $
—  $
118  $
88,783  $
479,259 
MGM Grand Las Vegas
  
231,327   
25,365   
82   
1,719   
72,188   
330,681 
Mandalay Bay
  
114,202   
29,123   
252   
2,377   
89,655   
235,609 
The Mirage
  
85,300   
13,813   
—   
44   
40,270   
139,427 
Luxor
  
57,653   
11,594   
1,625   
708   
36,612   
108,192 
New York-New York
  
93,169   
7,439   
479   
210   
20,432   
121,729 
Excalibur
  
71,885   
9,083   
—   
4,405   
16,152   
101,525 
Monte Carlo
  
33,291   
8,409   
1,929   
1,131   
34,102   
78,862 
Circus Circus Las Vegas
  
33,516   
10,694   
—   
816   
16,963   
61,989 
MGM Grand Detroit
  
147,865   
—   
—   
(59)   
23,608   
171,414 
Beau Rivage
  
68,054   
—   
—   
(172)   
25,880   
93,762 
Gold Strike Tunica
  
39,831   
—   
—   
67   
9,792   
49,690 
Borgata
  
38,616   
—   
90   
8,652   
33,923   
81,281 
MGM National Harbor
  
(13,626)   
—   
17,986   
—   
5,236   
9,596 
Domestic Resorts
  
1,367,626   
139,335   
22,443   
20,016   
513,596   
2,063,016 
MGM China
  
255,264   
—   
27,848   
(216)   
237,840   
520,736 
Unconsolidated resorts
  
524,448   
—   
3,168   
—   
—   
527,616 
Management and other operations
  
4,316   
—   
1,150   
29   
7,505   
13,000 
 
  
2,151,654   
139,335   
54,609   
19,829   
758,941   
3,124,368 
Stock compensation
  
(44,957)   
—   
—   
—   
—   
(44,957)
Corporate
  
(26,910)   
—   
85,466   
(432,869)   
90,586   
(283,727)
 
 $
2,079,787  $
139,335  $
140,075  $
(413,040)  $
849,527  $
2,795,684
 
44

 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2015
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Property
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Transactions,
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
Preopening
  
Net
  
Depreciation
   
 
 
 
 
Operating
  
and Start-up
  
and Goodwill
  
and
  
Adjusted
 
 
 
Income (Loss)
  
Expenses
  
Impairment
  
Amortization
  
EBITDA
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Bellagio
 $
303,858  $
—  $
1,085  
$
90,442  $
395,385 
MGM Grand Las Vegas
  
206,896   
—   
110  
 
73,260   
280,266 
Mandalay Bay
  
120,142   
—   
3,599  
 
79,733   
203,474 
The Mirage
  
66,069   
115   
1,729  
 
44,562   
112,475 
Luxor
  
49,369   
(2)   
94  
 
37,708   
87,169 
New York-New York
  
81,618   
(74)   
4,931  
 
19,982   
106,457 
Excalibur
  
67,545   
—   
111  
 
14,591   
82,247 
Monte Carlo
  
55,594   
—   
3,219  
 
27,149   
85,962 
Circus Circus Las Vegas
  
27,305   
280   
21  
 
15,639   
43,245 
MGM Grand Detroit
  
131,016   
—   
(36)  
 
23,999   
154,979 
Beau Rivage
  
62,613   
—   
(5)  
 
26,235   
88,843 
Gold Strike Tunica
  
34,362   
—   
221  
 
11,440   
46,023 
Other resort operations
  
2,975   
—   
—  
 
466   
3,441 
Domestic Resorts
  
1,209,362   
319   
15,079  
 
465,206   
1,689,966 
MGM China
  
(1,212,377)   
13,863   
1,472,128  
 
266,267   
539,881 
Unconsolidated resorts
  
254,408   
3,475   
—  
 
—   
257,883 
Management and other operations
  
27,395   
1,179   
1,080  
 
7,765   
37,419 
 
  
278,788   
18,836   
1,488,287  
 
739,238   
2,525,149 
Stock compensation
  
(32,125)   
—   
—  
 
—   
(32,125)
Corporate
  
(402,895)   
52,491   
15,655  
 
80,645   
(254,104)
 
 $
(156,232)  $
71,327  $
1,503,942  
$
819,883  $
2,238,920
 
 
 
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
Cash Flows – Summary
 
We require a certain amount of cash on hand to operate our resorts. In addition to required cash on hand for operations, we utilize company-wide cash
management procedures to minimize the amount of cash held on hand or in banks. Funds are swept from the accounts at most of our domestic resorts daily into
central bank accounts, and excess funds are invested overnight or are used to repay borrowings under our senior secured credit facility. In addition, from time to
time we may use excess funds to repurchase our outstanding debt securities subject to limitations in our senior secured credit facility. At December 31, 2017 and
2016, we held cash and cash equivalents of $1.5 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents related to MGM China at December 31, 2017 and
2016 was $676 million and $454 million, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents related to the Operating Partnership at December 31, 2017 and 2016 was $260
million and $360 million, respectively.
 
Our cash flows consisted of the following:  
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
 $
2,206,411  $
1,533,972  $
1,005,079 
Net cash used in investing activities
  
(1,580,592)
  
(2,276,204)   
(795,058)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
  
(568,778)
  
519,422   
(257,879)
 
Cash Flows
 
Operating activities. Trends in our operating cash flows tend to follow trends in operating income, excluding non-cash charges, but can be affected by
changes in working capital, cash paid for interest, the timing of significant tax payments or refunds, and distributions from unconsolidated affiliates. Cash provided
by operating activities was $2.2 billion in 2017 compared to $1.5 billion in 2016. Operating cash flows increased in the current period due to an increase in
operating income at our domestic resorts, partially offset by an increase in cash paid for taxes. Cash provided by operating activities in 2017 was positively affected
by changes in working capital primarily related to the timing of significant purchases of chips by gaming promoters at MGM China.
45

 
 
Cash provided by operating activities in 2016 increased from 2015 due to an increase in operating income at our domestic resorts and a decrease in cash
paid for interest, partially offset by an increase in cash paid for taxes. Cash provided by operating activities in 2015 was negatively affected by changes in working
capital primarily related to short-term gaming liabilities.
 
We paid net taxes of $182 million, $68 million and $12 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Investing activities. Our investing cash flows can fluctuate significantly from year to year depending on our decisions with respect to strategic capital
investments in new or existing resorts, business acquisitions or dispositions, and the timing of maintenance capital expenditures to maintain the quality of our
resorts. Capital expenditures related to regular investments in our existing resorts can also vary depending on timing of larger remodel projects related to our public
spaces and hotel rooms. Most of such costs relate to construction materials, furniture and fixtures, and external labor costs.
 
 
•
In 2017, we had capital expenditures of $1.9 billion, which included $908 million at MGM China, excluding development fees and capitalized interest
on development fees eliminated in consolidation. Capital expenditures at MGM China included $856 million related to the construction of MGM Cotai
and $53 million related to improvements at MGM Macau. Capital expenditures at our domestic resorts and corporate entities of $956 million included
$269 million related to the construction of MGM Springfield, $221 million related to the Monte Carlo rebranding project, and $195 million primarily
related to the finalization of construction of MGM National Harbor, as well as various resorts’ room remodels, construction of additional convention
space  at  MGM Grand  Las  Vegas,  the  parking  garage  at  Excalibur,  a  waterpark  at  Circus  Circus,  and  various  restaurant  and  entertainment  venue
remodels.
 
 
•
In 2016, we had capital expenditures of $2.3 billion, which included $971 million at MGM China, excluding development fees and capitalized interest
on development fees eliminated in consolidation. Capital expenditures at MGM China included $948 million related to the construction of MGM Cotai
and $23 million related to improvements at MGM Macau. Capital expenditures at our domestic resorts and corporate entities of $1.3 billion included
$741 million related to the construction of MGM National Harbor, $121 million related to the construction of MGM Springfield, $39 million related to
the construction of The Park, as well as various room remodels including the tower rooms at Mandalay Bay, construction of additional exhibit space at
the Mandalay Bay Convention Center, construction of the Park Theater and rebranding at Monte Carlo, construction of the parking garage at Excalibur
and restaurant and entertainment venue remodels .
 
 
•
In 2015, we had capital expenditures of $1.5 billion, which included $579 million at MGM China, excluding development fees and capitalized interest
on development fees eliminated in consolidation. Capital expenditures at MGM China included $543 million related to the construction of MGM Cotai
and $36 million related to improvements at MGM Macau. Capital expenditures at our domestic resorts and corporate entities of $888 million included
$361  million  and  $35  million  related  to  the  construction  of  MGM  National  Harbor  and  MGM  Springfield,  respectively,  various  room  remodels
including the tower rooms at Mandalay Bay and the suites at Bellagio, construction of additional exhibit space at the Mandalay Bay Convention
Center, construction of the Park Theatre, construction of The Park entertainment district, and restaurant and entertainment venue remodels.
 
We additionally had other investing activities. Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates for 2017 consisted of our $300 million share of a $600 million
dividend paid by CityCenter in April 2017.
 
During 2016, we received $15 million of proceeds related to the sale of a portion of our investment in the Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC, and we paid
approximately $604 million and acquired cash of approximately $43 million in connection with the acquisition of Boyd Gaming’s ownership interest in Borgata.
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates for 2016 primarily related to a $540 million distribution paid by CityCenter in May 2016.
 
In 2015, investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates primarily represented investments in CityCenter pursuant to the completion guarantee of
$141 million and investments in the Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC of $50 million. In 2015, investing activities also included proceeds of $20 million related to
the  sale  of  Railroad  Pass and  Gold  Strike  Jean,  proceeds  of  $72  million  (net  of  cash  included  in  the  sale)  related  to  the  sale  of Circus  Circus  Reno  and  the
Company’s 50% interest in Silver Legacy, and $202 million of distributions received from unconsolidated affiliates, which includes a $200 million distribution
paid by CityCenter in April 2015. In addition, we invested $200 million in certificates of deposit with original maturities longer than 90 days and received proceeds
of $770 million related to the maturity of certificates of deposit with original maturities longer than 90 days.
 
46

 
Financing activities. In 2017, we repaid net debt of $138 million which included the following repayments:
 
•
$503 million for the redemption of our $475 million 11.375% senior notes, including a premium ;
 
•
$478 million for the repayment of the MGM National Harbor credit facility, which consisted of $425 million in term loans and $53 million drawn on
the revolving credit facility, in connection with the MGM National Harbor transaction;
 
•
$ 42 million of amortization payments on the Operating Partnership senior credit facility term loans;
 
•
$77 million of amortization payments on the MGM China credit facility term loans; and
 
•
$13 million of amortization payments on our senior credit facility term loan.
 
The repayments were partially offset by the following issuances and draws:
 
 
•
$350 million for the Operating Partnership’s issuance of 4.50% senior notes due 2028 in connection with the MGM National Harbor transaction;
 
•
$135 million of net draws on our senior secured revolving credit facility;
 
•
$462 million of net draws on the MGM China revolving credit facility; and
 
•
$28 million of net draws on the MGM National Harbor revolving credit facility.
 
Additionally, we paid $10 million of debt issuance costs related to the issuance of the Operating Partnership’s senior notes and the amendments to the MGM
China and Operating Partnership credit facilities.
 
In 2016, we repaid net debt of $301 million. In April 2016, in connection with the MGP IPO and related financing transactions we permanently repaid $2.7
billion under our prior senior secured credit facility and entered into an amended and restated senior secured credit facility under which we borrowed $250 million.
The Operating Partnership borrowed net debt of $2.1 billion during 2016 under its senior credit facility. In addition, MGM National Harbor borrowed $450 million
under its credit facility, MGM China borrowed $374 million under its revolving credit facility, and we permanently repaid $584 million under Borgata’s credit
facility. The following senior notes were issued during 2016:
 
•
$500 million 4.625% senior notes, due 2026 issued by us;
 
•
$500 million 4.5% senior notes, due 2026 issued by the Operating Partnership; and
 
•
$1.05 billion 5.625% senior notes, due 2024 issued by the Operating Partnership.
We redeemed the following senior notes during 2016:
 
•
$743 million 7.625% senior notes, due 2017 at a premium;
 
•
$732.7 million 7.5% senior notes, due 2016 at a premium;
 
•
$500 million 10% senior notes, due 2016 at a premium; and
 
•
$242.9 million 6.875% senior notes in April 2016 at maturity.
Additionally, we paid $140 million of debt issuance costs related to the senior notes issued in August 2016, the MGP financing transactions, the MGM
National Harbor credit facility and the February 2016 amendment to the MGM China credit facility.
 
In 2015, we had net borrowings of $102 million, including $1.0 billion of borrowings under the MGM China credit facility, the repayment of $28 million
under our senior secured credit facility and the repayment of the $875 million 6.625% senior notes at maturity in July 2015 using cash on hand. Additionally, we
paid $46 million of debt issuance costs related to the refinancing of the MGM China credit facility.
Other financing activities during the year ended 2017 included MGP’s receipt of net proceeds of $388 million from a secondary offering of its Class A
shares issued in September 2017 in connection with the MGM National Harbor transaction. During the year ended 2016, MGP received proceeds of $1.2 billion in
connection with the MGP IPO in April 2016 and paid $75 million of issuance costs related to the IPO, and we paid $100 million as part of the consideration for the
purchase of an additional 188.1 million common shares of our MGM China subsidiary.
 
Additionally, in September 2017, we repurchased and retired $328 million of our common stock pursuant to our stock repurchase plan. As discussed further
below, we paid dividends to common shareholders in 2017 and have made distributions to noncontrolling interests in each of 2017, 2016, and 2015.
 
We received $47 million and $6 million in 2016 and 2015, respectively, related to proceeds from the issuance of non-voting membership interests in MGM
National Harbor.  No non-voting membership interests in MGM National Harbor were issued in 2017.
 
47

 
Other Factors Affecting Liquidity
 
Anticipated uses of cash.  We have significant outstanding debt and contractual obligations in addition to planned capital expenditures. At December 31,
2017, we had $13.0 billion in principal amount of indebtedness, including $373 million of borrowings outstanding under our $1.5 billion senior secured credit
facility, $2.1 billion outstanding under the $2.7 billion Operating Partnership credit facility, and $2.3 billion outstanding under the $2.9 billion MGM China credit
facility. In the next twelve months, we have due an estimated $710 million of cash interest payments and $820 million of term loan principal payments, of which
approximately $774 million relates to MGM China’s existing credit facility. MGM China is in the process of amending its credit facility to extend the maturity
date, extend the timing of and reduce the amount of scheduled amortization payments, and increase the maximum leverage ratio. We believe we have the ability to
meet known obligations, including principal and interest obligations as well as planned capital expenditures, over the next twelve months from the balance sheet
date with existing cash and cash deposits, cash flows from operations, and availability under our revolving credit facilities.
 
In addition, we have made significant investments through December 31, 2017 and we expect to make capital investments as described below during 2018.
See “Executive Overview” for further information regarding the scope and timing of our significant development projects.
 
 
•
Approximately $640 million in capital expenditures at our domestic resorts and corporate entities, excluding MGM Springfield;
 
•
Approximately $455 million on the MGM Cotai project, excluding development fees and capitalized interest;
 
•
Approximately $375 million on the MGM Springfield project, excluding capitalized interest and land-related costs; and
 
•
Approximately $115 million in maintenance capital improvements at MGM China.
 
Our capital expenditures fluctuate depending on our decisions with respect to strategic capital investments in new or existing resorts and the timing of
capital investments to maintain the quality of our resorts, the amounts of which can vary depending on timing of larger remodel projects related to our public spaces
and hotel rooms. Future capital expenditures could vary from our current expectations depending on the progress of our development efforts and the structure of
our ownership interests in future developments.
 
MGM Resorts International stock repurchase program. In September 2017, our Board of Directors authorized a $1.0 billion stock repurchase program,
under which we may repurchase shares from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated agreements. The timing, volume and nature of stock
repurchases will be at the sole discretion of management, dependent on market conditions, applicable securities laws, and other factors, and may be suspended or
discontinued at any time. Repurchased shares are retired. The remaining availability under the stock repurchase program was approximately $672 million as of
December 31, 2017.
 
MGM Resorts International dividends. During 2017, we paid dividends each quarter of $0.11 per share, totaling $252 million for the year. On February
19, 2018 the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend to holders of record on March 9, 2018 of $0.12 per share, totaling $68 million, which will be paid on
March 15, 2018. Our intention is to pay a comparable quarterly dividend in each quarter of 2018, subject to our operating results, cash requirements and financial
conditions, any applicable provisions of state law that may limit the amount of funds available to us, and compliance with covenants and financial ratios related to
existing or future agreements governing the indebtedness at our subsidiaries and any limitations in other agreements such subsidiaries may have with third parties.
 
Operating Partnership distributions and MGP dividends. The Operating Partnership paid the following distributions to its partnership unit holders:
 
 
•
$112  million  distribution  paid  in  January  2018,  of  which  the  Company  received  $82  million  and  MGP  received  $30  million,  which  MGP
concurrently paid as a dividend to its Class A shareholders;
 
•
$385  million  of  distributions  paid  in  2017,  of  which  the  Company  received  $290  million  and  MGP  received  $95  million,  which  MGP
concurrently paid as a dividend to its Class A shareholders;
 
•
$151  million  of  distributions  paid  in  2016,  of  which  the  Company  received  $113  million  and  MGP  received  $38  million,  which  MGP
concurrently paid as a dividend to its Class A shareholders.
 
MGM China dividends. MGM China paid, or will pay, the following dividends to its shareholders:
 
 
•
$47 million dividend, to be paid in 2018 if approved at the MGM China 2018 annual shareholders meeting, of which the Company would receive
$26 million and noncontrolling interests would receive $21 million;
 
•
$134 million of dividends paid in 2017, of which the Company received $75 million and noncontrolling interests received $59 million;
48

 
 
•
$104 million of di vidends paid in 2016, of which the Company received $53 million and noncontrolling interests received $51 million;
 
•
$596 million of dividends paid in 2015, of which the Company received $304 million and noncontrolling interests received $292 million.
 
During 2017, we paid $7 million of our share of MGM China’s dividend to Grand Paradise Macau (“GPM”) under a deferred cash payment arrangement.
See Note 12 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the deferred cash payment arrangement.
 
Principal Debt Arrangements
 
See Note 10 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information regarding our debt agreements as of December 31, 2017.
 
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
 
Our off-balance sheet arrangements consist primarily of investments in unconsolidated affiliates, which consist primarily of our investments in CityCenter,
Grand Victoria, and Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC. We have not entered into any transactions  with special purpose entities,  nor have we engaged in any
derivative transactions, other than the Operating Partnership’s cash flow hedges. See Note 10 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional
information. Our unconsolidated affiliate investments allow us to realize the proportionate benefits of owning a full-scale resort or other entertainment facilities in a
manner that minimizes our initial investment. We guarantee the T-Mobile Arena credit facility as described in Item 2 – Properties. In addition, there are no other
provisions in the agreements with our investees which we believe are unusual or subject us to risks to which we would not be subjected if we had full ownership of
the resort.
 
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
 
The following table summarizes our scheduled contractual obligations as of December 31, 2017:
 
 
 
2018
  
2019
  
2020
  
2021
  
2022
  Thereafter   
Total
 
 
 
(In millions)
 
Long-term debt (1)
 $
820 
 $
2,424  $
1,546  $
1,832  $
1,018  $
5,378  $
13,018 
Estimated interest payments on long-term debt (2)
  
710 
  
583   
548   
443   
315   
276   
2,875 
Construction commitments
  
295 
  
7   
—   
—   
—   
—   
302 
Operating leases (3)
  
39 
  
36   
34   
35   
32   
1,360   
1,536 
Other Long-term liabilities (4)
  
— 
  
46   
—   
7   
7   
63   
123 
Other purchase obligations (5)
  
84   
21   
18   
17   
17   
101   
258 
 
 $
1,948  $
3,117  $
2,146  $
2,334  $
1,389  $
7,178  $
18,112
 
 
(1)
Refer to Note 10 for further information on long-term debt.
(2)
Estimated interest payments, adjusted for the impact of interest rate swap agreements, are based on principal amounts and expected maturities of debt outstanding at December 31, 2017
and management’s forecasted LIBOR rates for our senior credit facility and HIBOR rates for the MGM China credit facility.
(3)
Refer to Note 12 for further information on operating leases.
(4)
Reflects future expected cash outlays of our other long-term liabilities recorded on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2017, and, accordingly, we have not included such liabilities
above that do not have future cash payments, such as deferred rent. We have also excluded deferred income tax liabilities and unrecognized tax benefits from the amounts presented in
the table as the amounts that will be settled in cash are not known and the timing of any payments is uncertain.
(5)
Our purchase obligations represent minimum obligations we have under agreements with certain of our vendors, primarily utility and entertainment contracts. Also, although open
purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs
prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services, and hence, have not been included in the table above.
 
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
 
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our consolidated financial statements. To
prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, we must make estimates
and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. We regularly evaluate these estimates and assumptions, particularly in
areas we consider to be critical accounting estimates, where changes in the estimates and assumptions could have a material effect on our results of operations,
financial position or cash flows. Senior management and the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors have reviewed the disclosures included herein about our
critical accounting estimates, and have reviewed the processes to determine those estimates. However, by their nature, judgments are subject to an inherent degree
of uncertainty and therefore actual results can differ from our estimates.
49

 
 
Allowance for Doubtful Casino Accounts Receivable
 
Marker play represents a significant portion of the table games volume at certain of our Las Vegas resorts. Our other casinos do not emphasize marker play
to the same extent, although we offer markers to customers at those casinos as well. MGM China extends credit to certain in-house VIP gaming customers and
gaming promoters. We maintain strict controls over the issuance of markers and aggressively pursue collection from our customers who fail to pay their marker
balances timely. These collection efforts are similar to those used by most large corporations when dealing with overdue customer accounts, including the mailing
of statements and delinquency notices, personal contacts, the use of outside collection agencies and civil litigation. Markers are generally legally enforceable
instruments in the United States and Macau. Markers are not legally enforceable instruments in some foreign countries, but the United States assets of foreign
customers may be reached to satisfy judgments entered in the United States. We consider the likelihood and difficulty of enforceability, among other factors, when
we issue credit to customers at our domestic resorts who are not residents of the United States. MGM China performs background checks and investigates the credit
worthiness of gaming promoters and casino customers prior to issuing credit. At December 31, 2017 and 2016, approximately 60% and 49%, respectively, of our
gross casino accounts receivable were owed by customers from the United States.
 
We maintain an allowance, or reserve, for doubtful casino accounts at all of our operating casino resorts. The provision for doubtful accounts, an operating
expense, increases the allowance for doubtful accounts. We regularly evaluate the allowance for doubtful casino accounts. At domestic resorts where marker play is
not significant, the allowance is generally established by applying standard reserve percentages to aged account balances. At domestic resorts where marker play is
significant, we apply standard reserve percentages to aged account balances under a specified dollar amount and specifically analyze the collectability of each
account with a balance over the specified dollar amount, based on the age of the account, the customer’s financial condition, collection history and any other known
information.  MGM  China  specifically  analyzes  the  collectability  of  casino  receivables  on  an  individual  basis  taking  into  account  the  age  of  the  account,  the
financial condition and the collection history of the gaming promoter or casino customer.
 
In addition to enforceability issues, the collectability of unpaid markers given by foreign customers at our domestic resorts is affected by a number of
factors, including changes in currency exchange rates and economic conditions in the customers’ home countries. Because individual customer account balances
can  be  significant,  the  allowance  and  the  provision  can  change  significantly  between  periods,  as  information  about  a  certain  customer  becomes  known  or  as
changes in a region’s economy occur.
 
The following table shows key statistics related to our casino receivables, net of discounts:
 
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
 
Casino receivables
 $
343,869 
 $
332,443 
 
Allowance for doubtful casino accounts receivable
  
86,126 
  
92,424 
 
Allowance as a percentage of casino accounts receivable
  
25%   
28%
 
Approximately $31 million and $35 million of casino receivables and $7 million and $8 million of the allowance for doubtful casino accounts receivable
relate  to  MGM  China  at  December  31,  2017  and  2016,  respectively.  The  allowance  for  doubtful  accounts  as  a  percentage  of  casino  accounts  receivable  has
decreased in the current year due to a decrease in the age of outstanding account balances. At December 31, 2017, a 100 basis-point change in the allowance for
doubtful accounts as a percentage of casino accounts receivable would change income before income taxes by $3 million.
 
Fixed Asset Capitalization and Depreciation Policies
 
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  cost.  A  significant  amount  of  our  property  and  equipment  was  acquired  through  business  combinations  and  was
therefore recognized at fair value at the acquisition date. Maintenance and repairs that neither materially add to the value of the property nor appreciably prolong its
life are charged to expense as incurred. Depreciation and amortization are provided on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. When we
construct assets, we capitalize direct costs of the project, including fees paid to architects and contractors, property taxes, and certain costs of our design and
construction subsidiaries. In addition, interest cost associated with major development and construction projects is capitalized as part of the cost of the project.
Interest is typically capitalized on amounts expended on the project using the weighted-average cost of our outstanding borrowings. Capitalization of interest starts
when construction activities begin and ceases when construction is substantially complete or development activity is suspended for more than a brief period.
 
50

 
We must make estimates and assumptions when accounting for capital expenditures. Whether an expenditure is considered a maintenance expense or a
capital asset is a matter of judgment. When constructing or purchasing assets, w e must determine whether existing assets are being replaced or otherwise impaired,
which also may be a matter of judgment. In addition, our depreciation expense is highly dependent on the assumptions we make about our assets’ estimated useful
lives.  We  det ermine  the  estimated  useful  lives  based  on  our  experience  with  similar  assets,  engineering  studies,  and  our  estimate  of  the  usage  of  the  asset.
Whenever events or circumstances occur which change the estimated useful life of an asset, we account for the ch ange prospectively.
 
Impairment of Long-lived Assets, Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
 
We evaluate our property and equipment and other long-lived assets for impairment based on our classification as held for sale or to be held and used.
Several criteria must be met before an asset is classified as held for sale, including that management with the appropriate authority commits to a plan to sell the
asset at a reasonable price in relation to its fair value and is actively seeking a buyer. For assets classified as held for sale, we recognize the asset at the lower of
carrying value or fair market value less costs of disposal, as estimated based on comparable asset sales, offers received, or a discounted cash flow model. For assets
to be held and used, we review for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. We then compare the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an
undiscounted basis, to the carrying value of the asset. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted
cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, then an impairment is recorded based on the fair value of the asset. For operating assets, fair value is typically
measured using a discounted cash flow model whereby future cash flows are discounted using a weighted-average cost of capital, developed using a standard
capital asset pricing model, based on guideline companies in our industry. If an asset is still under development, future cash flows include remaining construction
costs. All recognized impairment losses, whether for assets to be held for sale or assets to be held and used, are recorded as operating expenses.
 
There are several estimates, assumptions and decisions in measuring impairments of long-lived assets. First, management must determine the usage of the
asset. To the extent management decides that an asset will be sold, it is more likely that an impairment may be recognized. Assets must be tested at the lowest level
for which identifiable cash flows exist. This means that some assets must be grouped, and management has some discretion in the grouping of assets. Future cash
flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from our estimates.
 
On a quarterly basis, we review our major long-lived assets to determine if events have occurred or circumstances exist that indicate a potential impairment.
Potential factors which could trigger an impairment include underperformance compared to historical or projected operating results, negative industry or economic
factors, significant changes to our operating environment, or changes in intended use of the asset group. We estimate future cash flows using our internal budgets
and probability weight cash flows in certain circumstances to consider alternative outcomes associated with recoverability of the asset group, including potential
sale. Historically, undiscounted cash flows of our significant operating asset groups have exceeded their carrying values by a substantial margin.
 
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets at least annually and between annual test dates in certain circumstances. We perform our annual impairment test
for indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist primarily of license rights and trademarks.
For  our  2017  annual  impairment  test,  we  utilized  the  option  to  perform  a  qualitative  (“step  zero”)  analysis  for  certain  of  our  indefinite-lived  intangibles  and
concluded it was more likely than not that the fair values of such intangibles exceeded their carrying values by a substantial margin. We elected to perform a
quantitative analysis for the Borgata trade name using a discounted cash flow approach, for which the fair value exceeded its carrying value by approximately 4%.
For our 2016 and 2015 annual impairment tests we utilized the two-step quantitative analysis for all of our intangible assets, using a discounted cash flow approach
for license rights and using the relief-from-royalty method for trademarks. The estimated fair values of the intangibles were substantially in excess of their carrying
values, with the fair value of the Borgata trade name exceeding its carrying value by approximately 2%, reflecting the recentness of the Borgata Transaction. As
discussed  below,  management  makes  significant  judgments  and  estimates  as  part  of  these  analyses.  If  certain  future  operating  results  do  not  meet  current
expectations it could cause carrying values of the intangibles to exceed their fair values in future periods, potentially resulting in an impairment charge.
 
We  review  goodwill  at  least  annually  and  between  annual  test  dates  in  certain  circumstances.  With  the  exception  of  our  MGM  China  reporting  unit,
discussed below, none of our other reporting units incurred any goodwill impairment charges in 2017, 2016 or 2015. For our 2017 annual goodwill impairment
tests, we utilized the option to perform a step zero analysis for all of our domestic resorts reporting units and concluded it was more likely than not that the fair
values of such reporting units exceeded their carrying values. We utilized the quantitative analysis for the MGM China reporting unit, for which the fair value of
such reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by a substantial margin. For our 2016 annual impairment tests, we utilized the option to perform a step zero analysis
for certain of our domestic resorts reporting units and concluded it was more likely than not that the fair values of such reporting units exceeded their carrying
values by a substantial margin. The estimated fair values of reporting units for which we elected to forego the step zero analysis and instead utilized the two-step
quantitative analysis were substantially in excess of their carrying values. As discussed below, management makes significant judgments and estimates as part of
these analyses. If future operating results of our reporting units do not meet current expectations it could cause carrying values of our reporting units to exceed their
fair values in future periods, potentially resulting in a goodwill impairment charge.
51

 
 
During the fourth quarter of 2015 we conducted our annual impairment tests of goodwill by reviewing each of our reporting units, including our MGM
China reporting unit. The step one goodwill analysis of the MGM China reporting unit indicated the fair value was less than its carrying value by 4%. The decrease
in fair value resulted from a decrease in forecasted cash flows based on then current market conditions and a sustained decline in the enterprise value multiples of
the MGM China reporting unit as well as those of the MGM China reporting unit’s peer group. As a result of the indication of impairment from the step one
analysis, we proceeded to perform a step two impairment analysis to measure the impairment loss. As such, we determined the fair values of all assets of the MGM
China reporting unit, including its separately identifiable intangible assets. The fair values of each of the separately identifiable intangible assets exceeded their
respective carrying values by a significant amount, leading to a lower implied fair value of goodwill.  Therefore, we recorded a $1.5 billion non-cash impairment
charge to reduce the historical carrying value of goodwill related to the MGM China reporting unit to its implied fair value in 2015.
 
There are several estimates inherent in evaluating these assets for impairment. In particular, future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and
actual results may differ materially from our estimates. In addition, the determination of multiples, capitalization rates and the discount rates used in the impairment
tests are highly judgmental and dependent in large part on expectations of future market conditions.
 
See Note 2 and Note 8 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of goodwill and other intangible assets.
 
Impairment of Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates
 
See Note 7 and Note 16 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for discussion of other-than-temporary impairment.
 
Income Taxes
 
We recognize deferred tax assets, net of applicable reserves, related to net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and certain temporary differences with
a future tax benefit to the extent that realization of such benefit is more likely than not. Otherwise, a valuation allowance is applied.
 
We file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various state and local jurisdictions, and foreign jurisdictions, although the income taxes paid in
foreign jurisdictions are not material. Our income tax returns are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other tax authorities. Positions
taken in tax returns are sometimes subject to uncertainty in the tax laws and may not ultimately be accepted by the IRS or other tax authorities. See Note 11 in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the status and impact of examinations by tax authorities.
 
We assess our tax positions using a two-step process. A tax position is recognized if it meets a “more likely than not” threshold, and is measured at the
largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized. Uncertain tax positions must be reviewed at each balance sheet date. Liabilities
we record as a result of this analysis are recorded separately from any current or deferred income tax accounts, and are classified as current in “Other accrued
liabilities” or long-term in “Other long-term liabilities” based on the time until expected payment. Additionally, we recognize accrued interest and penalties, if any,
related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
 
Refer to Note 11 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion relating to income taxes.
 
Market Risk
 
In addition to the inherent risks associated with our normal operations, we are also exposed to additional market risks. Market risk is the risk of loss arising
from adverse changes in market rates and prices, such as interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Our primary exposure to market risk is interest rate risk
associated with our variable rate long-term debt. We attempt to limit our exposure to interest rate risk by managing the mix of our long-term fixed rate borrowings
and short-term borrowings under our bank credit facilities and by utilizing interest rate swap agreements that provide for a fixed interest payment on the Operating
Partnership’s  term  loan  B  facility.  A  change  in  interest  rates  generally  does  not  have  an  impact  upon  our  future  earnings  and  cash  flow  for  fixed-rate  debt
instruments. As fixed-rate debt matures, however, and if additional debt is acquired to fund the debt repayment, future earnings and cash flow may be affected by
changes  in  interest  rates.  This  effect  would  be  realized  in  the  periods  subsequent  to  the  periods  when  the  debt  matures.  We  do  not  hold  or  issue  financial
instruments for trading purposes and do not enter into derivative transactions that would be considered speculative positions.
52

 
As of December 31, 2017, variable rate borrowings represented approximately 27% of our total borrowings after giving effect to the $500 million and $700
million notional amount Operating Partnership interest rate swaps with w eighted average fixed rates that we pay 1.764% and 1.901%, respectively. The following
table provides additional information about our gross long-term debt subject to changes in interest rates excluding the effect of the Operating Partnership interest
rate swaps discussed above:
 
 
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
  
Fair Value
 
 
 
Debt maturing in,
  
December 31,
 
 
 
2018
  
2019
  
2020
  
2021
  
2022
  Thereafter  
Total
  
2017
 
 
 
(In millions)
 
Fixed-rate
 $
—  $
850  $
1,500  $
1,250  $
1,000  $
3,653  $
8,253  $
8,855 
Average interest rate
 
N/A   
8.6%  
6.3%  
6.6%  
7.8%  
5.4%  
6.3%  
  
Variable rate
 $
820  $
1,574  $
46  $
582  $
18  $
1,725  $
4,765  $
4,770 
Average interest rate
  
3.7%  
3.6%  
4.0%  
4.0%  
3.8%  
3.8%  
3.8%  
 
 
 
In addition to the risk associated with our variable interest rate debt, we are also exposed to risks related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates,
mainly related to MGM China and to our operations at MGM Macau and the development of MGM Cotai. While recent fluctuations in exchange rates have not
been significant, potential changes in policy by governments or fluctuations in the economies of the United States, China, Macau or Hong Kong could cause
variability in these exchange rates. We cannot assure you that the Hong Kong dollar will continue to be pegged to the U.S. dollar or the current peg rate for the
Hong Kong dollar will remain at the same level. The possible changes to the peg of the Hong Kong dollar may result in severe fluctuations in the exchange rate
thereof. As of December 31, 2017, a 1% increase in the Hong Kong dollar (the functional currency of MGM China) to the U.S. dollar exchange rate would impact
the carrying value of our cash balance by $7 million and a 1% decrease in the exchange rate would impact the carrying value of our debt balance by $23 million.
 
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
 
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Market Risk” in Item 7 of this Form 10-K.
 
ITEM 8.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
 
Our financial statements and supplementary data required by this Item 8 are included at the end of this report as listed on Item 15.  
 
ITEM 9.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
 
None.
 
ITEM 9A.
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
 
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
 
Our  Chief  Executive  Officer  (principal  executive  officer)  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  (principal  financial  officer)  have  concluded  that  our  disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (“the Exchange Act”)) were effective
as of December 31, 2017 to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed in the Company’s reports under the Exchange Act is recorded,
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and regulations and to provide that such information is accumulated and
communicated to management to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures. This conclusion is based on an evaluation as required by Rules 13a-15(b)
and 15d-15(b) under the Exchange Act conducted under the supervision and participation of the principal executive officer and principal financial officer along
with company management.
 
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
During  the  quarter  ended  December  31,  2017,  there  were  no  changes  in  our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  that  materially  affected,  or  are
reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
 
53

 
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting, referred to in Item 15(a)(1) of this Form 10-K, is included at page 63 of this
Form 10-K.
 
Attestation Report of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
The Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm’s Attestation Report on our internal control over financial reporting referred to in Item 15(a)(1) of this
Form 10-K, is included at page 64 of this Form 10-K.
 
ITEM 9B.  
OTHER INFORMATION
 
On February 23, 2018, the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors approved a special cash bonus award to each of Mr. Murren, Mr. Baldwin,
Mr. Hornbuckle, Mr. Sanders and Mr. D’Arrigo of $833,000, $333,000, $500,000, $500,000 and $333,000, respectively. The Compensation Committee approved
these one-time awards in recognition of the extraordinary leadership efforts displayed by each of the executives during 2017. The Company paid these amounts in a
lump sum in February 2018.
 
Because this report is being filed within four business days from the date of the reportable event, we have made the foregoing disclosure in this report rather
than  in  a  Form  8-K  under  Item  5.02  (Departure  of  Directors  or  Certain  Officers;  Election  of  Directors;  Appointment  of  Certain  Officers;  Compensatory
Arrangements of Certain Officers).
 
 
 
 
54

 
PART III
 
ITEM 10.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
 
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Executive Officers of the Registrant” in Item 1 of this Form 10-K and under “Election of
Directors” and “Corporate Governance” in our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2018 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which we expect to file with the SEC on
or before April 2, 2018 (the “Proxy Statement”).
 
ITEM 11.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
 
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Director Compensation” and “Executive Compensation” and “Corporate Governance —
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation” and “Compensation Committee Report” in the Proxy Statement.
 
ITEM 12.
SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND  MANAGEMENT  AND  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS
 
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Principal Stockholders” and “Election of Directors” in the Proxy Statement.
 
Equity Compensation Plan Information
 
The following table includes information about our equity compensation plans at December 31, 2017:
 
 
 
Securities to be issued
  
Weighted average
  
Securities available for
 
 
 
upon exercise of
  
exercise price of
  
future issuance under
 
 
 
outstanding options,
  
outstanding options,
  
equity compensation
 
 
 
warrants and rights
  
warrants and rights
  
plans
 
 
 
(In thousands, except per share data)
 
Equity compensation plans approved by
   security holders (1)
  
14,945  $
20.59   
20,869 
Equity compensation plans not approved by
   security holders
  
—   
—   
—
 
 
(1)
As of December 31, 2017 we had 2.6 million restricted stock units and 3.6 million performance share units outstanding that do not have an exercise price;
therefore,  the  weighted  average  per  share  exercise  price  only  relates  to  outstanding  stock  appreciation  rights.  The  amount  included  in  the  securities
outstanding above for performance share units assumes that each target price is achieved.
 
ITEM 13.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
 
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Transactions with Related Persons” and “Corporate Governance” in the Proxy Statement.
 
ITEM 14.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
 
We incorporate by reference the information appearing under “Selection of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” in the Proxy Statement.
 
 
 
55

 
PART IV
ITEM 15.
EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
 
(a)(1).Financial Statements.
 
Included in Part II of this Report:
  
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
 
63
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
 
64
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on Consolidated Financial Statements
 
65
Consolidated Balance Sheets — December 31, 2017 and 2016
 
66
Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015
 
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
67
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 
68
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
69
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
 
70
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
71
 
Audited consolidated financial statements for CityCenter Holdings, LLC as of and for the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017 are presented
in Exhibit 99.3 and are incorporated herein by reference.
 
(a)(2).Financial Statement Schedule.
 
Years Ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015
  
Schedule II — Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
 
113
 
We have omitted schedules other than the one listed above because they are not required or are not applicable, or the required information is shown in the
Consolidated Financial Statements or Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
 
 
(a)(3).Exhibits.
 
Exhibit 
Number
 
Description
2.1
 Master Contribution Agreement by and among the Company, MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership
LP, dated as of April 25, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed
on April 25, 2016).
3.1
 Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  of  the  Company,  dated  June  14,  2011  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  3.1  to  the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2011).
3.2
 Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Company, effective January 13, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K filed on January 15, 2016).
4.1(1)
 Indenture, dated February 1, 1996, by and between Mandalay and First Interstate Bank of Nevada, N.A., as Trustee (the “Mandalay February 1996
Indenture”) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(b) to Mandalay’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 13, 1996).
4.1(2)
 Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 15, 1996, by and between Mandalay and Wells Fargo Bank (Colorado), N.A., (successor to First
Interstate Bank of Nevada, N.A.), as Trustee, to the Mandalay February 1996 Indenture, with respect to $150 million aggregate principal amount
of 6.70% Senior Notes due 2096 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(c) to Mandalay’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter
ended October 31, 1996 (the “Mandalay October 1996 10-Q”)).
4.1(3)
 6.70% Senior Notes due February 15, 2096 in the principal amount of $150,000,000 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(d) to the Mandalay
October 1996 10-Q).
4.1(4)
 Indenture, dated November 15, 1996, by and between Mandalay and Wells Fargo Bank (Colorado), N.A., as Trustee (the “Mandalay November
1996 Indenture”) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(e) to the Mandalay October 1996 10-Q).
56

 
4.1(5)
 Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 15, 1996, to the Mandalay November 1996 Indenture, with respect to $150 million aggregate
principal amount of 7.0% Senior Notes due 2036 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(f) to the Mandalay October 1996 10-Q).
4.1(6)
 7.0% Senior Notes due February 15, 2036, in the principal amount of $150,000,000 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4(g) to the Mandalay
October 1996 10-Q).
4.1(7)
 Indenture, dated as of January 17, 2012, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee with
respect to $850 million aggregate principal amount of 8.625% Senior Notes due 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 17, 2012).
4.1(8)
 Indenture, dated March 22, 2012, between the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2012).
4.1(9)
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated March 22, 2012, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as
trustee with respect to $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 7.75% senior notes due 2022 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 22, 2012).
4.1(10)
 Indenture, dated as of September 19, 2012, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee
with  respect  to  $1.0  billion  aggregate  principal  amount  of  6.750%  Senior  Notes  due  2020  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.1  to  the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 19, 2012).
4.1(11)
 Second  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  December  20,  2012,  among  the  Company,  the  guarantors  named  therein  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as trustee to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, relating
to  the  6.625%  senior  notes  due  2021  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.1  to  the  Company’s  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K  filed  on
December 20, 2012).
4.1(12)
 Third Supplemental Indenture, dated December 19, 2013, among the Company, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National Association,
as  trustee  to  the  Indenture,  dated  as  of  March  22,  2012,  among  the  Company  and  U.S.  Bank  National  Association,  as  trustee,  relating  to
the 5.250% senior notes due 2020 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 19,
2013).
4.1(13)
 Fourth  Supplemental  Indenture,  dated  November  25,  2014,  among  the  Company,  the  guarantors  named  therein  and  U.S.  Bank  National
Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, relating
to the 6.000% senior notes due 2023 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November
25, 2014).
4.1(14)
 Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated August 19, 2016, among MGM Resorts International, the guarantors named therein and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee, to the Indenture, dated as of March 22, 2012, among MGM Resorts International and U.S. Bank National Association, as
trustee, relating to the 4.625% senior notes due 2026  (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on August 19, 2016).
4.1(15)
 Indenture, dated as of August 12, 2016, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., the subsidiary
guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current Report on Form 8-
K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on August 12, 2016) .
4.1(16)
 Indenture, dated as of April 20, 2016, among MGP Escrow Issuer, LLC and MGP Escrow Co-Issuer, Inc. and U.S. Bank National Association, as
Trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed April 21, 2016).
4.1(17)
 Indenture,  dated  as  of  September  21,  2017,  among  MGM  Growth  Properties  Operating  Partnership  LP,  MGP  Finance  Co-Issuer,  Inc.,  the
subsidiary guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Current Report
on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed on September 21, 2017).
4.2(1)
 Guarantee  (Mandalay  Resort  Group  6.70%  Senior  Notes  due  2096),  dated  as  of  April  25,  2005,  by  the  Company  certain  subsidiaries  of  the
Company, in favor of The Bank of New York, as successor in interest to First Interstate Bank of Nevada, N.A., as trustee for the benefit of the
holders of the Notes pursuant to the Indenture referred to therein (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.21 to the September 2005 10-Q).
 
 
57

 
4.2(2)
 Guarantee (Mandalay Resort Group 7.0% Senior Notes due 2036), dated as of April 25, 2005, by the Company and certain subsidiaries of the
Company, in favor of The Bank of New York, as trustee for the benefit of the holders of the Notes pursuant to the Indenture referred to therein
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to the September 2005 10-Q).
4.3
 Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of April 20, 2016, among MGP Escrow Issuer, LLC and MGP Escrow Co-Issuer, Inc. and J.P. Morgan
Securities LLC and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, as representatives of the initial purchasers of the Notes (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed April 21, 2016).
10.1(1)
 Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of April 25, 2016, among MGM Resorts International, the Lenders from time to time party
thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed April 25, 2016).
 
  
10.1(2)
 Credit Agreement, dated as of April 25, 2016, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the financial institutions referred to as
Lenders therein and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.17 of the Current Report on Form
8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
10.1(3)
 First Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated October 26, 2016, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other loan parties
and lenders named therein and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Current Report on
Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on October 26, 2016).
10.1(4)
 Second Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated May 1, 2017, among MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP, the other loan parties
and lenders named therein and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Current Report on
Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on May 1, 2017).
10.1(5)
 Second Supplemental Agreement, dated June 9, 2015, between MGM China Holdings Limited and MGM Grand Paradise, S.A., certain Lenders
and Arrangers named therein, Bank of America, N.A., Hong Kong Branch, as Facility Agent and Issuing Bank, and Banco Nacional Ultramarino,
S.A., as Original Security Agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 12,
2015).
10.1(6)
 Third Supplemental Agreement, by and among MGM China Holdings Limited, MGM Grand Paradise, S.A., the guarantors named therein, and
Bank of America, N.A., as facility agent, dated February 2, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on February 4, 2016).
10.1 (7)
 Fourth Supplemental Agreement, dated February 15, 2017, among MGM China Holdings Limited, MGM Grand Paradise, S.A., the guarantors
named therein and Bank of America, N.A., as facility agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed February 16, 2017).
10.2(1)
 Subconcession Contract for the Exploitation of Games Fortune and Chance or Other Games in Casino in the Special Administrative Region of
Macau,  dated  April  19,  2005,  between  Sociedade  de  Jogos  de  Macau,  S.A.,  as  concessionaire,  and  MGM  Grand  Paradise  S.A.,  as
subconcessionaire (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 7, 2011).
10.2(2)
 Land  Concession  Agreement,  dated  as  of  April  18, 2005,  relating  to  the  MGM Macau  resort  and  casino  between  the  Special  Administrative
Region of Macau and MGM Grand Paradise, S.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
filed on August 9, 2011).
10.2(3)
 Land Concession Agreement, effective as of January 9, 2013, relating to the MGM Macau resort and casino between the Special Administrative
Region of Macau and MGM Grand Paradise S.A. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2(4) to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
filed on March 1, 2013).
10.3(1)
 Third Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of CityCenter Holdings, LLC, dated December 22, 2015 (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.3(1) to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 29, 2016) .
10.3(2)
 Company Stock Purchase and Support Agreement, dated August 21, 2007, by and between the Company and Infinity World Investments, LLC
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed August 27, 2007).
58

 
10.3(3)
 Amendment No. 1, dated October 17, 2007, to the Company Stock Purchase and Support Agreement by and between the Company and Infinity
World Investments, LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on October 23, 2007).
10.4(1)
 Master Lease between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC, dated April 25, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Current
Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
10.4(2)
 First Amendment to Master Lease, dated as of August 1, 2016, between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 1, 2016).
10.4(3)
 Second Amendment to Master Lease, dated as of October 5, 2017, between MGP Lessor, LLC and MGM Lessee, LLC (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC and MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP filed
on October 6, 2017).
† 10.4(4)
 Hotel & Casino Ground Lease between National Harbor Beltway L.C., as landlord, and MGM National Harbor, LLC, as tenant, dated as of April
26, 2013 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(3) to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10‑K filed on March 1, 2017).
† 10.4(5)
 First Amendment to Hotel and Casino Ground Lease, dated July 23, 2014 between National Harbor Beltway L.C. and MGM National Harbor,
LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(4) to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10‑K filed on March 1, 2017).
† 10.4(6)
 Second Amendment to Hotel and Casino Ground Lease, dated November 24, 2015 between National Harbor Grand LLC and MGM National
Harbor, LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(5) to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10‑K filed on March 1, 2017).
10.4(7)
 Third Amendment to the Hotel and Casino Ground Lease, dated as of August 21, 2017, by and between National Harbor Grand LLC and MGM
National Harbor, LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10‑Q filed on November 9, 2017).
*10.5(1)
 Amended and Restated 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
filed on June 10, 2014).
*10.5(2)
 Second Amended and Restated Annual Performance-Based Incentive Plan for Executive Officers (incorporated by reference to Appendix A to the
Company’s Proxy Statement filed on April 20, 2016).
*10.5(3)
 Deferred Compensation Plan II, as Amended and Restated, effective December 17, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(6) to the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on March 2, 2015).
*10.5(4)
 Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of December 30, 2004 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 on Form 8-K filed on
January 10, 2005).
*10.5(5)
 Amendment No. 1 to the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of July 10, 2007 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3(12) to
the 2007 10-K).
*10.5(6)
 Amendment No. 2 to the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of October 15, 2007 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3(14)
to the 2007 10-K).
*10.5(7)
 Amendment No. 1 to the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan II, dated as of November 4, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 7, 2008).
*10.5(8)
 Employment Agreement, effective as of December 13, 2014, between the Company and Robert H. Baldwin (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 13, 2015).
*10.5(9)
 Employment Agreement, dated as of October 3, 2016, by and between the Company and James J. Murren (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on October 5, 2016).
*10.5(10)
 Employment Agreement, executed as of August 24, 2015, between the Company and Daniel J. D’Arrigo (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 28, 2015).
59

 
*10.5(11)
 Employment Agreement, effective as of November 15, 2016, between the Company and Corey Sanders (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 7, 2016).
*10.5(12)
 Employment  Agreement,  effective  as  of  November  15,  2016,  between  the  Company  and  William  Hornbuckle  (incorporated  by  reference  to
Exhibit 10.1 of the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 7, 2016).
*10.5(13)
 Deferred  Compensation  Plan  for  Non-Employee  Directors,  effective  as  of  June  12,  2012  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.2  to  the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2012).
*10.5(14)
 Form of Restricted Stock Units Agreement of the Company, effective for awards granted in August 2012 through 2015 (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2012).
*10.5(15)
 Form of Restricted Stock Units Agreement of the Company (Non-Employee Director), effective for awards granted in August 2012 and thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2012).
*10.5(16)
 Form  of  Restricted  Stock  Units  Agreement  of  the  Company  (Performance),  effective  for  awards  granted  in  August  2012  through  2015
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2012).
*10.5(17)
 Form of Restricted Stock Units Agreement of the Company effective for awards granted in October 2015 and thereafter (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(18)
 Form  of  Restricted  Stock  Units  Agreement  of  the  Company  (Performance)  effective  for  awards  granted  in  October  2015  and  thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(19)
 Form of Sign-On RSU Award Agreement (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
October 5, 2016).
*10.5(20)
 Form  of  Performance  Share  Units  Agreement  of  the  Company,  effective  for  bonus  awards  granted  in  March  2014  through  March  2015
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on May 8, 2014).
*10.5(21)
 Form  of  Performance  Share  Units  Agreement  of  the  Company  effective  for  awards  granted  in  October  2015  and  thereafter  (incorporated  by
reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(22)
 Form  of  Bonus  Performance  Share  Units  Agreement  of  the  Company,  effective  for  bonus  awards  granted  in  March  2016  and  thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on May 6, 2016).
*10.5(23)
 Change of Control Policy for Executive Officers, dated as of November 5, 2012 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 8, 2012).
*10.5(24)
 Form of Memorandum Agreement re: Changes to Severance and Change of Control Policies (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 8, 2012).
*10.5(25)
 Form  of  Freestanding  Stock  Appreciation  Right  Agreement  of  the  Company  effective  for  awards  granted  in  August  2012  and
thereafter (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on August 9, 2012).
*10.5(26)
 Form  of  Freestanding  Stock  Appreciation  Right  Agreement  of  the  Company  effective  for  awards  granted  in  October  2013  and  thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(43) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013).
*10.5(27)
 Amendment to all Stock Appreciation Right Agreements adopted by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors on October 7, 2013
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4(44) of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013).
60

 
*10.5(28)
 Form  of  Freestanding  Stock  Appreciation  Right  Agreement  of  the  Company  effective  for  awards  granted  in  October  2015  and  thereafter
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(29)
 Profit Growth Share Incentive Plan of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(30)
 Form of Performance Share Units Agreement (Profit Growth Share Incentive Plan) of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to
the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed on November 6, 2015).
*10.5(31)
 MGM Growth Properties LLC 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 of the Registration Statement on Form S-8
of MGM Growth Properties LLC (File No. 333-210832) filed on April 19, 2016).
*10.5(32)
 MGM Growth Properties LLC Form of 2016 Restricted Share Units Agreement (MGM Non-Employee Directors) (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.15 of the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).
*10.5(33)
 MGM Growth Properties LLC Form of 2016 Restricted Share Units Agreement (MGM Employees) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.16 of
the Current Report on Form 8-K of MGM Growth Properties LLC filed on April 25, 2016).  
*10.5(34)
 Form of Letter to Employees re: Existing Equity Awards (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed March 10, 2017).
*10.5(35)
 Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement (Bonus Payout) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed March 10, 2017).
*10.5(36)
 Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K filed March 10, 2017).
*10.5(37)
 Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (Non-Employee Director) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed March 10, 2017).
*10.5(38)
 Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (with Performance Hurdle) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed March 10, 2017).
*10.5(39)
 Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (no Performance Hurdle) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Current Report
on Form 8-K filed March 10, 2017).
*10.5(40)
 Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (Bonus RSUs).
*10.5(41)
 Form of Relative Performance Share Unit Agreement (Annual Grant).
12
 Computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
21
 List of subsidiaries of the Company.
23.1
 Consent of Deloitte & Touche LLP, independent auditors to the Company.
23.2
 Consent of Deloitte & Touche LLP, independent auditors to CityCenter Holdings, LLC.
31.1
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer of Periodic Report Pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) and Rule 15d‑14(a).
31.2
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer of Periodic Report Pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) and Rule 15d‑14(a).
**32.1
 Certification of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350.
**32.2
 Certification of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350.
99.1
 Description of our Operating Resorts.
61

 
99.2
 Description of Regulation and Licensing.
99.3
 Audited consolidated financial statements of CityCenter Holdings, LLC, as of and for the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017.
101
 The following information from the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 formatted in eXtensible
Business Reporting Language: (i) Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2017 and December 31, 2016; (ii) Consolidated Statements of
Operations for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015; (iii) Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years
ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015; (iv) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015;
(v) Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015; (vi) Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements and (vii) Financial Statement Schedule.
†
Portions of this Exhibit have been omitted pu rsuant to Rule 24b-2, are filed separately with the SEC and are subject to a confidential treatment request.
*
Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
**
Exhibits 32.1 and 32.2 shall not be deemed filed with the SEC, nor shall they be deemed incorporated by reference in any filing with the SEC under the
Exchange Act or the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, whether made before or after the date hereof and irrespective of any general incorporation language
in any filings
 
 
62

 
M ANAGEMENT’S ANNUAL REPORT
ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
 
Management’s Responsibilities
 
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Sections 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f) of the Exchange Act) for MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries (the “Company”).
 
Objective of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
In establishing adequate internal control over financial reporting, management has developed and maintained a system of internal control, policies and
procedures  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  information  contained  in  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  and  other  information
presented in this annual report is reliable, does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact, and fairly presents in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the Company as of and for the periods presented in this annual report. These include
controls  and  procedures  designed  to  ensure  that  this  information  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  the  Company’s  management,  including  its  principal
executive  officer  and  principal  financial  officer,  as  appropriate  for  all  timely  decisions  regarding  required  disclosure.  Significant  elements  of  the  Company’s
internal control over financial reporting include, for example:
 
 
•
Hiring skilled accounting personnel and training them appropriately;
 
•
Written accounting policies;
 
•
Written documentation of accounting systems and procedures;
 
•
Segregation of incompatible duties;
 
•
Internal audit function to monitor the effectiveness of the system of internal control; and
 
•
Oversight by an independent Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
 
Management’s Evaluation
 
Management, with the participation of the Company’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer, has evaluated the Company’s internal
control  over  financial  reporting  using  the  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
 
Based on its evaluation as of December 31, 2017, management believes that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting is effective in achieving
the objectives described above.
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Deloitte & Touche LLP audited the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2017 and issued their report
thereon, which is included in this annual report. Deloitte & Touche LLP has also issued an attestation report on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control
over financial reporting and such report is also included in this annual report.
 
 
 
63

 
R EPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
 
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of MGM Resorts International
 
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2017,
based  on  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  —  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission (COSO). In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017,
based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
 
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated
financial statements and financial statement schedule as of and for the year ended December 31, 2017, of the Company and our report dated March 1, 2018,
expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
 
Basis for Opinion  
 
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of
internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  the  accompanying  Management’s  Annual  Report  on  Internal  Control  Over  Financial  Reporting.  Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered
with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
 
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of
internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
 
Las Vegas, Nevada  
 
March 1, 2018
 
 
64

 
R EPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
 
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of MGM Resorts International
 
Opinion on the Financial Statements
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries (the "Company") as of December 31, 2017
and 2016, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income (loss), cash flows and stockholders' equity for each of the three years in the
period  ended  December  31,  2017,  and  the  related  notes  and  financial  statement  schedule  of  Valuation  and  Qualifying  Accounts  included  in  Item  15(a)(2),
(collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017,
in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
 
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company's
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated March 1, 2018, expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company's
internal control over financial reporting.
 
Basis for Opinion
 
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's financial
statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in
accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
 
Las Vegas, Nevada  
 
March 1, 2018
 
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2002.
 
65

 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(In thousands, except share data)
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
ASSETS
 
Current assets
  
  
  
  
Cash and cash equivalents
 $
1,499,995 
 $
1,446,581 
Accounts receivable, net
  
540,545 
  
542,924 
Inventories
  
102,292 
  
97,733 
Income tax receivable
  
42,551 
  
— 
Prepaid expenses and other
  
189,244 
  
142,349 
Total current assets
  
2,374,627 
  
2,229,587 
 
  
  
  
  
Property and equipment, net
  
19,635,459 
  
18,425,023 
 
  
  
  
  
Other assets
  
  
  
  
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
  
1,034,161 
  
1,220,443 
Goodwill
  
1,806,531 
  
1,817,119 
Other intangible assets, net
  
3,877,960 
  
4,087,706 
Other long-term assets, net
  
430,440 
  
393,423 
Total other assets
  
7,149,092 
  
7,518,691 
 
 $
29,159,178 
 $
28,173,301 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
 
Current liabilities
  
  
  
  
Accounts payable
 $
255,028 
 $
250,477 
Construction payable
  
474,807 
  
270,361 
Income tax payable
  
— 
  
10,654 
Current portion of long-term debt
  
158,042 
  
8,375 
Accrued interest on long-term debt
  
135,785 
  
159,028 
Other accrued liabilities
  
2,068,720 
  
1,594,526 
Total current liabilities
  
3,092,382 
  
2,293,421 
 
  
  
  
  
Deferred income taxes, net
  
1,304,835 
  
2,551,228 
Long-term debt, net
  
12,751,052 
  
12,979,220 
Other long-term obligations
  
284,416 
  
325,981 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
  
  
  
  
Redeemable noncontrolling interests
  
79,778 
  
54,139 
Stockholders' equity
  
  
  
  
Common stock, $.01 par value: authorized 1,000,000,000 shares, issued and
   outstanding 566,275,789 and 574,123,706 shares
  
5,663 
  
5,741 
Capital in excess of par value
  
5,357,709 
  
5,653,575 
Retained earnings
  
2,252,890 
  
545,811 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
  
(3,610)
  
15,053 
Total MGM Resorts International stockholders' equity
  
7,612,652 
  
6,220,180 
Noncontrolling interests
  
4,034,063 
  
3,749,132 
Total stockholders' equity
  
11,646,715 
  
9,969,312 
 
 $
29,159,178 
 $
28,173,301
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
 
66

 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(In thousands, except per share data)
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
Revenues
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino
 $
5,984,335 
 $
4,936,490 
 $
4,842,836 
Rooms
  
2,151,380 
  
2,023,841 
  
1,876,733 
Food and beverage
  
1,790,287 
  
1,639,910 
  
1,575,496 
Entertainment
  
542,706 
  
517,433 
  
539,318 
Retail
  
214,331 
  
200,340 
  
201,688 
Other
  
605,832 
  
533,528 
  
506,934 
Reimbursed costs
  
402,042 
  
397,152 
  
398,836 
 
  
11,690,913 
  
10,248,694 
  
9,941,841 
Less: Promotional allowances
  
(917,009)
  
(793,571)
  
(751,773)
 
  
10,773,904 
  
9,455,123 
  
9,190,068 
Expenses
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino
  
3,241,180 
  
2,718,483 
  
2,882,752 
Rooms
  
608,103 
  
576,426 
  
564,094 
Food and beverage
  
1,004,949 
  
943,803 
  
917,993 
Entertainment
  
430,981 
  
411,657 
  
410,284 
Retail
  
102,886 
  
96,928 
  
102,904 
Other
  
375,865 
  
351,215 
  
348,513 
Reimbursed costs
  
402,042 
  
397,152 
  
398,836 
General and administrative
  
1,559,915 
  
1,378,617 
  
1,309,104 
Corporate expense
  
356,875 
  
312,774 
  
274,551 
NV Energy exit expense
  
(40,629)
  
139,335 
  
— 
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
118,475 
  
140,075 
  
71,327 
Property transactions, net
  
50,279 
  
17,078 
  
35,951 
Goodwill impairment
  
— 
  
— 
  
1,467,991 
Gain on Borgata transaction
  
— 
  
(430,118)
  
— 
Depreciation and amortization
  
993,480 
  
849,527 
  
819,883 
 
  
9,204,401 
  
7,902,952 
  
9,604,183 
Income from unconsolidated affiliates
  
145,989 
  
527,616 
  
257,883 
Operating income (loss)
  
1,715,492 
  
2,079,787 
  
(156,232)
Non-operating income (expense)
  
  
  
  
  
  
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
  
(668,745)
  
(694,773)
  
(797,579)
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
  
(34,751)
  
(53,139)
  
(76,462)
Other, net
  
(48,241)
  
(72,698)
  
(15,970)
 
  
(751,737)
  
(820,610)
  
(890,011)
Income (loss) before income taxes
  
963,755 
  
1,259,177 
  
(1,046,243)
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
  
1,132,663 
  
(22,299)
  
6,594 
Net income (loss)
  
2,096,418 
  
1,236,878 
  
(1,039,649)
Less: Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
(136,132)
  
(135,438)
  
591,929 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,960,286 
 $
1,101,440 
 $
(447,720)
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Earnings per share
  
  
  
  
  
  
Basic
 $
3.39 
 $
1.94 
 $
(0.82)
Diluted
 $
3.35 
 $
1.92 
 $
(0.82)
Weighted average common shares outstanding
  
  
  
  
  
  
Basic
  
572,253 
  
568,134 
  
542,873 
Diluted
  
578,795 
  
573,317 
  
542,873 
Dividends declared per common share
 $
0.44 
 $
— 
 $
—
 
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
67

 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
(In thousands)
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
Net income (loss)
 $
2,096,418 
 $
1,236,878 
 $
(1,039,649)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
  
  
  
  
  
  
Foreign currency translation adjustment
  
(43,188)
  
(2,680)
  
3,727 
Unrealized gain on cash flow hedges
  
7,995 
  
1,879 
  
— 
Other
  
— 
  
— 
  
(672)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
  
(35,193)
  
(801)
  
3,055 
Comprehensive income (loss)
  
2,061,225 
  
1,236,077 
  
(1,036,594)
Less: Comprehensive (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
(119,700)
  
(134,680)
  
589,905 
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,941,525 
 $
1,101,397 
 $
(446,689)
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
68

 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(In thousands)
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
Net income (loss)
 
$
2,096,418 
 $
1,236,878 
 $
(1,039,649)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by
   operating activities:
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Depreciation and amortization
 
 
993,480 
  
849,527 
  
819,883 
Amortization of debt discounts, premiums and issuance costs
 
 
32,996 
  
40,493 
  
46,280 
Loss on retirement of long-term debt
 
 
45,696 
  
66,933 
  
1,924 
Provision for doubtful accounts
 
 
20,603 
  
10,863 
  
54,691 
Stock-based compensation
 
 
62,494 
  
55,487 
  
42,872 
Property transactions, net
 
 
50,279 
  
17,078 
  
35,951 
Goodwill impairment
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
1,467,991 
Gain on Borgata transaction
 
 
— 
  
(430,118)
  
— 
(Income) loss from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
(111,238)
  
(471,309)
  
(177,946)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
13,050 
  
16,905 
  
29,333 
Deferred income taxes
 
 
(1,264,674)
  
(80,628)
  
(3,615)
Change in operating assets and liabilities:
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Accounts receivable
 
 
(18,438)
  
(33,208)
  
(62,720)
Inventories
 
 
(4,656)
  
10,806 
  
(2,649)
Income taxes receivable and payable, net
 
 
(53,204)
  
13,385 
  
(5,946)
Prepaid expenses and other
 
 
(46,974)
  
20,192 
  
(13,694)
Prepaid Cotai land concession premium
 
 
(7,765)
  
(22,376)
  
(22,427)
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
 
419,525 
  
272,828 
  
(139,069)
Other
 
 
(21,181)
  
(39,764)
  
(26,131)
Net cash provided by operating activities
 
 
2,206,411 
  
1,533,972 
  
1,005,079 
Cash flows from investing activities
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Capital expenditures, net of construction payable
 
 
(1,864,082)
  
(2,262,473)
  
(1,466,819)
Dispositions of property and equipment
 
 
718 
  
3,944 
  
8,032 
Proceeds from partial disposition of investment in unconsolidated affiliate
 
 
— 
  
15,000 
  
— 
Proceeds from sale of business units and investment in unconsolidated affiliate
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
92,207 
Acquisition of Borgata, net of cash acquired
 
 
— 
  
(559,443)
  
— 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
(16,727)
  
(3,633)
  
(196,062)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates in excess of cumulative earnings
 
 
301,211 
  
542,097 
  
201,612 
Investments in cash deposits - original maturities longer than 90 days
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
(200,205)
Proceeds from cash deposits - original maturities longer than 90 days
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
770,205 
Other
 
 
(1,712)
  
(11,696)
  
(4,028)
Net cash used in investing activities
 
 
(1,580,592)
  
(2,276,204)
  
(795,058)
Cash flows from financing activities
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Net borrowings under bank credit facilities – maturities of
   90 days or less
 
 
15,001 
  
491,032 
  
977,275 
Borrowings under bank credit facilities – maturities longer than 90 days
 
 
— 
  
1,845,375 
  
5,118,750 
Repayments under bank credit facilities – maturities longer than 90 days
 
 
— 
  
(1,845,375)
  
(5,118,750)
Issuance of long-term debt
 
 
350,000 
  
2,050,000 
  
— 
Retirement of senior notes
 
 
(502,669)
  
(2,258,053)
  
(875,504)
Repayment of Borgata credit facility
 
 
— 
  
(583,598)
  
— 
Debt issuance costs
 
 
(9,977)
  
(139,584)
  
(46,170)
Issuance of MGM Growth Properties Class A shares in public offering
 
 
404,685 
  
1,207,500 
  
— 
MGM Growth Properties Class A share issuance costs
 
 
(17,137)
  
(75,032)
  
— 
Acquisition of MGM China shares
 
 
— 
  
(100,000)
  
— 
Dividends paid to common shareholders
 
 
(252,014)
  
— 
  
— 
Distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
 
 
(170,402)
  
(103,367)
  
(307,227)
Proceeds from issuance of redeemable noncontrolling interests
 
 
— 
  
47,325 
  
6,250 
Purchases of common stock
 
 
(327,500)
  
— 
  
— 
Other
 
 
(58,765)
  
(16,801)
  
(12,503)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
 
 
(568,778)
  
519,422 
  
(257,879)
Effect of exchange rate on cash
 
 
(3,627)
  
(921)
  
793 
Cash and cash equivalents
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Net increase (decrease) for the period
 
 
53,414 
  
(223,731)
  
(47,065)
Change in cash related to assets held for sale
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
3,662 
Balance, beginning of period
 
 
1,446,581 
  
1,670,312 
  
1,713,715 
Balance, end of period
 
$
1,499,995 
 $
1,446,581 
 $
1,670,312 
Supplemental cash flow disclosures
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Interest paid, net of amounts capitalized
 
$
658,637 
 $
661,166 
 $
776,540 
Federal, state and foreign income taxes paid, net of refunds
 
 
181,651 
  
68,236 
  
11,801 
Non-cash investing and financing activities
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Common stock issued for acquisition of MGM China shares
 
$
— 
 $
174,041 
 $
— 
Deferred cash payment for acquisition of MGM China shares
 
 
— 
  
43,265 
  
— 
Conversion of convertible senior notes to equity
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
1,449,499 
Increase (decrease) in investment in and advances to CityCenter related to change
   in completion guarantee liability
 
 
— 
  
— 
  
(8,198)
Increase in construction accounts payable
 
 
204,446 
  
20,241 
  
79,681 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements .
69

 
 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
For the Years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015
(In thousands )
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
Total
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Retained
 
 
Accumulated
 
 MGM   Resorts  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Common Stock
 
 
Capital in
 
 
Earnings
 
 
Other
 
 
International  
 
Non-
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Par
 
 
Excess of
 
 
(Accumulated  
 
Comprehensive  
 
Stockholders'  
 Controlling  
 
Stockholders'  
 
 
Shares  
 
Value
 
 
Par Value
 
 
Deficit)
 
 
Income (Loss)
 
 
Equity
 
 
Interests
 
 
Equity
 
Balances, January 1, 2015
 
 491,292  
$
4,913  
$
4,180,922  
$
(107,909)  
$
12,991  
$
4,090,917  
$
3,537,357  
$
7,628,274 
Net loss
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(447,720)  
 
—  
 
(447,720)  
 
(591,929)  
 
(1,039,649)
Currency translation adjustment
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
1,703  
 
1,703  
 
2,024  
 
3,727 
Other comprehensive loss from
   unconsolidated affiliates, net
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(672)  
 
(672)  
 
—  
 
(672)
Stock-based compensation
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
38,464  
 
—  
 
—  
 
38,464  
 
4,538  
 
43,002 
Issuance of common stock pursuant to
   stock-based compensation awards
 
 
1,844  
 
18  
 
(24,896)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(24,878)  
 
—  
 
(24,878)
Conversion of convertible debt to
  common stock
 
 
71,703  
 
717  
 
1,448,779  
 
—  
 
—  
 
1,449,496  
 
—  
 
1,449,496 
Cash distributions to noncontrolling
   interest owners
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(307,494)  
 
(307,494)
Issuance of performance share units
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
4,872  
 
—  
 
—  
 
4,872  
 
—  
 
4,872 
Other
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
7,745  
 
—  
 
—  
 
7,745  
 
4  
 
7,749 
Balances, December 31, 2015
 
 564,839  
 
5,648  
 
5,655,886  
 
(555,629)  
 
14,022  
 
5,119,927  
 
2,644,500  
 
7,764,427 
Net income
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
1,101,440  
 
—  
 
1,101,440  
 
134,902  
 
1,236,342 
Currency translation adjustment
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(1,477)  
 
(1,477)  
 
(1,203)  
 
(2,680)
Stock-based compensation
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
51,460  
 
—  
 
—  
 
51,460  
 
4,147  
 
55,607 
Issuance of common stock pursuant to
   stock-based compensation awards
 
 
2,225  
 
22  
 
(30,065)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(30,043)  
 
—  
 
(30,043)
Issuance of performance share units
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
5,817  
 
—  
 
—  
 
5,817  
 
—  
 
5,817 
Cash distributions to noncontrolling
   interest owners
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(103,457)  
 
(103,457)
MGM Growth Properties IPO
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
(150,414)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(150,414)  
 
1,334,252  
 
1,183,838 
MGP dividend payable to Class A
   shareholders
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(22,281)  
 
(22,281)
MGM China common stock acquisition
 
 
7,060  
 
71  
 
127,146  
 
—  
 
1,074  
 
128,291  
 
(270,903)  
 
(142,612)
Borgata transaction
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
(18,385)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(18,385)  
 
28,752  
 
10,367 
Other comprehensive income - cash flow
   hedges
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
1,434  
 
1,434  
 
445  
 
1,879 
Other
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
12,130  
 
—  
 
—  
 
12,130  
 
(22)  
 
12,108 
Balances, December 31, 2016
 
 574,124  
 
5,741  
 
5,653,575  
 
545,811  
 
15,053  
 
6,220,180  
 
3,749,132  
 
9,969,312 
Net income
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
1,960,286  
 
—  
 
1,960,286  
 
128,320  
 
2,088,606 
Currency translation adjustment
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(23,995)  
 
(23,995)  
 
(19,193)  
 
(43,188)
Other comprehensive income - cash flow
   hedges
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
5,234  
 
5,234  
 
2,761  
 
7,995 
Stock-based compensation
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
57,531  
 
—  
 
—  
 
57,531  
 
4,991  
 
62,522 
Issuance of common stock pursuant to
   stock-based compensation awards
 
 
2,152  
 
22  
 
(33,802)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(33,780)  
 
—  
 
(33,780)
Issuance of performance share units
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
9,648  
 
—  
 
—  
 
9,648  
 
95  
 
9,743 
Cash distributions to noncontrolling
   interest owners
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(147,685)  
 
(147,685)
Dividends paid to common shareholders
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(252,014)  
 
—  
 
(252,014)  
 
—  
 
(252,014)
MGP dividend payable to Class A
   shareholders
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(29,777)  
 
(29,777)
National Harbor transaction
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
(12,486)  
 
—  
 
(11)  
 
(12,497)  
 
19,383  
 
6,886 
Repurchase of common stock
 
 
(10,000)  
 
(100)  
 
(327,400)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(327,500)  
 
—  
 
(327,500)
MGP Class A share issuance
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
35,029  
 
—  
 
109  
 
35,138  
 
326,484  
 
361,622 
Adjustment of redeemable non-controlling
   interest to redemption value
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
(18,280)  
 
—  
 
—  
 
(18,280)  
 
—  
 
(18,280)
Other
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
(6,106)  
 
(1,193)  
 
—  
 
(7,299)  
 
(448)  
 
(7,747)
Balances, December 31, 2017
 
 566,276  
$
5,663  
$
5,357,709  
$
2,252,890  
$
(3,610)  
$
7,612,652  
$
4,034,063  
$
11,646,715 
 
   
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
 
 
70

 
M GM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
NOTE 1 — ORGANIZATION
 
Organization. MGM Resorts International (together with its consolidated subsidiaries, unless otherwise indicated or unless the context requires otherwise,
the “Company”) is a Delaware corporation that acts largely as a holding company and, through subsidiaries, owns and operates casino resorts. As discussed further
below, the Company leases certain of its real estate assets from MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP (the “Operating Partnership”), which is a
consolidated subsidiary.
 
The Company owns and operates the following integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resorts in Las Vegas, Nevada: Bellagio, MGM Grand Las Vegas,
The Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New York, Monte Carlo, Excalibur and Circus Circus Las Vegas. Operations at MGM Grand Las Vegas include
management of The Signature at MGM Grand Las Vegas, a condominium-hotel consisting of three towers. The Company operates and, along with local investors,
owns MGM Grand Detroit in Detroit, Michigan and MGM National Harbor in Prince George’s County, Maryland. The Company also owns and operates Borgata
located on Renaissance Pointe in the Marina area of Atlantic City, New Jersey and the following resorts in Mississippi: Beau Rivage in Biloxi and Gold Strike in
Tunica.  Additionally,  the  Company  owns and  operates  the  Park,  a  dining  and  entertainment  district  located  between  New York-New  York and  Monte  Carlo,
Shadow  Creek,  an  exclusive  world-class  golf  course  located  approximately  ten  miles  north  of  its  Las  Vegas  Strip  resorts,  Primm  Valley  Golf  Club  at  the
California/Nevada state line and Fallen Oak golf course in Saucier, Mississippi.
 
On April 25, 2016, MGM Growth Properties LLC (“MGP”), a consolidated subsidiary of the Company, completed its initial public offering (“IPO”) of
57,500,000 of its Class A shares representing limited liability company interests (inclusive of the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase
7,500,000 Class A shares) at an initial offering price of $21 per share. In connection with the IPO, the Company and MGP entered into a series of transactions and
several agreements that, among other things, set forth the terms and conditions of the IPO and provide a framework for the Company’s relationship with MGP.
 
MGP is organized as an umbrella partnership REIT (commonly referred to as an “UPREIT”) structure in which substantially all of its assets are owned by
and  substantially  all  of  its  businesses  are  conducted  through  its  Operating  Partnership  subsidiary.  MGP has  two  classes  of  authorized  and  outstanding  voting
common shares (collectively, the “shares”): Class A shares and a single Class B share. The Company owns MGP’s Class B share, which does not provide its holder
any  rights  to  profits  or  losses  or  any  rights  to  receive  distributions  from  operations  of  MGP  or  upon  liquidation  or  winding  up  of  MGP.  MGP’s  Class  A
shareholders are entitled to one vote per share, while the Company, as the owner of the Class B share, is entitled to an amount of votes representing a majority of
the total voting power of MGP’s shares so long as the Company and its controlled affiliates’ (excluding MGP) aggregate beneficial ownership of the combined
economic interests in MGP and the Operating Partnership does not fall below 30%. The Company and MGP each hold Operating Partnership units representing
limited partner interests in the Operating Partnership. The general partner of the Operating Partnership is also a subsidiary of MGP, which is 100% owned by MGP.
The Operating Partnership units held by the Company are exchangeable into Class A shares of MGP on a one-to-one basis, or cash at the fair value of a Class A
share. The determination of settlement method is at the option of MGP’s independent conflicts committee. The Company and MGP’s ownership interest percentage
in the Operating Partnership have varied based upon the transactions that MGP has completed, as discussed in Note 13. As of December 31, 2017, the Company
owned 73.4% of the Operating Partnership units, and MGP held the remaining 26.6% ownership interest in the Operating Partnership.  
 
Pursuant to a master contribution agreement entered into in connection with the IPO by and between the Company, MGP, and the Operating Partnership, the
Company contributed the real estate assets of The Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New York, Monte Carlo, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica,
MGM Grand Detroit and Beau Rivage to newly formed subsidiaries and subsequently transferred 100% ownership in such subsidiaries to the Operating Partnership
in exchange for a percentage ownership of Operating Partnership units. Concurrently, pursuant to a master lease agreement between a subsidiary of the Company
(the “tenant”) and a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership (the “landlord”), the tenant leased the contributed real estate assets from the landlord.
 
Subsequent to the Company completing its acquisition of Borgata in August 2016, as discussed in Note 4, MGP acquired Borgata’s real property from a
subsidiary of the Company, and in October 2017, MGP also acquired the long-term leasehold interest and real property associated with MGM National Harbor
from a subsidiary of the Company. Amendments to the master lease agreement provides for the Company to lease the real estate assets of Borgata and MGM
National Harbor from a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership. See Note 10, Note 13, and Note 18 for additional information related to MGP, its ownership and
transactions, and certain other intercompany agreements and debt financing transactions entered into in connection therewith.  
 
71

 
The Company has an approximate 56% controlling interest in MGM China, which owns MGM Grand Paradise, S.A. (“MGM Grand Paradise”). MGM
Grand Paradise owns and operates the MGM Macau resort and casino and the related gaming subconcession and land concessions as well as MGM Cotai, an
integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resort located on an 18 acre sit e on the Cotai Strip in Macau that opened on February 13, 2018. The Gaming Inspection
and Coordination Bureau of Macau (“DICJ”) approved 100 gaming tables for the opening of MGM Cotai and 25 additional gaming tables effective for operation on
January 1, 20 19, for a total of 125 gaming tables in aggregate. In addition, the DICJ approved the initial transfer of 77 gaming tables from MGM Macau to MGM
Cotai .
 
The  Company  owns  50%  of  and  manages  CityCenter  Holdings,  LLC  (“CityCenter”),  located  between  Bellagio  and  Monte  Carlo.  The  other  50%  of
CityCenter is owned by Infinity World Development Corp, a wholly owned subsidiary of Dubai World, a Dubai, United Arab Emirates government decree entity.
CityCenter consists of Aria, an integrated casino, hotel and entertainment resort; Mandarin Oriental Las Vegas, a non-gaming boutique hotel; and Vdara, a luxury
condominium-hotel. In addition, CityCenter features residential units in the Residences at Mandarin Oriental and Veer. See Note 7 and Note 18 for additional
information related to CityCenter.
 
The Company and a subsidiary of Anschutz Entertainment Group, Inc. (“AEG”) each own 42.5% of the Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC (“Las Vegas
Arena Company”), the entity which owns the T-Mobile Arena, and Athena Arena, LLC owns the remaining 15%. The Company manages the T-Mobile Arena,
which is located on a parcel of the Company’s land between Frank Sinatra Drive and New York-New York, adjacent to the Las Vegas Strip. The T-Mobile Arena is
a 20,000 seat venue designed to host world-class events – from mixed martial arts, boxing, basketball and bull riding, to high profile awards shows and top-name
concerts, and is the home of the Vegas Golden Knights of the National Hockey League. Additionally, the Company leases the MGM Grand Garden Arena, located
adjacent to the MGM Grand Las Vegas, to the Las Vegas Arena Company. See Note 7 for additional information regarding the Company’s investment in the Las
Vegas Arena Company.
 
The Company also has a 50% interest in Grand Victoria. Grand Victoria is a riverboat casino in Elgin, Illinois; an affiliate of Hyatt Gaming owns the other
50% of Grand Victoria and also operates the resort. See Note 7 for additional information regarding the Company’s investment in Grand Victoria.
 
A subsidiary of the Company was awarded a casino license to build and operate MGM Springfield in Springfield, Massachusetts. MGM Springfield is in the
process of being  developed on approximately  14 acres  of land in downtown Springfield.  The Company’s plans for  the resort  currently  include  a casino with
approximately 2,550 slots and 120 table games including poker; a 250-room hotel; 100,000 square feet of retail and restaurant space; 44,000 square feet of meeting
and event space; and a 3,500 space parking garage, with an expected development and construction cost of approximately $960 million, excluding capitalized
interest and land-related costs. Construction of MGM Springfield is expected to be completed in the third quarter of 2018.
 
The Company has two reportable segments: domestic resorts and MGM China. See Note 17 for additional information about the Company’s segments.
 
 
NOTE 2 — BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of consolidation. For entities  not  determined  to be  a  variable  interest  entity  (“VIE”),  the  Company  consolidates  such  entities  in  which the
Company owns 100% of the equity. For entities in which the Company owns less than 100% of the equity interest, the Company consolidates the entity if it has the
direct or indirect ability to control the entities’ activities based upon the terms of the respective entities’ ownership agreements. For these entities, the Company
records a noncontrolling interest in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company’s investments in unconsolidated affiliates which are 50% or less owned are
accounted  for  under  the  equity  method  when  the  Company  can  exercise  significant  influence  over  or  has  joint  control  of  the  unconsolidated  affiliate.  All
intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated in consolidation.
The Company evaluates entities for which control is achieved through means other than voting rights to determine if it is the primary beneficiary of a VIE.
A VIE is an entity in which either (i) the equity investors as a group, if any, lack the power through voting or similar rights to direct the activities of such entity that
most significantly impact such entity’s economic performance or (ii) the equity investment at risk is insufficient to finance that entity’s activities without additional
subordinated financial support. The Company identifies the primary beneficiary of a VIE as the enterprise that has both of the following characteristics: (i) the
power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance; and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses or receive benefits
of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the entity. The Company consolidates its investment in a VIE when it determines that it is its primary beneficiary.
For these VIEs, the Company records a noncontrolling interest in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company may change its original assessment of a VIE upon
subsequent events such as the modification of contractual arrangements that affect the characteristics or adequacy of the entity’s equity investments at risk and the
disposition of all or a portion of an interest held by the primary beneficiary. The Company performs this analysis on an ongoing basis.
72

 
Management has determined that MGP is a VIE b ecause the Class A equity investors as a group lack the power through voting or similar rights to direct the
activities of such entity that most significantly impact such entity’s economic performance. The Company has determined that it is the primary bene ficiary of MGP
and consolidates MGP because (i) its ownership of MGP’s single Class B share entitles it to a majority of the total voting power of MGP’s shares, and (ii) the
exchangeable nature of the Operating Partnership units owned provide the Company t he right to receive benefits from MGP that could potentially be significant to
MGP. The Company has recorded MGP’s ownership interest in the Operating Partnership of 26.6% as of December 31, 2017 as noncontrolling interest in the
Company’s consolidated fin ancial statements. As of December 31, 2017, on a consolidated basis MGP had total assets of $10.4 billion, primarily related to its real
estate investments, and total liabilities of $4.3 billion, primarily related to its indebtedness.  
 
R eclassifications. Certain reclassifications have been made to conform the prior period presentation.
Management’s use of estimates. The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America. These principles require the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets
and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
 
Fair value measurements. Fair value measurements affect the Company’s accounting and impairment assessments of its long-lived assets, investments in
unconsolidated affiliates, cost method investments, assets acquired and liabilities assumed in an acquisition, and goodwill and other intangible assets. Fair value
measurements also affect the Company’s accounting for certain of its financial assets and liabilities. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell
an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and is measured according to a hierarchy that
includes: Level 1 inputs, such as quoted prices in an active market; Level 2 inputs, which are observable inputs for similar assets; or Level 3 inputs, which are
unobservable inputs. The Company used the following inputs in its fair value measurements:
 
 
•
Level 1 and Level 2 inputs for its long-term debt fair value disclosures. See Note 10;
 
•
Level 2 and Level 3 inputs when assessing the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed during the Borgata transaction. See Note 4;
 
•
Level 2 and Level 3 inputs when measuring the impairment of goodwill related to the MGM China reporting unit. See Note 8; and
 
•
Level 3 inputs when assessing the fair value of its investment in Grand Victoria. See Note 7
 
Cash and cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents include investments and interest bearing instruments with maturities of 90 days or less at the date of
acquisition. Such investments are carried at cost, which approximates market value. Book overdraft balances resulting from the Company’s cash management
program are recorded as accounts payable or construction payable as applicable.
 
Accounts receivable and credit risk. Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of casino
accounts  receivable.  The  Company  issues  credit  to  approved  casino  customers  and  gaming  promoters  following  background  checks  and  investigations  of
creditworthiness. At December 31, 2017, 35% of the Company’s casino receivables at its domestic resorts were due from customers residing in foreign countries
and 8% of the Company’s casino receivables related to MGM China. Business or economic conditions or other significant events in these countries could affect the
collectability of such receivables.
 
Accounts receivable are typically non-interest bearing and are initially recorded at cost. Accounts are written off when management deems the account to be
uncollectible. Recoveries of accounts previously written off are recorded when received. An estimated allowance for doubtful accounts is maintained to reduce the
Company’s receivables to their net carrying amount, which approximates fair value. The allowance is estimated based on both a specific review of customer
accounts  as  well  as  historical  collection  experience  and  current  economic  and  business  conditions.  Management  believes  that  as  of  December  31,  2017,  no
significant concentrations of credit risk existed for which an allowance had not already been recorded.
 
Inventories. Inventories  consist  primarily  of  food  and  beverage,  retail  merchandise  and  operating  supplies,  and  are  stated  at  the  lower  of  cost  or  net
realizable  value.  Cost  is  determined  primarily  using  the  average  cost  method  for  food  and  beverage  and  operating  supplies.  Cost  for  retail  merchandise  is
determined using the cost method.
 
73

 
Property and equipment. Property and equipment are stated at cost. A significant amount of the Compa ny’s property and equipment was acquired through
business combinations and therefore recognized at fair value at the acquisition date. Gains or losses on dispositions of property and equipment are included in the
determination of income or loss. Maintenanc e costs are expensed as incurred. As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, the Company had accrued $28 million and $36
million for property and equipment within accounts payable and $34 million and $32 million related to construction retention within other long-t erm liabilities,
respectively.
 
Property and equipment are generally depreciated over the following estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis:
 
Buildings and improvements
 
20 to 40 years
Land improvements
 
10 to 20 years
Furniture and fixtures
 
3 to 20 years
Equipment
 
3 to 15 years
 
The Company evaluates its property and equipment and other long-lived assets for impairment based on its classification as held for sale or to be held and
used. Several criteria must be met before an asset is classified as held for sale, including that management with the appropriate authority commits to a plan to sell
the asset at a reasonable price in relation to its fair value and is actively seeking a buyer. For assets held for sale, the Company recognizes the asset at the lower of
carrying value or fair market value less costs to sell, as estimated based on comparable asset sales, offers received, or a discounted cash flow model. For assets to
be held and used, the Company reviews for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. The Company then compares the estimated future cash flows of
the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to the carrying value of the asset. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the
undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, then an impairment charge is recorded based on the fair value of the asset, typically measured using a
discounted cash flow model. If an asset is still under development, future cash flows include remaining construction costs. All recognized impairment losses,
whether for assets held for sale or assets to be held and used, are recorded as operating expenses.
 
Capitalized interest. The interest cost associated with major development and construction projects is capitalized and included in the cost of the project.
When no debt is incurred specifically for a project, interest is capitalized on amounts expended on the project using the weighted-average cost of the Company’s
outstanding borrowings. Capitalization of interest ceases when the project is substantially complete or development activity is suspended for more than a brief
period.
 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates. The Company has investments in unconsolidated affiliates accounted for under the equity
method.  Under  the  equity  method,  carrying  value  is  adjusted  for  the  Company’s  share  of  the  investees’  earnings  and  losses,  amortization  of  certain  basis
differences, as well as capital contributions to and distributions from these companies. Distributions in excess of equity method earnings are recognized as a return
of investment and recorded as investing cash inflows in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows. The Company classifies operating income and
losses as well as gains and impairments related to its investments in unconsolidated affiliates as a component of operating income or loss, as the Company’s
investments in such unconsolidated affiliates are an extension of the Company’s core business operations.
 
The Company evaluates its investments in unconsolidated affiliates for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying
value of its investment may have experienced an “other-than-temporary” decline in value. If such conditions exist, the Company compares the estimated fair value
of the investment to its carrying value to determine if an impairment is indicated and determines whether the impairment is “other-than-temporary” based on its
assessment of all relevant factors, including consideration of the Company’s intent and ability to retain its investment. The Company estimates fair value using a
discounted cash flow analysis based on estimated future results of the investee and market indicators of terminal year capitalization rates, and a market approach
that utilizes business enterprise value multiples based on a range of multiples from the Company’s peer group. See Note 7 and Note 16 for results of the Company’s
review of its investment in certain of its unconsolidated affiliates.
 
Goodwill  and  other  intangible  assets. Goodwill  represents  the  excess  of  purchase  price  over  fair  market  value  of  net  assets  acquired  in  business
combinations.  Goodwill  and  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  must  be  reviewed  for  impairment  at  least  annually  and  between  annual  test  dates  in  certain
circumstances. The Company performs its annual impairment tests in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. No impairments were indicated or recorded as a result
of the annual impairment review for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in 2017 and 2016. An impairment of goodwill related to the MGM China
reporting unit was recorded as a result of the annual impairment review in 2015. See Note 8.
 
Accounting guidance provides entities the option to perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets (commonly referred
to  as  “step  zero”)  in  order  to  determine  whether  further  impairment  testing  is  necessary.  In  performing  the  step  zero  analysis  the  Company  considers
macroeconomic  conditions,  industry  and  market  considerations,  current  and  forecasted  financial  performance,  entity-specific  events,  and  changes  in  the
composition or carrying amount of net assets of reporting units for
74

 
goodwill. In addition, the Company ta kes into consideration the amount of excess of fair value over carrying value determined in the last quantitative analysis that
was performed, as well as the period of time that has passed since the last quantitative analysis. If the step zero analysis ind icates that it is more likely than not that
the fair value is less than its carrying amount, the entity would proceed to a quantitative analysis.
 
Under the quantitative analysis, goodwill for relevant reporting units is tested for impairment using a discounted cash flow analysis based on the estimated
future results of the Company’s reporting units discounted using market discount rates and market indicators of terminal year capitalization rates, and a market
approach that utilizes business enterprise value multiples based on a range of multiples from the Company’s peer group. Effective January 1, 2017, the Company
prospectively  adopted  accounting  guidance  that  simplifies  goodwill  impairment  testing  by  eliminating  the  requirement  to  calculate  the  implied  fair  value  of
goodwill (formerly “Step 2”) in the event that impairment is identified. Instead, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value
exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Under the quantitative analysis, license rights are
tested for impairment using a discounted cash flow approach, and trademarks are tested for impairment using the relief-from-royalty method. If the fair value of an
indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference.
 
Revenue  recognition  and  promotional  allowances. Casino  revenue  is  the  aggregate  net  difference  between  gaming  wins  and  losses,  with  liabilities
recognized for funds deposited by customers before gaming play occurs (“casino front money”) and for chips in the customers’ possession (“outstanding chip
liability”). Hotel, food and beverage, entertainment, retail and other operating revenues are recognized as services are performed and goods are provided. Advance
deposits on rooms and advance ticket sales are recorded as accrued liabilities until services are provided to the customer.
 
Gaming revenues are recognized net of certain sales incentives, including discounts and points earned in point-loyalty programs. The retail value of hotel
rooms, food and beverage, and other services furnished to guests without charge is included in gross revenue and then deducted as promotional allowances. The
estimated cost of providing promotional allowances is primarily included in casino expenses as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Rooms
 $
139,992 
 $
120,369 
 $
112,313 
Food and beverage
  
324,554 
  
283,598 
  
279,041 
Entertainment, retail and other
  
42,357 
  
39,611 
  
39,388 
 
 $
506,903 
 $
443,578 
 $
430,742
 
 
Gaming promoters. A significant portion of the high-end (“VIP”) gaming volume at MGM Macau is generated through the use of gaming promoters, also
known as junket operators. These operators introduce VIP gaming players to MGM Macau, assist these customers with travel arrangements, and extend gaming
credit to these players. VIP gaming at MGM Macau is conducted by the use of special purpose nonnegotiable gaming chips. Gaming promoters purchase these
nonnegotiable chips from MGM Macau and in turn sell these chips to their players. The nonnegotiable chips allow MGM Macau to track the amount of wagering
conducted by each gaming promoter’s clients in order to determine VIP gaming play volume, or rolling chip turnover, which is the amount of nonnegotiable chips
wagered and lost. In exchange for the gaming promoters’ services, MGM Macau compensates the gaming promoters through revenue-sharing arrangements and
rolling chip turnover-based commissions. The estimated portion of the gaming promoter commissions that represent amounts passed through to VIP customers is
recorded as a reduction of casino revenue, and the estimated portion retained by the gaming promoter for its compensation is recorded as casino expense.
 
Reimbursed costs. The Company recognizes costs reimbursed pursuant to management services as revenue in the period it incurs the costs. Reimbursed
costs related primarily to the Company’s management of CityCenter.
 
Loyalty programs. The Company’s primary loyalty program is “M life Rewards” and is available to patrons at most of the Company’s domestic resorts and
CityCenter. Members may earn points and/or Express Comps for their gaming play which can be redeemed at restaurants, box offices or the M life Rewards front
desk at participating properties. Points may also be redeemed for free slot play on participating machines. The Company records a liability based on the points
earned multiplied by the redemption value, less an estimate for points not expected to be redeemed, and records a corresponding reduction in casino revenue.
Customers also earn Express Comps based on their gaming play which can be redeemed for complimentary goods and services, including hotel rooms, food and
beverage, and entertainment. The Company records a liability for the estimated costs of providing goods and services for Express Comps based on the Express
Comps earned multiplied by a cost margin, less an estimate for Express Comps not expected to be redeemed and records a corresponding expense in the casino
department. MGM Macau also has loyalty programs, including M life Rewards as well as the Golden Lion Club, which provides benefits to customers focused on
gaming.
 
75

 
Advertising. The  Company  expenses  advertising  costs  the  first  time  the  advertising  ta kes  place.  Advertising  expense,  which  is  generally  included  in
general and administrative expenses, was $223 million, $171   million and $156 million for 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
 
Corporate expense. Corporate expense represents unallocated payroll, aircraft costs, professional fees and various other expenses not directly related to the
Company’s casino resort operations.  In addition,  corporate  expense includes  the costs associated  with the Company’s evaluation  and pursuit of new business
opportunities, which are expensed as incurred.
 
Preopening and start-up expenses. Preopening and start-up costs, including organizational costs, are expensed as incurred. Costs classified as preopening
and start-up expenses include payroll, outside services, advertising, and other expenses related to new or start-up operations.
 
Property transactions, net. The Company classifies transactions such as write-downs and impairments, demolition costs, and normal gains and losses on
the sale of assets as “Property transactions, net.” See Note 16 for a detailed discussion of these amounts.
 
Redeemable  noncontrolling  interest. In  2015  and  2016,  MGM  National  Harbor  issued  non-voting  economic  interests  in  MGM  National  Harbor
(“Interests”) to noncontrolling interest parties for a total aggregate purchase price of $53 million. The Interests provide for annual preferred distributions by MGM
National Harbor to the noncontrolling interest parties based on a percentage of its annual net gaming revenue (as defined in the MGM National Harbor operating
agreement). Such distributions are accrued each quarter and are paid 90-days after the end of each fiscal year.
 
Beginning on December 31, 2019 the noncontrolling interest parties will each have the ability to require MGM National Harbor to purchase all or a portion
of their Interests for a purchase price based on a contractually agreed upon formula. Additionally, certain noncontrolling interest parties each have the right to sell
back all or a portion of their Interests prior to such date if MGM National Harbor were to guarantee or grant liens to secure any indebtedness of the Company or its
affiliates other than the indebtedness of MGM National Harbor.
 
The Company has recorded the Interests as “Redeemable noncontrolling interests” in the mezzanine section of the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets and not stockholders’  equity because their redemption  is not exclusively  in the Company’s control. Interests were initially accounted for at fair value.
Subsequently, the Company recognizes changes in the redemption value as they occur and adjusts the carrying amount of the redeemable noncontrolling interests to
equal the maximum redemption value, provided such amount does not fall below the initial carrying value, at the end of each reporting period. The Company
records any changes caused by such an adjustment in capital in excess of par value. Additionally, the carrying amount of the redeemable noncontrolling interests is
adjusted  for accrued  annual preferred  distributions,  with changes caused by such adjustments  recorded within net income  (loss) attributable  to noncontrolling
interests.   
 
Income (loss) per share of common stock. The table below reconciles basic and diluted income (loss) per share of common stock. Diluted net income
(loss) attributable to common stockholders includes adjustments for redeemable noncontrolling interests and the potentially dilutive effect on the Company’s equity
interests in MGP and MGM China due to shares outstanding under their respective stock compensation plans. Diluted weighted-average common and common
equivalent shares include adjustments for potential dilution of share-based awards outstanding under the Company’s stock compensation plan.
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
Numerator:
 
(In thousands)
 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,960,286 
 $
1,101,440 
 $
(447,720)
Adjustment related to redeemable noncontrolling interests
  
(18,363)
  
(28)
  
— 
Net income (loss) available to common stockholders - basic
  
1,941,923   
1,101,412   
(447,720)
Potentially dilutive effect due to MGP Omnibus Plan
  
(90)
  
(40)
  
— 
Potentially dilutive effect due to MGM China Share Option Plan
  
(178)
  
(11)
  
— 
Net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders - diluted
 $
1,941,655 
 $
1,101,361 
 $
(447,720)
Denominator:
  
  
  
  
  
  
Weighted-average common shares outstanding basic
  
572,253 
  
568,134 
  
542,873 
Potential dilution from share-based awards
  
6,542   
5,183   
— 
Weighted-average common and common equivalent shares - diluted
  
578,795   
573,317   
542,873 
Antidilutive share-based awards excluded from the calculation of diluted
   earnings per share
  
2,601   
4,207   
18,276
 
76

 
 
Currency translation. The Company translates the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries that are not denominated in U.S. dollars. Balance sheet
accounts are translated at the exchange rate in effect at each balance sheet date. Income statement accounts are translated at the average rate of exchange prevailing
during the period. Translation adjustments resulting from this process are recorded to other comprehensive income (loss).
 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Comprehensive  income  (loss) includes  net  income  (loss) and  all other non-stockholder  changes in
equity,  or  other  comprehensive  income  (loss).  Elements  of  the  Company’s  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  are  reported  in  the  accompanying
consolidated statements of stockholders’ equity. Amounts reported in accumulated other comprehensive income related to cash flow hedges will be reclassified to
interest  expense  as  interest  payments  are  made  on  our  variable-rate  debt.  The  following  table  summarizes  the  changes  in  the  accumulated  balance  of  other
comprehensive income:
 
 
 
Currency
Translation
Adjustments
 
 
Cash Flow
Hedges
  
Other
  
Total
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Balance, January 1, 2016
 $
14,022 
 $
— 
 $
— 
 $
14,022 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
  
(2,680)
  
1,521 
  
1,074 
  
(85)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income to
interest expense
  
— 
  
358 
  
— 
  
358 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
  
(2,680)
  
1,879 
  
1,074 
  
273 
Other comprehensive income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interest
  
1,203 
  
(445)
  
— 
  
758 
Balance, December 31, 2016
  
12,545 
  
1,434 
  
1,074 
  
15,053 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications
  
(43,188)
  
(1,221)
  
98 
  
(44,311)
Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to
interest expense
  
— 
  
9,216 
  
— 
  
9,216 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
  
(43,188)
  
7,995 
  
98 
  
(35,095)
Other comprehensive income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interest
  
19,193 
  
(2,761)
  
— 
  
16,432 
Balance, December 31, 2017
 $
(11,450)
 $
6,668 
 $
1,172 
 $
(3,610)
 
 
Recently issued accounting standards. In May 2014, the FASB issued ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)” which outlines a
new,  single  comprehensive  model  for  entities  to  use  in  accounting  for  revenue  arising  from  contracts  with  customers  and  supersedes  most  current  revenue
recognition  guidance, including industry-specific  guidance. Under the standard, revenue  is recognized  when a customer  obtains control  of promised goods or
services in an amount that reflects the consideration the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods and services.  
 
The Company adopted ASC 606 on a full retrospective basis, effective January 1, 2018, which will be reflected in future financial statements. The most
significant impacts of adoption of the new accounting pronouncement are as follows:
 
 
•
Promotional Allowances: The Company is no longer permitted to recognize revenues for goods and services provided to customers for free as an
inducement  to  gamble  as  gross  revenue  with  a  corresponding  offset  to  promotional  allowances  to  arrive  at  net  revenues,  and  accordingly  the
promotional allowances line item will be removed in future filings. The majority of such amounts previously included in promotional allowances will
now offset casino revenues based on stand-alone selling price. This change will primarily result in a reclassification of revenue between revenue line
items;
 
 
•
Loyalty Accounting: Accounting for Express Comps granted under the M life Rewards program and points granted under the Golden Lion Club will
be identified as separate performance obligations and recorded as a reduction in gaming revenues when earned at the retail value of such benefits owed
to the customer (less estimated breakage) and an increase to the loyalty program liability representing outstanding performance obligations. Such
amounts will be recognized as revenue in the line item of the corresponding good or service provided when the performance obligation is fulfilled.
This change will result in a decrease to beginning retained earnings of approximately $41 million as a result of the initial application of the standard
and will not have a significant impact to earnings;
 
77

 
 
•
Gaming Promoter Commission: Commissions paid to gaming promoters under MGM China’s incentive program will no w be fully reflected as a
reduction in casino revenue. This change will primarily result in a decrease in casino expense and a corresponding decrease in casino revenue;
 
 
•
Gross versus Net Presentation: Mandatory service charges on food and beverage and hotel offerings and wide area progressive operator fees will be
recorded gross, that is, the amount received from the customer will be recorded as revenue with the corresponding amount paid as an expense. These
changes will primarily result in an increase in revenue with a corresponding increase in expense;
 
 
•
Estimated Cost of Promotional Allowances: The Company will no longer reclassify the estimated cost of complimentaries provided to the gaming
patron from other expense line items to the casino expense line item. This change will result in a reclassification of expense between expense line
items which will reduce casino expense by $507 million, $444 million, and $431 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016, and 2015,
respectively, and increase Rooms, Food and beverage, Retail, Entertainment and Other expenses. Refer to the ‘Revenue recognition and promotional
allowances’ section within this note for the historical amounts that will be reclassified back to each expense line item when the retrospective adoption
to prior years is reflected in future filings.
 
These changes, and other less significant adjustments that were required upon adoption, will not have an aggregate material impact on operating income, net
income, or cash flows .
 
In  February  2016,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  No.  2016-02,  “Leases  (Topic  842),”  (“ASU  2016-02”),  which  replaces  the  existing  guidance  in  Accounting
Standards Codification (“ASC”) 840, “Leases.” ASU 2016-02 is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15,
2018. ASU 2016-02 requires a dual approach for lessee accounting under which a lessee would account for leases as finance leases or operating leases. Both
finance leases and operating leases will result in the lessee recognizing a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a corresponding lease liability. For finance leases, the
lessee would recognize interest expense and amortization of the ROU asset and for operating leases the lessee would recognize a straight-line total lease expense.
The Company is currently assessing the impact the adoption of ASU 2016-02 will have on its consolidated financial statements and footnote disclosures.
 
In August 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-15, “Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230): Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments (a
consensus  of  the  Emerging  Issues  Task  Force),”  (“ASU  2016-15”),  effective  for  fiscal  years  beginning  after  December  15,  2017.  ASU  2016-15  amends  the
guidance of ASC 230 on the classification of certain cash receipts and payments in the statement of cash flows. The primary purpose of ASU 2016-15 is to reduce
the diversity in practice that has resulted from the lack of consistent principles, specifically clarifying the guidance on eight cash flow issues. The adoption of ASU
2016-15 did not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and footnote disclosures.
 
In January 2017, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-09, “Compensation – Stock Compensation (Topic 718),” (“ASU 2016-09”). ASU 2016-09 simplifies
the accounting for share-based payment transactions, including the income tax consequences, accounting for forfeitures, classification of awards as either equity or
liabilities, and classification on the statement of cash flows. ASU 2016-09 has separate transition guidance for each element of the new standard. The adoption of
ASU 2016-09 did not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and footnote disclosures.
 
In January 2017, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-17, “Consolidation (Topic 810): Interests Held Through Related Parties that are Under Common
Control,” (“ASU 2016-17”). The amendments affect the evaluation of whether to consolidate a VIE in certain situations involving entities under common control.
Specifically, the amendments change the evaluation of whether an entity is the primary beneficiary of a VIE for an entity that is a single decision-maker of a
variable interest by changing how an entity treats indirect interests in the VIE held through related parties that are under common control with the reporting entity.
The  guidance  in  ASU  2016-17  must  be  applied  retrospectively  to  all  relevant  periods.  The  adoption  of  ASU  2016-17  did  not  have  a  material  effect  on  the
Company’s consolidated financial statements and footnote disclosures.
 
In  January  2017,  the  Company  early  adopted  ASU  No.  2017-04,  “Intangibles  –  Goodwill  and  Other  (Topic  350):  Simplifying  the  Test  for  Goodwill
Impairment” (“ASU 2017-04”). ASU 2017-04 simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating step two from the goodwill impairment test.
Under  the  amended  guidance,  the  Company  will  perform  its  annual  goodwill  impairment  tests  (and  interim  tests  if  any  are  determined  to  be  necessary)  by
comparing the fair value of its reporting units with their carrying value, and an impairment charge, if any, will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying
value exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 did not have
a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and footnote disclosures.
 
78

 
NOTE 3 — ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE, NET
 
Accounts receivable, net consisted of the following:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Casino
 $
343,869 
 $
332,443 
Hotel
  
146,931 
  
169,321 
Other
  
142,316 
  
139,080 
 
  
633,116 
  
640,844 
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
  
(92,571)
  
(97,920)
 
 $
540,545 
 $
542,924
 
 
 
NOTE 4— BORGATA TRANSACTION
 
On August 1, 2016, the Company completed the acquisition of Boyd Gaming Corporation’s (“Boyd Gaming”) ownership interest in Borgata. Following the
completion  of  the  acquisition  of  Boyd  Gaming’s  interest,  MGP  acquired  Borgata’s  real  property  from  the  Company  and  leased  back  the  real  property  to  a
subsidiary of the Company.   
 
As part of the purchase and sale agreement, the Company agreed to pay Boyd Gaming half of any net amount received or utilized by the Company as it
relates to the Atlantic City property tax refund owed to Borgata at the time of the transaction. After taking into account the contingent consideration paid related to
the property tax refunds realized by Borgata through the finalization of purchase price accounting, cash paid to Boyd Gaming for its interest in Borgata was $604
million. As further discussed in Note 12, Borgata subsequently entered into a property tax reimbursement agreement in February 2017 with the Department of
Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey and Atlantic City and received the settlement amount of $72 million in June 2017, half of which the Company paid
Boyd Gaming, net of fees and expenses.  
 
Through the acquisition of Boyd Gaming’s interest in Borgata, the Company obtained 100% of the equity interests in Borgata and therefore consolidated
Borgata as of August 1, 2016. The Company recognized 100% of the assets and liabilities of Borgata at fair value at the date of the acquisition. Prior to the
acquisition, the Company held a 50% ownership interest in Borgata, which was accounted for under the equity method. The fair value of the equity interests of
Borgata was determined by the transaction price and equaled approximately $1.2 billion. The carrying value of the Company’s equity method investment was
significantly less than its share of the fair value of Borgata at the acquisition date, resulting in a $430 million gain on the acquisition. Under the acquisition method,
the fair value was allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction. The allocation of fair value for substantially all of the assets and
liabilities has been finalized as of December 31, 2016.
 
The following table sets forth the finalized allocation at December 31, 2016 (in thousands):
 
Fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed:
  
 
Current assets
$
112,221 
Property and equipment and other long-term assets
 
1,373,567 
Goodwill
 
386,892 
Trade name
 
83,000 
Customer list
 
22,000 
Current liabilities
 
(122,743)
Long-term debt
 
(583,187)
Deferred taxes
 
(12,124)
Other long-term obligations
 
(51,894)
 
$
1,207,732
 
 
As discussed above, the Company recognized the identifiable intangible assets of Borgata at fair value. The trade name and customer relationship intangible
assets did not have historical cost bases at Borgata. The estimated fair values of the intangible assets were determined using methodologies under the income
approach based on significant inputs that were not observable.
79

 
 
Unfavorable lease liability. The Company has assumed the liability of a series of ground leases for a total of approximately 11 acres of land on which the
Borgata employee parking garage, public space expansion, rooms expansion, modified surface parking lot, beer garden and outdoor pool reside. The Company
recorded an unfavorable lease liability of $1 million in “Current liabilities” and $47 million in “Other long-term obligations” for the excess contractual lease
obligations over the market value of the leases, which will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease contracts through December 2070. Both a
market and income approach using Level 2 and Level 3 inputs were utilized to determine the fair value of these leases.
 
Deferred taxes. The Company recorded an additional net deferred tax liability of $89 million, of which $82 million and $7 million was recorded to income
tax expense and goodwill, respectively. The net deferred tax liability represents the excess of the financial reporting amounts of the net assets of Borgata over their
respective basis under U.S. and New Jersey tax law expected to be applied to taxable income in the periods such differences are expected to be realized.
 
Consolidated results. Borgata’s net revenue for the period from August 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016 was $348 million, operating income was $39
million and net income was $8 million.
Pro  forma  information. The  operating  results  for  Borgata  are  included  in  the  accompanying  consolidated  statements  of  operations  from  the  date  of
acquisition. The following unaudited pro forma consolidated financial information for the Company has been prepared assuming the Company’s acquisition of its
controlling interest has occurred as of January 1, 2015 and excludes the $430 million gain discussed above. The unaudited pro forma financial information below is
not necessarily indicative of either future results of operations or results that might have been achieved had the acquisition been consummated as of January 1,
2015.
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
  
2015
 
 
(In thousands, except per share data)
 
 
(unaudited)
 
Net revenues
$
9,940,176  $
9,993,718 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 
819,278   
(417,671)
Basis net income (loss) per share
$
1.44  $
(0.77)
Diluted net income (loss) per share
$
1.43  $
(0.77)
 
NOTE 5 — DISPOSITIONS
 
On April 1, 2015, the Company closed the sale of Railroad Pass. At closing, the Company received $8 million in cash proceeds. On April 30, 2015, the
Company  closed the sale of  Gold Strike and related assets in Jean, Nevada.  At closing, the Company received $12 million in cash proceeds . On July 7, 2015, the
Company entered into an agreement with Eldorado Resorts, Inc. to sell Circus Circus Reno, as well as the Company’s 50% interest in Silver Legacy and associated
real property. On November 23, 2015, the Company closed the sale and received $80 million in cash proceeds and recorded a gain of $23 million related to the sale,
classified within “Property transactions, net.” See Note 7 for further discussion of the sale of the Company’s 50% investment in Silver Legacy. Railroad Pass, Gold
Strike and Circus Circus Reno were not classified as discontinued operations because the Company concluded that the sales did not have a major effect on the
Company’s operations or its financial results and they do not represent a disposal of a major geographic segment or product line.
 
NOTE 6 — PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
 
Property and equipment, net consisted of the following:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Land
 $
6,531,701 
 $
6,530,988 
Buildings, building improvements and land improvements
  
12,245,950 
  
11,969,984 
Furniture, fixtures and equipment
  
5,157,363 
  
4,863,647 
Construction in progress
  
3,950,635 
  
2,628,603 
 
  
27,885,649 
  
25,993,222 
Less: Accumulated depreciation
  
(8,250,190)
  
(7,568,199)
 
 $
19,635,459 
 $
18,425,023
 
 
80

 
 
NOTE 7 — INVESTMENTS IN AND ADVANCES TO UNCONSOLIDATED AFFILIATES
 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates consisted of the following:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
CityCenter Holdings, LLC – CityCenter (50%)
 $
809,084 
 $
1,007,358 
Elgin Riverboat Resort–Riverboat Casino – Grand Victoria (50%)
  
124,342 
  
123,585 
Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC (42.5%)
  
76,619 
  
80,339 
Other
  
24,116 
  
9,161 
 
 $
1,034,161 
 $
1,220,443
 
 
The Company recorded its share of the net income from unconsolidated affiliates, including adjustments for basis differences, as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Income from unconsolidated affiliates
 $
145,989 
 $
527,616 
 $
257,883 
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
— 
  
(3,168)
  
(3,475)
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
  
(34,751)
  
(53,139)
  
(76,462)
 
 $
111,238 
 $
471,309 
 $
177,946
 
 
CityCenter
 
Crystals sale. In April 2016, CityCenter closed the sale of Crystals for approximately $1.1 billion. During the year ended December 31, 2016, CityCenter
recognized a gain on the sale of Crystals of $400 million and the Company recognized a $401 million gain, which included $200 million representing its 50% share
of the gain recorded by CityCenter and $201 million representing the reversal of certain basis differences. The basis differences primarily related to other-than-
temporary impairment charges recorded on the Company’s investment in CityCenter that were allocated to Crystals’ building assets.
 
CityCenter distributions. In April 2017, CityCenter paid a $600 million dividend, consisting of a $350 million dividend using proceeds from the upsized
senior credit facilities and a $250 million dividend from cash on hand, of which $78 million was part of its annual dividend policy. MGM Resorts received its 50%
share, or $300 million. In March 2016, a $90 million distribution was declared in accordance with CityCenter’s annual distribution policy and in April 2016,
CityCenter declared a $990 million special distribution in connection with the Crystals sale. The Company’s $540 million share of such distributions was paid in
May 2016. In April 2015, CityCenter declared a special distribution of $400 million, of which the Company received its 50% share of $200 million.
 
CityCenter litigation settlement. During the first quarter of 2015, CityCenter recognized a $160 million gain as a result of the final resolution of its
construction litigation and related settlements, of which the Company recorded $80 million, its 50% share of the gain.
 
CityCenter credit facility. In April 2017, CityCenter completed a refinancing of its senior credit facility. The new senior credit facility consists of a $1.6
billion term loan B facility maturing in April 2024 and a $125 million revolving credit facility maturing in April 2022. The term loan B was issued at 99.5% and
bears interest at LIBOR plus 2.50% with a LIBOR floor of 0.75%. The revolving facility bears interest at LIBOR plus 2.00%. The term loan B facility requires
CityCenter to make amortization payments of 0.25% of the original principal balance at each quarter end.
 
Borgata
 
As discussed in Note 4, the Company acquired Boyd Gaming’s ownership interest in Borgata on August 1, 2016, and therefore began to consolidate Borgata
beginning on that date. Prior thereto, the Company’s investment in Borgata was accounted for under the equity method.
 
81

 
Grand Victoria
 
At December 31, 2015, the Company reviewed the carrying value of its Grand Victoria investment for impairment due to a greater than anticipated decline
in operating results resulting in part from a continued loss of market share to video gaming terminals, as well as a decrease in forecasted cash flows compared to the
prior forecast. The Company used a blended discounted cash flow analysis and guideline public company method to determine the estimated fair value from a
market participant’s viewpoint. Key assumptions included in the discounted cash flow analysis were estimates of future cash flows including outflows for capital
expenditures, a long-term growth rate of 2% and a discount rate of 10.5%. Key assumptions in the guideline public company method included business enterprise
value multiples selected based on the range of multiples in Grand Victoria’s peer group. As a result of the analysis, the Company determined that it was necessary
to record an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $17 million at December 31, 2015, based on an estimated fair value of $123 million for the Company’s
50% interest. The Company performed a sensitivity analysis surrounding its long-term growth rate assumption and noted that if a long-term growth rate of 1.5%
had been used, the resulting estimated fair value of the Company’s 50% interest in Grand Victoria would have been approximately $120 million. The Company
intends to, and believes it will be able to, retain its investment in Grand Victoria; however, due to the extent of the shortfall and the Company’s assessment of the
uncertainty of fully recovering its investment, the Company has determined that the impairment was other-than-temporary.  
  
Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC
 
Athena Arena transaction. On September 1, 2016, the Company and AEG each sold a 7.5% membership interest in the Las Vegas Arena Company, LLC
to Athena Arena, LLC. As a result of this transaction, the Company received $15 million in proceeds and recorded a $3 million gain in “Property transactions, net”.
 
Arena financing. As of December 31, 2017, the senior secured credit facility consisted of a $129 million term loan A and a $50 million term loan B. The
senior secured credit facility matures in September 2019, is secured by substantially all the assets of the Las Vegas Arena Company, and contains certain financial
covenants which became applicable upon the opening of the T-Mobile Arena in April 2016. See Note 12 for discussion of the Company’s repayment guarantee
related to the Las Vegas Arena Company’s term loan B facility.
 
Silver Legacy
 
Silver Legacy sale. As discussed in Note 5, the Company closed the sale of its 50% interest in Silver Legacy on November 23, 2015, received proceeds of
$58 million, and recorded a gain of $20 million. The Company’s investment in Silver Legacy was not classified as discontinued operations because the Company
concluded that the sale would not have a major effect on the Company’s operations or its financial results and it did not represent a disposal of a major geographic
segment or product line.
 
Basis Differences
 
The Company’s investments in unconsolidated affiliates do not equal the Company’s share of venture-level equity due to various basis differences. Basis
differences related to depreciable assets are being amortized based on the useful lives of the related assets and liabilities, and basis differences related to non–
depreciable assets, such as land and indefinite-lived intangible assets, are not being amortized. Differences between the Company’s share of venture-level equity
and investment balances are as follows:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Venture-level equity attributable to the Company
 $
2,660,644 
 $
2,883,324 
Adjustment to CityCenter equity upon contribution of net assets by MGM Resorts
   International (1)
  
(532,501)
  
(537,819)
CityCenter capitalized interest (2)
  
206,065 
  
215,467 
CityCenter completion guarantee (3)
  
322,703 
  
337,223 
CityCenter deferred gain (4)
  
(219,561)
  
(221,638)
CityCenter capitalized interest on sponsor notes (5)
  
(40,258)
  
(42,095)
Other-than-temporary impairments of CityCenter investment (6)
  
(1,504,161)
  
(1,555,509)
Acquisition fair value adjustments net of other-than-temporary impairments of Grand Victoria investment (7)
  
99,619 
  
99,619 
Other adjustments
  
41,611 
  
41,871 
 
 $
1,034,161 
 $
1,220,443
 
 
 
(1)
Primarily relates to land and fixed assets.
 
(2)
Relates to interest capitalized on the Company’s investment balance during development and construction stages.
82

 
 
(3)
Created by contributions to CityCenter under the completion guarantee recognized as equity contributions by CityCenter split between the members.
 
(4)
Relates to a deferred gain on assets contributed to CityCenter upon formation of CityCenter.
 
(5)
Relates to interest on the sponsor notes capitalized by CityCenter during development. Such sponsor notes were converted to equity in 2013.  
 
(6)
The impairment of the Company’s CityCenter investment includes $379 million of impairments allocated to land.
 
(7)
Relates to indefinite-lived gaming license rights for Grand Victoria and other-than-temporary impairments of the Company’s investment in Grand
Victoria.
 
 
NOTE 8 — GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Goodwill and other intangible assets consisted of the following:  
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
Goodwill:
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic resorts
 $
457,867  $
457,867 
MGM China
  
1,348,664   
1,359,252 
 
 $
1,806,531  $
1,817,119 
Indefinite-lived intangible assets:
  
    
  
Detroit development rights
 $
98,098  $
98,098 
Trademarks, license rights and other
  
312,022   
312,022 
Total indefinite-lived intangible assets
  
410,120   
410,120 
Finite-lived intangible assets:
  
    
  
MGM Grand Paradise gaming subconcession
  
4,478,911   
4,514,073 
Less: Accumulated amortization
  
(1,180,908)   
(1,024,185)
 
  
3,298,003   
3,489,888 
MGM Macau land concession
  
84,076   
84,736 
Less: Accumulated amortization
  
(27,870)   
(23,817)
 
  
56,206   
60,919 
MGM China customer lists
  
127,969   
128,974 
Borgata customer list
  
22,000   
22,000 
Less: Accumulated amortization
  
(145,569)   
(135,574)
 
  
4,400   
15,400 
Maryland license, Massachusetts license and other intangible assets
  
136,127   
136,127 
Less: Accumulated amortization
  
(26,896)   
(24,748)
 
  
109,231   
111,379 
Total finite-lived intangible assets, net
  
3,467,840   
3,677,586 
Total other intangible assets, net
 $
3,877,960  $
4,087,706
 
 
83

 
Goodwill . A summary of changes in the Company’s goodwill by reportable segment is as follows for 2 017 and 2016:
 
 
 
2017
 
 
 
Balance at
January 1
 
 
Acquisitions
 
 
Currency exchange
  
Balance at December
31
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Goodwill, net by reportable segment:
   
    
    
    
 
Domestic resorts
 $
457,867 
 $
— 
 $
— 
 $
457,867 
MGM China
  
1,359,252 
  
— 
  
(10,588)
  
1,348,664 
 
 $
1,817,119 
 $
— 
 $
(10,588)
 $
1,806,531 
 
   
 
   
 
   
    
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
    
 
 
 
2016
 
 
 
Balance at
January 1
 
 
Acquisitions
 
 
Currency exchange
  
Balance at December
31
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Goodwill, net by reportable segment:
   
    
    
    
 
Domestic resorts
 $
70,975  $
386,892  $
—  $
457,867 
MGM China
  
1,359,792 
  
— 
  
(540)
  
1,359,252 
 
 $
1,430,767 
 $
386,892 
 $
(540)
 $
1,817,119 
 
   
 
   
 
   
    
 
 
Goodwill concerning domestic resorts relates to the acquisition of Mirage Resorts in 2001, the acquisition of Mandalay Resort Group in 2005, and the
acquisition of Borgata in August 2016. See Note 4 for goodwill recognized in connection with the Borgata transaction. The Company recognized goodwill resulting
from its acquisition of a controlling interest in MGM China in 2011.
MGM China Goodwill Impairment. During the fourth quarter of 2015, the Company conducted its annual impairment tests of goodwill by reviewing each
of its reporting units, including its MGM China reporting unit. The step one goodwill analysis of the MGM China reporting unit indicated the fair value was less
than its carrying value by 4%. The decrease in fair value resulted from a decrease in forecasted cash flows based on then current market conditions and a sustained
decline in the enterprise value multiples of the MGM China reporting unit as well as the multiples of the reporting unit’s peer group.
As a result of the indication of impairment from its step one analysis, the Company performed a step two impairment analysis to measure the impairment
loss. As such, the Company determined the fair values of all assets of the MGM China reporting unit, including its separately identifiable intangible assets. The fair
values of each of the separately identifiable intangible assets exceeded their respective carrying values by a significant amount, leading to a lower implied fair value
of goodwill. Therefore, the Company recorded a $1.5 billion non-cash impairment charge to reduce the historical carrying value of goodwill related to the MGM
China reporting unit to its implied fair value. The carrying value of goodwill related to the MGM China reporting unit as of December 31, 2015 following the
impairment charge was $1.4 billion.
Indefinite-lived  intangible  assets. The  Company’s  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  consist  primarily  of  development  rights  in  Detroit,  trademarks  of
which $210 million related to the Mandalay Resort Group trademarks and trade names, and $83 million related to the Borgata trade name, and license rights.
MGM Grand Paradise gaming subconcession. Pursuant to the agreement dated June 19, 2004 between MGM Grand Paradise and Sociedade de Jogos de
Macau, S.A., a gaming subconcession was acquired by MGM Grand Paradise for the right to operate casino games of chance and other casino games for a period of
15 years commencing on April 20, 2005. The Company cannot provide any assurance that the gaming subconcession will be extended beyond the original terms of
the  agreement;  however,  management  believes  that  the  gaming  subconcession  will  be  extended,  given  that  the  Cotai  land  concession  agreement  with  the
government extends significantly beyond the gaming subconcession. As such, the Company is amortizing the gaming subconcession intangible asset on a straight-
line basis over the term of the Cotai land concession, ending in January 2038.  
MGM Macau land concession. MGM Grand Paradise entered into a contract with the Macau government to use the land under MGM Macau commencing
from April 6, 2006. The land use right has an initial term through April 6, 2031, subject to renewal for additional periods. The land concession intangible asset is
amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining initial contractual term.
84

 
C ustomer lists. The Company recognized an intangible asset related to MGM China’s customer lists, which was amortized on an accelerated basis ove r its
estimated useful life of five years. The MGM China customer list intangible asset became fully amortized in 2016. The Company recognized an intangible asset
related to the Borgata customer list, which is amortized on an accelerated basis over its est imated useful life of two years and five months.
Gaming licenses. The Company was granted a license to operate a casino in Maryland. The consideration paid to the State of Maryland for the license fee
of $22 million is considered a finite-lived intangible asset that is amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of 15 years, beginning in December 2016, when
the casino started operations. The Company was granted a license to operate a casino in Massachusetts. The consideration paid to the State of Massachusetts for the
license fee of $85 million is considered a finite-lived intangible asset that will be amortized over a period of 15 years beginning upon the opening of the casino
resort.
Other. The Company’s other finite–lived intangible assets consist primarily of lease acquisition costs amortized over the life of the related leases, and
certain license rights amortized over their contractual life.  
Total amortization expense related to intangible assets was $173 million, $180 million and $199 million for 2017, 2016, and 2015, respectively. Estimated
future amortization is as follows:
 
 
   
 
Years ending December 31,
 
(In thousands)
 
2018
 $
176,432 
2019
  
176,755 
2020
  
176,755 
2021
  
176,755 
2022
  
176,755 
Thereafter
  
2,584,388 
 
 $
3,467,840
 
 
NOTE 9 — OTHER ACCRUED LIABILITIES
 
Other accrued liabilities consisted of the following:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Payroll and related
 $
483,101  $
483,194 
Advance deposits and ticket sales
  
149,698   
148,707 
Casino outstanding chip liability
  
597,753   
227,538 
Casino front money deposits
  
304,652   
214,727 
MGM China gaming promoter commissions
  
23,651   
31,445 
Other gaming related accruals
  
131,109   
119,446 
Taxes, other than income taxes
  
170,639   
166,916 
MGP Dividend
  
29,777   
22,281 
Other
  
178,340   
180,272 
 
 $
2,068,720  $
1,594,526
 
 
 
85

 
NOTE 10 — LONG-TERM DEBT
 
Long-term debt consisted of the following:  
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Senior credit facility
 $
372,500 
 $
250,000 
Operating Partnership senior credit facility
  
2,091,375 
  
2,133,250 
MGM China credit facility
  
2,301,584 
  
1,933,313 
MGM National Harbor credit facility
  
— 
  
450,000 
$475 million 11.375% senior notes, due 2018
  
— 
  
475,000 
$850 million 8.625% senior notes, due 2019
  
850,000 
  
850,000 
$500 million 5.25% senior notes, due 2020
  
500,000 
  
500,000 
$1,000 million 6.75% senior notes, due 2020
  
1,000,000 
  
1,000,000 
$1,250 million 6.625% senior notes, due 2021
  
1,250,000 
  
1,250,000 
$1,000 million 7.75% senior notes, due 2022
  
1,000,000 
  
1,000,000 
$1,250 million 6% senior notes, due 2023
  
1,250,000 
  
1,250,000 
$1,050 million 5.625% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2024
  
1,050,000 
  
1,050,000 
$500 million 4.50% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2026
  
500,000 
  
500,000 
$500 million 4.625% senior notes, due 2026
  
500,000 
  
500,000 
$350 million 4.50% Operating Partnership senior notes, due 2028
  
350,000 
  
— 
$0.6 million 7% debentures, due 2036
  
552 
  
552 
$2.3 million 6.7% debentures, due 2096
  
2,265 
  
2,265 
 
  
13,018,276 
  
13,144,380 
Less: Premiums, discounts, and unamortized debt issuance costs, net
  
(109,182)
  
(156,785)
 
  
12,909,094 
  
12,987,595 
Less: Current portion
  
(158,042)
  
(8,375)
 
 $
12,751,052 
 $
12,979,220
 
 
Debt due within one year of the December 31, 2017 balance sheet was classified as long-term as the Company had both the intent and ability to refinance
current  maturities  on  a  long-term  basis  under  its  revolving  senior  credit  facilities,  with  the  exception  that  $158  million  related  to  MGM  China’s  term  loan
amortization payments in excess of available borrowings under the MGM China revolving credit facility were classified as current. Debt due within one year of the
December 31, 2016 balance sheet was classified as long-term as the Company had both the intent and ability to refinance current maturities on a long-term basis
under  its  revolving  senior  credit  facilities,  with  the  exception  that  $8  million  of  MGP’s  quarterly  amortization  payments  under  its  senior  credit  facility  were
classified as current because MGP used cash to make such amortization payments in January 2017.
 
Interest expense, net consisted of the following:
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Total interest incurred
$
779,855  
$
814,731  
$
862,377 
Interest capitalized
 
(111,110)  
 
(119,958)  
 
(64,798)
 
$
668,745  
$
694,773  
$
797,579
 
 
Senior credit facility. At December 31,  2017, the Company’s senior credit facility consisted of a $238 million term loan A facility and a $1.25 billion
revolving facility. The term loan A facility and the revolving facility bear interest determined by reference to a total net leverage ratio pricing grid which results in
an interest rate of LIBOR plus 1.75% to 2.75%. Both the term loan A facility and the  revolving  facility will mature in April 2021. The term loan A facility is
subject to amortization of principal in equal quarterly installments, with 5.0% of the initial aggregate principal amount of the term loan A facility to be payable
each year. The Company permanently repaid $13 million of the term loan A facility for the year ended December 31, 2017 in accordance with the scheduled
amortization. At December 31, 2017, $135 million was drawn on the revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2017, the interest rate on the term loan A facility
was 3.82% and the interest rate on the revolving credit facility was 3.74%. For the year ended December 31, 2016, the Company incurred a loss on early retirement
of its prior credit facility of approximately $28 million recorded in “Other, net” in the consolidated statements of operations.
86

 
 
The senior credit facility contains representations and warranties, customary events of default, and positive, negative and financial covenants, including that
the Company maintain compliance with a maximum total net leverage ratio, a maximum first lien net leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. The
Company was in compliance with its credit facility covenants at December 31, 2017.
 
The senior credit facility is secured by (i) a mortgage on the real properties comprising the MGM Grand Las Vegas and the Bellagio, (ii) a pledge of
substantially all existing and future personal property of the subsidiaries of the Company that own the MGM Grand Las Vegas and the Bellagio; and (iii) a pledge
of the equity or limited liability company interests of the entities that own MGM Grand Las Vegas and the Bellagio.
 
Mandatory prepayments of the credit facilities will be required upon the occurrence of certain events, including sales of certain assets, casualty events and
the incurrence of certain additional indebtedness, subject to certain exceptions and reinvestment rights.
 
Operating Partnership senior credit facility. At December 31, 2017, the Operating Partnership’s senior secured credit facility consisted of a $274 million
term loan A facility, a $1.82 billion term loan B facility, and a $600 million revolving credit facility. The revolving credit facility and term loan A facility bear
interest determined by reference to a total net leverage ratio pricing grid which results in an interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.25% to 2.75%. Prior to February 2017,
the term loan B facility bore interest at LIBOR plus 2.75% with a LIBOR floor of 0.75%. In February 2017, the Operating Partnership received a reduction of its
term loan B interest rate to LIBOR plus 2.50%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.75% upon achieving a minimum corporate family rating of Ba3/BB-. On May 1, 2017, the
Operating Partnership repriced its term loan B interest rate to LIBOR plus 2.25% with a LIBOR floor of 0%. All other principal provisions of the existing credit
facility remain unchanged. The revolving credit facility and the term loan A facility will mature in April 2021 and the term loan B facility will mature in April
2023.
 
The term loan facilities are subject to amortization of principal in equal quarterly installments, with 5.0% of the initial aggregate principal amount of the
term loan A facility and 1.0% of the initial aggregate principal amount of the term loan B facility to be payable each year. The Operating Partnership permanently
repaid $19 million of the term loan A facility and $23 million of the term loan B facility for the year ended December 31, 2017, in accordance with the scheduled
amortization. At December 31, 2017, the interest rate on the term loan A facility was 4.32% and the interest rate on the term loan B facility was 3.82%. No amounts
have been drawn on the revolving credit facility.
 
The  Operating  Partnership  credit  facility  contains  customary  representations  and  warranties,  events  of  default,  and  positive,  negative  and  financial
covenants, including that the Operating Partnership maintain compliance with a maximum senior secured net debt to adjusted total assets ratio, maximum total net
debt to adjusted assets ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. The Operating Partnership was in compliance with its credit facility covenants at December 31,
2017. 
 
The Operating Partnership senior credit facility is guaranteed by each of the Operating Partnership’s existing and subsequently acquired direct and indirect
wholly owned material domestic restricted subsidiaries, and secured by a first priority lien security interest on substantially all of the Operating Partnership’s and
such restricted subsidiaries’ material assets, including mortgages on its real estate, subject to customary exclusions, other than that of MGM National Harbor.
 
The Operating Partnership is party to interest rate swaps to mitigate the interest rate risk inherent in its senior secured term loan B facility. As of December
31, 2017, the Operating Partnership pays a weighted average fixed rate of 1.844% on total notional amount of $1.2 billion and the variable rate received resets
monthly  to  the  one-month  LIBOR  with  no  minimum  floor.  Net  unrealized  gain  on  the  interest  rate  swaps  was  $11  million  as  of  December  31,  2017.  As  of
December 31, 2016 the Operating Partnership had interest rate swaps with a notional amount of $500 million outstanding with a weighted average fixed rate of
1.825% and a net unrealized gain of $2 million.
 
MGM China credit facility. At December 31, 2017, the MGM China credit facility consisted of $1.47 billion of term loans and a $1.45 billion revolving
credit facility, which bear interest at a fluctuating rate per annum based on HIBOR plus a margin that ranges between 1.375% and 2.5% based on MGM China’s
leverage ratio. The MGM China credit facility is scheduled to mature in April 2019 with the term loan facilities subject to amortization of principal in quarterly
installments as a percentage of the original principal amount of 5% due in January 2018, 15% due in each of the subsequent quarters of 2018 and the first quarter of
2019, and the balance due at maturity in April 2019. The Company permanently  repaid $77 million of term  loans for the year ended December 31, 2017 in
accordance with the scheduled amortization. The MGM China credit facility is secured by MGM Grand Paradise’s interest in the Cotai land use right, and MGM
China, MGM Grand Paradise and their guarantor subsidiaries have granted a security interest in substantially all of their assets to secure the facility. At December
31, 2017, $832 million was drawn on the revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2017, the weighted average interest rate on the term loans was 3.71% and the
weighted average interest rate on the revolving credit facility was 3.57%.
87

 
The  MGM  China  credit  facility  contains  customary  representations  and  warr anties,  events  of  default,  and  positive,  negative  and  financial  covenants,
including that MGM China maintains compliance with a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. In February 2017 , the MGM China credit
facility was amended to inc rease the maximum total leverage ratio to 6.00 to 1.00 through December 31, 2017, declining to 5.50 to 1.00 at March 31, 2018, 5.00 to
1.00 at June 30, 2018, 4.50 to 1.00 at September 30, 2018 and thereafter. MGM China was in compliance with its credit fac ility covenants at December 31, 2017.
MGM China is in the process of amending its credit facility. The proposed amended facility extends the maturity date, extends the timing of and reduces the
amount of scheduled amortization payments, and increases the maximum leverage ratio.  
MGM National Harbor credit agreement. In October 2017, the revolving credit facility was repaid and terminated by the Company and the $425 million
in  outstanding  term  loans  were  assumed,  and  immediately  repaid,  by  a  subsidiary  of  MGP  in  conjunction  with  the  MGM  National  Harbor  transaction.  The
Company incurred a $14 million loss on the early retirement of debt related to the MGM National Harbor credit facility recorded in “Other, net” in the consolidated
statements of operations.
 
Senior Notes. In July 2017, the Company redeemed for cash all $475 million principal amount of its outstanding 11.375% senior notes due 2018. The
Company incurred a $30 million loss on the early retirement of such notes recorded in “Other, net” in the consolidated statements of operations.
 
In August 2016, the Company issued $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior notes due 2026 for net proceeds of $493 million. T he
Company used the net proceeds, together with cash on hand, to redeem the $743 million outstanding aggregate principal amount of its 7.625% senior notes due
2017, in September 2016. The Company incurred a loss on early retirement of the 7.625% senior notes of approximately $16 million recorded in “Other, net” in the
consolidated statements of operations.
 
In connection with the closing of MGP’s IPO, on May 25, 2016 (the “Redemption Date”) the Company redeemed for cash all $1.23 billion aggregate
principal amount of its outstanding 7.5% senior notes due 2016 and 10% senior notes due 2016 in accordance with the terms of the applicable indenture. The
Company incurred a loss on early retirement of such notes of approximately $22 million recorded in “Other, net” in the consolidated statements of operations.
 
Operating Partnership senior notes. In September 2017, the Operating Partnership issued $350 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.50% senior
notes due 2028 for net proceeds of $346 million.
 
I n August 2016, the Operating Partnership issued $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.5% senior notes due 2026 for net proceeds of $492
million.
 
I n April 2016, a subsidiary of the Operating Partnership issued $1.05 billion in aggregate principal amount of 5.625% senior notes due 2024 and on MGP’s
IPO date, the Operating Partnership entered into a supplemental indenture through which it assumed the obligations under the notes from such subsidiary (which
merged into the Operating Partnership on such date) .  
 
Each  series  of  the  Operating  Partnership's  senior  notes  are  fully  and  unconditionally  guaranteed,  jointly  and  severally,  on  a  senior  basis  by  all  of  the
Operating Partnership’s subsidiaries that guarantee the Operating Partnership’s credit facilities, other than MGP Finance Co-Issuer, Inc., which is a co-issuer of the
senior notes. The Operating Partnership may redeem all or part of the senior notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the senior notes
plus, to the extent the Operating Partnership is redeeming senior notes prior to the date that is three months prior to their maturity date, an applicable make whole
premium, plus, in each case, accrued and unpaid interest. The indentures governing the senior notes contain customary covenants and events of default. These
covenants are subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications set forth in the applicable indentures governing the senior notes, including, with
respect to the restricted payments covenants, the ability to make unlimited restricted payments to maintain the REIT status of MGP.
 
Bridge Facilities. In connection with the Borgata transaction in August 2016, the Company borrowed $545 million under certain bridge facilities,  the
proceeds of which were used to repay existing Borgata debt. The bridge facilities were subsequently contributed to the Operating Partnership. The Operating
Partnership immediately repaid the bridge facilities with a combination of cash on hand and a draw down on its revolving credit facility, which it subsequently
refinanced with proceeds from its offering of its 4.5% senior notes due 2026.
 
88

 
In connection  with the master contribution  agreement  and related transactions in April 2016, the Company borrowed $4.0 billion under certain bridge
facilities, the proceeds of which were used to repay its outstanding obligations under its prior senior credit facility and were used to repay its 7.5% senior notes due
2016 and its 10% senior notes due 2016 on the Redemption Date. The bridge facilities were subsequently assumed by the Operating Partnership pursuant to the
master  contribution  agreement.  The  Operating  Partnership  repaid  the  bridge  facilities  with  a  combination of  proceeds  from  financing  its  transactions  and  the
proceeds from the IPO.
 
Maturities of long-term debt. The maturities of the principal amount of the Company’s long-term debt as of December 31, 2017 are as follows:
 
Years ending December 31,
  
 
(In thousands)
 
2018
 
  $
819,572 
2019
 
   
2,424,013 
2020
 
   
1,546,000 
2021
 
   
1,832,250 
2022
 
 
  
1,018,500 
Thereafter
 
 
  
5,377,941 
 
 
  $
13,018,276 
 
  
   
 
Fair value of long-term debt. The estimated fair value of the Company’s long-term debt was $13.6 billion and $13.9 billion at December 31, 2017 and
2016, respectively. Fair value was estimated using quoted market prices for the Company’s senior notes and senior credit facilities.
 
NOTE 11 — INCOME TAXES
 
The  Company  recognizes  deferred  income  tax  assets,  net  of  applicable  reserves,  related  to  net  operating  losses,  tax  credit  carryforwards  and  certain
temporary differences. The Company recognizes future tax benefits to the extent that realization of such benefit is more likely than not. Otherwise, a valuation
allowance is applied.
 
Income (loss) before income taxes for domestic and foreign operations consisted of the following:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic operations
 $
750,055  $
985,683  $
155,296 
Foreign operations
  
213,700   
273,494   
(1,201,539)
 
 $
963,755  $
1,259,177  $
(1,046,243)
 
89

 
The benefit (provision) for income taxes attributable to income (loss) before income taxes is as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
Federal:
 
(In thousands)
 
Current
 $
(120,980)  $
(97,502)  $
(13,540)
Deferred (excluding separate components)
  
203,674   
(125,181)   
280,220 
Deferred – change in enacted rates
  
994,249   
—   
— 
Deferred – valuation allowance
  
101,443   
222,688   
(247,867)
Other noncurrent
  
1,356   
3,608   
(590)
Benefit for federal income taxes
  
1,179,742   
3,613   
18,223 
State:
  
    
    
  
Current
  
(6,798)   
4,069   
(1,840)
Deferred (excluding separate components)
  
(25,233)   
2,313   
(2,768)
Deferred – operating loss carryforward
  
44,242   
(16,024)   
(2,263)
Deferred – valuation allowance
  
(40,078)   
23,058   
(4,465)
Other noncurrent
  
(3,875)   
(2,901)   
7,153 
Benefit (provision) for state income taxes
  
(31,742)   
10,515   
(4,183)
Foreign:
  
    
    
  
Current
  
(470)   
(2,015)   
(2,127)
Deferred (excluding separate components)
  
(40,653)   
(34,425)   
(5,832)
Deferred – operating loss carryforward
  
4,688   
2,988   
10,472 
Deferred – valuation allowance
  
21,098   
(2,975)   
(9,959)
Provision for foreign income taxes
  
(15,337)   
(36,427)   
(7,446)
 
 $
1,132,663  $
(22,299)  $
6,594
 
 
A reconciliation of the federal income tax statutory rate and the Company’s effective tax rate is as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
  
2015
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
Federal income tax statutory rate
  
35.0%   
35.0%  
35.0%
Change in enacted rates
  
(103.1)
  
—   
— 
Foreign tax credit
  
(70.1)
  
(10.5)   
63.7 
Repatriation of foreign earnings
  
35.3 
  
5.2   
(32.0)
Foreign goodwill impairment
  
— 
  
—   
(49.1)
Federal valuation allowance
  
(10.5)
  
(17.7)   
(23.7)
State taxes, net
  
2.4 
  
—   
— 
Stock-based compensation
  
(2.1)
  
—   
— 
Gain on Borgata transaction
  
— 
  
(5.4)   
— 
Foreign jurisdiction income/losses taxed at other than 35%
  
(4.9)
  
(3.8)   
6.9 
Permanent and other items
  
0.5 
  
(1.0)   
(0.2)
 
  
(117.5)%  
1.8%  
0.6%
 
90

 
The major tax-effected components of the Company’s net deferred tax liability are as follows:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
Deferred tax assets – federal and state:
 
(In thousands)
 
Bad debt reserve
 $
25,432  $
40,330 
Deferred compensation
  
5,232   
6,881 
Net operating loss carryforward
  
46,702   
9,669 
Accruals, reserves and other
  
85,626   
168,712 
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates
  
84,006   
152,092 
Stock-based compensation
  
24,390   
33,311 
Tax credits
  
3,045,138   
2,824,312 
 
  
3,316,526   
3,235,307 
Less: Valuation allowance
  
(2,462,272)   
(2,510,140)
 
  
854,254   
725,167 
Deferred tax assets – foreign:
  
    
  
Bad debt reserve
  
821   
895 
Net operating loss carryforward
  
76,909   
72,788 
Accruals, reserves and other
  
—   
3,945 
Stock-based compensation
  
4,423   
3,830 
 
  
82,153   
81,458 
Less: Valuation allowance
  
(51,466)   
(73,134)
 
  
30,687   
8,324 
Total deferred tax assets
 $
884,941  $
733,491 
Deferred tax liabilities – federal and state:
  
    
  
Property and equipment
 $
(1,670,704)  $
(2,657,230)
Long-term debt
  
(48,809)   
(146,018)
Intangibles
  
(79,167)   
(124,729)
 
  
(1,798,680)   
(2,927,977)
Deferred tax liabilities – foreign:
  
    
  
Accruals, reserves and other
  
(26,657)   
— 
Property and equipment
  
(16,277)   
(4,691)
Intangibles
  
(348,162)   
(352,051)
 
  
(391,096)   
(356,742)
Total deferred tax liability
 $
(2,189,776)  $
(3,284,719)
Net deferred tax liability
 $
(1,304,835)  $
(2,551,228)
 
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax
Act”). The Tax Act makes broad and complex changes to the U.S. tax code that will generally be applicable to tax years beginning after December 31, 2017,
including, but not limited to, (1) reducing the U.S. federal corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent; (2) requiring companies to pay a one-time transition tax
on certain unrepatriated earnings of foreign subsidiaries; (3) generally eliminating U.S. federal income taxes on dividends from foreign subsidiaries; (4) adding a
new provision designed to tax global intangible low-taxed income (GILTI), which allows for the possibility of using foreign tax credits (FTCs) and a deduction of
up to 50 percent to offset the income tax liability (subject to some limitations); (5) creating a new limitation on deductible interest expense; (6) imposing additional
limitations on the deductibility of executive compensation and certain employee fringe benefits; and (7) increasing bonus depreciation to allow for full expensing of
qualified property.
 
The SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (SAB 118), which provides guidance on accounting for the tax effects of the Tax Act. SAB 118
provides a measurement period that should not extend beyond one year from the Tax Act enactment date for companies to complete the accounting under ASC 740.
In accordance with SAB 118, a company must reflect the income tax effects of those aspects of the Act for which the accounting under ASC 740 is complete. To
the extent that a company’s accounting for certain income tax effects of the Tax Act is incomplete but it is able to determine a reasonable estimate, it must record a
provisional estimate in the financial statements. If a company cannot determine a provisional estimate to be included in the financial statements, it should continue
to apply ASC 740 on the basis of the provisions of the tax laws that were in effect immediately before the enactment of the Tax Act.  
 
91

 
In connection with its initial analysis of the impact of the Tax Act, the Company’s accounting for certain elements of the Tax Act is incomplete. However,
the Company was able to make reasonable estimates of certain effects and, therefore, recorded a provisional discrete non-cash net tax benefit of $1.4 billion in the
period ended December 31, 2017, consisting of a benefit of $994 million for the corporate rate reduction and a benefit of $438 million from its provisional re-a
ssessment of the Tax Act’s impact on the valuation allowance on its foreign tax credit (“FTC”) carryovers. The Company did not provide tax expense for the
transition tax on its unrepatriated earnings, which totaled $ 669 million without regard to actual 201 7 distributions of $62 million, because such earnings are fully
offset by FTCs. Furthermore, the Company has made an accounting policy decision to treat taxes due, if any, on future inclusions in U.S. taxable income under the
GILTI provisions as a current period expense when incurred. Accordingly, the Company has not provided a deferred tax liability for any GILTI taxes that may
result in future periods.
 
The  Company’s  accounting  for  the  impact  of  the  Tax  Act  is  incomplete.  The  Company  was  able  to  make  a  reasonable  estimate  of  the  impact  on  the
valuation allowance against its FTC carryovers and provided the provisional adjustment described above. This amount may be adjusted during the measurement
period as the Company gathers additional information and evaluates any future regulatory or other guidance on items that may impact the valuation allowance,
including, but not limited to, the computations of foreign derived intangible income and allocations of interest and other expenses to active foreign source income.
In addition, the Company was not able to make reasonable estimates and provided no provisional amounts for the potential impact, if any, of indirect costs of
providing certain employee fringe benefits that may be subject to limitation under the Tax Act.  
 
The Company has recorded a provisional valuation allowance of $2.4 billion on its FTC carryover of $3.0 billion as of December 31, 2017 based upon its
initial assessment of future realization under the Tax Act, resulting in an FTC net deferred tax asset of $618 million. The FTCs are attributable to the Macau Special
Gaming Tax, which is 35% of gross gaming revenue in Macau. Because MGM Grand Paradise is presently exempt from the Macau 12% complementary tax on
gaming profits, the Company believes that payment of the Macau Special Gaming Tax qualifies as a tax paid in lieu of an income tax that is creditable against U.S.
taxes. While the Company generally does not expect to generate new FTC carryovers under the Tax Act, it will be able to utilize its existing FTC carryovers to the
extent that it has active foreign source income during the 10-year FTC carryforward period. Such foreign source income includes the recapture, to the extent of U.S.
taxable income, of overall domestic losses that totaled $2.3 billion at December 31, 2017. The Company relies on future U.S. source operating income in assessing
utilization of the overall domestic losses and, by extension, future FTC realization during the 10-year FTC carryover period. The FTC carryovers will expire if not
utilized as follows: $752 million in 2022; $976 million in 2023; $787 million in 2024; $331 million in 2025; and $199 million in 2027.
 
The Company’s assessment of the realization of its FTC deferred tax asset is based on available evidence, including assumptions concerning future U.S.
operating profits and its initial interpretations of the Tax Act in the absence of regulatory or other clarifying guidance. As a result, significant judgment is required
in assessing the possible need for a valuation allowance and changes to such assumptions could result in a material change in the valuation allowance with a
corresponding impact on the provision for income taxes in the period including such change.  
 
Income generated from gaming operations of MGM Grand Paradise, which is owned by MGM China, is exempted from Macau’s 12% complementary tax,
pursuant to approval from the Macau government. Absent this exemption, “Net income attributable to MGM Resorts International” would have decreased by $23
million and $25 million in 2017 and 2016, respectively, and diluted earnings per share would have decreased by $0.04 in each year.
 
On September 7, 2016, MGM Grand Paradise was granted an additional extension of the complementary tax exemption through March 31, 2020, concurrent
with the end of the term of its current gaming subconcession. A competitor of MGM Grand Paradise subsequently received an additional extension of its exemption
through March 31, 2020, which also runs concurrent with the end of the term of its current gaming concession. Based upon these developments and the uncertainty
concerning taxation after the concession renewal process, the Company has assumed that MGM Grand Paradise will pay the Macau 12% complementary tax on
gaming profits for all periods beyond March 31, 2020 and has factored that assumption into the measurement of Macau deferred tax assets and liabilities.
 
Non-gaming  operations  remain  subject  to  the  Macau  complementary  tax.  MGM  Grand  Paradise  had  at  December  31,  2017  a  complementary  tax  net
operating loss carryforward of $625 million resulting from non-gaming operations that will expire if not utilized against non-gaming income in years 2018 through
2020.
 
MGM Grand Paradise’s exemption from the Macau 12% complementary tax on gaming profits does not apply to dividend distributions of such profits to
MGM China. However, MGM Grand Paradise has had an agreement with the Macau government to settle the 12% complementary tax that would otherwise be due
by its shareholder, MGM China, on distributions of its gaming profits by paying a flat annual payment (“annual fee arrangement”) regardless of the amount of
distributable dividends. Such annual fee arrangement was effective for distributions of profits earned through December 31, 2016. MGM China was not subject to
the complementary tax on distributions covered by the annual fee arrangement, which required annual payments of $2 million through
92

 
2016.  Since  the  earnings  for  2017  were  not  covered  by  an  annual  fee  arrangement  as  of  December  31,  2017,  the Company  provided  deferred  taxes  on  such
earnings, which total $41 million as of December 31, 2017. Subsequent to year-end, on February 27, 2018, MGM Grand Paradise was notified of the terms of an
extension of the annual fee arrangement, which covers the d istributions of profits earned for the period of January 1, 2017 through March 31, 2020. It will require
annual payments of approximately $1 million for 2017 through 2019 and a payment of approximately $300,000 for the first quarter 2020. When the extensio n is
executed, the Company will reverse the deferred taxes previously recorded on 2017 earnings, which is anticipated to be within the first quarter 2018, resulting in a
reduction in provision for income taxes in such period that will be partially offset b y the 2017 annual payment amount.
 
The Company has net operating losses in certain of the states in which it operates that total $708 million as of December 31, 2017, which equates to
deferred tax assets of $47 million after federal tax effect and before valuation allowance. These net operating loss carryforwards will expire if not utilized by 2021
through  2037.  The  Company  has  provided  a  valuation  allowance  of  $36  million  on  certain  of  its  state  deferred  tax  assets,  including  the  net  operating  losses
described above.
 
In addition, there is a valuation allowance of $49 million on certain Macau deferred tax assets, and a valuation allowance of $2 million on Hong Kong net
operating losses because the Company believes these assets do not meet the “more likely than not” criteria for recognition.
 
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amounts of gross unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Gross unrecognized tax benefits at January 1
 $
14,026  $
13,724  $
31,143 
Gross decreases - prior period tax positions
  
(2,280)   
(3,375)   
(14,158)
Gross increases - current period tax positions
  
6,842   
3,677   
1,222 
Settlements with taxing authorities
  
—   
—   
(2,408)
Lapse in Statutes of Limitations
  
—   
—   
(2,075)
Gross unrecognized tax benefits at December 31
 $
18,588  $
14,026  $
13,724
 
 
The total amount of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate was $11 million and $9 million at December 31, 2017
and 2016, respectively.
 
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense, which were not material as of December 31,
2017, 2016 or 2015. The Company does not anticipate that the total amounts of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2017 will change materially within the
next twelve months.
 
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various state and local jurisdictions, and foreign jurisdictions, although the income
taxes paid in foreign jurisdictions are not material. As of December 31, 2017, the IRS can no longer assess tax with respect to years ended prior to 2014; however
the IRS may adjust NOLs generated in such years that were utilized in 2014. The Company’s 2014 U.S. consolidated federal income tax return and the 2014 U.S.
income tax return of CityCenter Holdings, LLC, an unconsolidated affiliate treated as a partnership for income tax purposes are currently under examination by the
IRS. During 2015, the Company received final approval from the Joint Committee on Taxation of the results of the IRS examination of the 2009 tax year and
agreed to all IRS adjustments to the 2010 and 2011 tax years of CityCenter Holdings, LLC. The Company received a refund of $16 million of taxes and associated
interest in connection with the settlement of these examinations, which are considered settled for financial accounting purposes.
 
As of December 31, 2017, other than adjustments resulting from the federal income tax audits discussed above, the various state and local tax jurisdictions
in which the Company files tax returns can no longer assess tax with respect to years ended prior to 2013. However, such jurisdictions may adjust NOLs generated
in such years that are utilized in subsequent years. Subsequent to year-end, the state of Mississippi informed the Company that it would be opening an audit of the
2014 through 2016 Mississippi tax returns filed by the Company. During 2015, the state of New Jersey completed its examination of Marina District Development
Holding Company, LLC for the 2003 through 2009 tax years. All adjustments were agreed to by the members of Marina District Development Holding Company,
LLC and the examination is now considered settled for financial accounting purposes. The Company made a $1 million payment of tax and associated interest as a
result of this settlement. No other state or local income tax returns are currently under examination.
 
 
93

 
NOTE 12 – COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
 
Leases. The Company leases real estate and various equipment under operating and, to a lesser extent, capital lease arrangements. Certain real estate leases
provide for escalation of rent based upon a specified price index and/or based upon periodic appraisals.
 
At December 31, 2017, the Company was obligated under non-cancellable operating leases to make future minimum lease payments as follows:
 
Years ending December 31,
 
(In thousands)
 
2018
 $
39,429 
2019
  
35,525 
2020
  
33,754 
2021
  
35,293 
2022
  
32,458 
Thereafter
  
1,360,206 
Total minimum lease payments
 $
1,536,665
 
 
The  table  above  excludes  the  Company’s  future  lease  obligations  to  a  subsidiary  of  the  Operating  Partnership  pursuant  to  the  master  lease  agreement
discussed in Note 18 as these lease obligations are eliminated in consolidation. Rental expense for operating leases was $92 million, $80 million and $74 million
for 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively, which included short-term rentals charged to rent expense as well as $7 million in each of 2017, 2016, 2015 related to the
amortization of the Cotai land concession. The Company accounts for the Cotai land concession contract as an operating lease for which the required upfront
payments are amortized over the initial 25-year contract term. Amortization relating to the Cotai land concession is included in “Preopening and start-up expenses”
prior to its opening.
 
In August 2016, in connection with the Borgata transaction, the Company has assumed the liability of a series of ground leases for a total of approximately
11 acres of land on which the Borgata employee parking garage, public space expansion, rooms expansion, and modified surface parking lot reside. The Company
recorded an unfavorable lease liability for the excess contractual lease obligations over the market value of the leases, which will be amortized on a straight-line
basis over the term of the lease contracts through December 2070. The remaining balance of the unfavorable lease liability was $47 million and $48 million as of
December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. The ground lease is accounted for as an operating lease with rental expense of $6 million and $2 million for the years
ending December 31, 2017 and December 31, 2016, respectively.
 
In April 2013, the Company entered into a ground lease agreement for an approximate 23 acre parcel of land in connection with the MGM National Harbor
project. The ground lease has an initial term of 25 years and the right to extend for up to 13 additional six year periods with the first 7 of those additional periods
considered to be reasonably assured. The Company therefore amortizes the lease on a straight line basis over a 67 year term. The ground lease is accounted for as
an operating lease with rental expense of $16 million, $16 million and $19 million recorded for the years ending December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Rent recognized for the ground lease was recorded in "Preopening and start-up expenses" prior to its opening in December 2016 .
 
Borgata property tax reimbursement agreement. On February 15, 2017, Borgata, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey and
Atlantic City entered into an agreement wherein Borgata was to be reimbursed $72 million as settlement for property tax refunds in satisfaction of New Jersey Tax
Court and Superior Court judgments totaling approximately $106 million, plus interest for the 2009-2012 tax years and the settlement of pending tax appeals for the
tax years 2013-2015. Those pending tax appeals could potentially have resulted in Borgata being awarded additional refunds due of approximately $65 million. In
June 2017, Atlantic City and the State of New Jersey issued bonds and used the proceeds to pay the $72 million settlement in full. The Company recorded the
amounts received pursuant to the reimbursement agreement as an offset to general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. As
required by the purchase and sale agreement to acquire Borgata in August 2016, the Company paid Boyd Gaming half of the settlement amount received by the
Company,  net  of  fees  and  expenses.  Amounts  paid  to  Boyd  Gaming  were  recorded  in  general  and  administrative  expenses  in  the  consolidated  statements  of
operations.
 
NV Energy. In July 2016, the Company filed its notice to exit the fully bundled sales system of NV Energy and now purchases energy, capacity, and/or
ancillary  services  from  a  provider  other  than  NV  Energy.  The  Company  paid  an  upfront  impact  payment  of  $83  million,  including  $14  million  related  to
CityCenter, in September 2016. Under the terms of the exit agreement, the Company and CityCenter were required to make ongoing payments to NV Energy for
non-bypassable rate charges, which primarily relate to each entity’s share of NV Energy’s portfolio of renewable energy contracts which extended through 2040
and each entity’s share of the costs of decommissioning and remediation of coal-fired power plants in Nevada. The Company’s initial estimate of its obligation
94

 
related to non-bypassable charges was $71 million. The expense recognized related to the upfront payment and the initial acc rual for the liability associated with
the non-bypassable charges was recorded within “NV Energy exit expense” in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December
31, 2016. Subsequent accretion of the liability and changes in estimates are recognized within general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of
operations. In the second quarter of 2017, the terms of the ongoing impact fee obligations were modified. Such modifications included a credit to be appli ed
against future non-bypassable rate charges and substantially shortened the period over which the Company and CityCenter are responsible for such charges, with an
end date in 2022. As such, the Company recognized a reduction in its liability for future c harges of $41 million with a corresponding credit to “NV Energy exit
expense”. Additionally, CityCenter recorded an $8 million reduction in liability and credit to expense. As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, the Company has
recorded an estimate of its remai ning liability on a discounted basis of $10 million and $8 million, respectively, in “Other accrued liabilities” and $23 million and
$63 million, respectively, in “Other long-term obligations.”
 
Grand  Paradise  Macau  deferred  cash  payment. On  September  1,  2016,  the  Company  purchased  188.1  million  common  shares  of  its  MGM  China
subsidiary from Grand Paradise Macau (“GPM”), an entity controlled by Ms. Ho, Pansy Catilina Chiu King (“Ms. Ho”). As part of the consideration for the
purchase, the Company agreed to pay GPM a deferred cash payment of $50 million, which will be paid in amounts equal to the ordinary dividends received on such
shares, with a final lump sum payment due on the fifth anniversary of the closing date of the transaction if any portion of the deferred cash payment remains unpaid
at that time. In 2017, the total amount paid under the deferred cash payment arrangement was $7 million. As of December 31, 2017, the Company recorded a
remaining liability on a discounted basis of $39 million in “Other long-term obligations.”
   
T-Mobile Arena senior credit facility. The Company is party to a repayment guarantee for the term loan B facility under the Las Vegas Arena Company’s
senior credit facility. As of December 31, 2017, the term loan B outstanding balance was $50 million. As of December 31, 2017, the Company does not believe it is
probable that it will need to perform on the guarantee.
 
Other  guarantees. The  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  are  party  to  various  guarantee  contracts  in  the  normal  course  of  business,  which  are  generally
supported by letters of credit issued by financial institutions. The Company’s senior credit facility limits the amount of letters of credit that can be issued to $250
million, MGP’s senior credit facility limits the amount to $75 million, and MGM China’s credit facility limits the amount to $100 million. At December 31, 2017,
$15 million in letters of credit were outstanding under the Company’s senior credit facility and $39 million in letters of credit were outstanding under MGM
China’s credit facility. No letters of credit were outstanding under the MGP senior credit facility at December 31, 2017. The amount of available borrowings under
each of the credit facilities is reduced by any outstanding letters of credit.
 
October 1 litigation. The Company and/or certain of its subsidiaries have been named as defendants in a number of lawsuits related to the October 1, 2017
shooting in Las Vegas. The matters involve in large degree the same legal and factual issues, in each case being filed on behalf of individuals who are seeking
damages for emotional distress, physical injury, medical expenses, economic damages and/or wrongful death based on assertions that the Company and/or certain
of its subsidiaries were negligent. Pending lawsuits were first filed in October 2017 and include actions filed by multiple individuals in the District Court of Clark
County, Nevada and in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, California. Some of the original actions have been voluntarily dismissed, and plaintiffs’ counsel
indicate they anticipate re-filing the lawsuits in similar form. Additional lawsuits related to this incident may be filed in the future.
 
The Company is currently unable to reliably predict the developments in, outcome of, and economic costs and other consequences of pending or future
litigation related to this matter. The Company will continue to investigate the factual and legal defenses, and evaluate these matters based on subsequent events,
new information and future circumstances. The Company intends to defend against these lawsuits and ultimately believes it should prevail, but litigation of this
type is inherently unpredictable. Although there are significant procedural, factual and legal issues to be resolved that could significantly affect the Company’s
belief as to the possibility of liability, the Company currently believes that it is reasonably possible that it could incur liability in connection with certain of these
lawsuits. The foregoing determination was made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, as codified in ASC 450-20, and is not an admission
of any liability on the part of the Company or any of its affiliates. Given that these cases are in the early stages and in light of the uncertainties surrounding them,
the Company does not currently possess sufficient information to determine a range of reasonably possible liability. In the event the Company incurs any liability,
the Company believes it is unlikely it would incur losses in connection with these claims in excess of its insurance coverage. In addition, the Company’s general
liability insurance coverage provides, as part of the contractual “duty to defend”, payment of legal fees and associated costs incurred to defend covered lawsuits
that are filed arising from the October 1, 2017 shooting in Las Vegas. Payment of such fees and costs is in addition to (and not limited by) the limits of the
insurance policies and does not erode the total liability coverage available. The insurance carriers have not expressed any reservation of rights or coverage defenses
that indicate they dispute coverage under the applicable policies.
 
95

 
Other litigation. The Company is a party to various other legal proceedings, most of which relate to routine matters incidental to its business. Management
does not believe that the out come of such proceedings will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
 
NOTE 13 — STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
     Noncontrolling interest
 
The following is a summary of net income attributable to MGM Resorts International and transfers to noncontrolling interest.
 
 
 
 
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
 
  
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts International
 
 
 $
1,960,286 
 $
1,101,440 
Transfers from/(to) to noncontrolling interest:
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
MGP formation transactions
 
 
  
— 
  
(150,414)
Borgata transaction
 
 
  
— 
  
(18,385)
MGP Class A share issuance
 
 
  
35,138 
  
— 
MGM National Harbor transaction
 
 
  
(12,497)
  
— 
MGM China transaction
 
 
  
— 
  
(45,554)
Other
 
 
  
(2,889)
  
— 
Net transfers from/(to) noncontrolling interest
 
 
  
19,752 
  
(214,353)
Change from net income attributable to MGM Resorts International and
transfers to noncontrolling interest
 
 
 $
1,980,038 
 $
887,087
 
     Noncontrolling interest ownership transactions
MGP formation transactions. In 2016, the Company adjusted the carrying value of the noncontrolling interests to reflect MGP’s Class A shareholders’
initial 26.7% ownership interest in the consolidated net assets of MGP related to MGP’s IPO and related transactions discussed in Note 1, with an offsetting
adjustment to capital in excess of par value. Subsequent to the MGP formation transactions, the Company indirectly owned 73.3% of partnership units in the
Operating Partnership.
Borgata transaction. In 2016, MGP acquired  Borgata’s real property from a subsidiary of the Company in exchange for MGP’s assumption of $545
million of indebtedness and the issuance of 27.4 million Operating Partnership units to a subsidiary of the Company. The Company adjusted the carrying value of
the noncontrolling interests for the change in noncontrolling interests ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, including assets and liabilities
transferred,  with  an  offsetting  adjustment  to  capital  in  excess  of  par  value.  Subsequent  to  the  Borgata  transaction,  the  Company  indirectly  owned  76.3%  of
partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGP Class A share issuance. In September 2017, MGP completed a public offering of 13,225,000 of its Class A shares, including 1,725,000 shares sold
pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option, at a public offering price of $30.60 per share for net proceeds of $388 million. The Company has adjusted the
carrying value of the noncontrolling interests as a result of MGP’s Class A share issuance to adjust for the change in noncontrolling interests ownership percentage
of the Operating Partnership's net assets, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to
MGP’s issuance of the incremental shares, the Company indirectly owned 72.3% of partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGM National Harbor transaction. In October 2017, MGP acquired the long-term leasehold interest and real property associated with MGM National
Harbor from a subsidiary of the Company in exchange for cash of $463 million, the assumption of $425 million of indebtedness, which was immediately repaid by
MGP on the closing date, and the issuance of 9.8 million Operating Partnership units to a subsidiary of the Company. The Company adjusted the carrying value of
noncontrolling interest to adjust for the change in noncontrolling interest ownership percentage of the Operating Partnership’s net assets, including assets and
liabilities transferred, with offsetting adjustments to capital in excess of par value and accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent to the MGM National
Harbor transaction, the Company indirectly owned 73.4% of the partnership units in the Operating Partnership.
MGM  China  transaction. In  September  2016,  the  Company  acquired  188.1  million  ordinary  shares  of  MGM  China  from  GPM.  As  a  result  of  the
transaction, the Company owns approximately 56% of MGM China’s outstanding common shares. Ms. Ho owned approximately 22.5% immediately following the
transaction. As consideration for the MGM China shares, the Company issued 7,060,492 shares of its common stock and paid $100 million to GPM. In addition,
the Company agreed to pay GPM a deferred cash payment of $50 million. See Note 12 for additional information regarding the deferred cash payment. The
Company adjusted the
96

 
carrying  value  of  the  noncontrolling  interest  and  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  to  reflect  the  change  in  MGM  China’s  noncontrolling  ownership
interest resulting from the tra nsaction. The difference between the fair value of the consideration paid and the aforementioned adjustments was recognized as a
reduction to capital in excess of par value.
 
Dividends
 
MGM Resorts International dividends. The Company paid, or will pay, the following dividends:
 
 
•
$68 million quarterly dividend, or $0.12 per share, to be paid on March 15, 2018 to holders of record as of March 9, 2018;
 
•
$62 million quarterly dividend in December 2017, or $0.11 per share; and
 
•
$63 million quarterly dividend in each of September, June, and March 2017, or $0.11 per share.
 
The  Company  intends  to  pay  a  quarterly  dividend  in  each  future  quarter  subject  to  the  Company’s  operating  results,  cash  requirements  and  financial
conditions, any applicable provisions of state law that may limit the amount of available funds, and compliance with covenants and financial ratios related to
existing or future agreements governing the indebtedness at the Company’s subsidiaries and any limitations in other agreements such subsidiaries may have with
third parties.
 
Stock repurchase program
 
MGM Resorts International stock repurchase program. In September 2017, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a $1.0 billion stock repurchase
program (the “Stock Repurchase Program”). Under the Stock Repurchase Program, the Company may repurchase shares from time to time in the open market or in
privately negotiated agreements. The timing, volume and nature of stock repurchases will be at the sole discretion of management, dependent on market conditions,
applicable securities laws, and other factors, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time.
 
In September 2017, the Company repurchased 10 million shares of its common stock at $32.75 per share for a total aggregate amount of $328 million.
Repurchased shares were retired. The remaining availability under the Stock Repurchase Program was approximately $672 million as of December 31, 2017.
 
 
NOTE 14 — STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
 
MGM  Resorts  2005  Omnibus  Incentive  Plan. The  Company’s  omnibus  incentive  plan,  as  amended  (the  “Omnibus  Plan”),  allows  it  to  grant  up  to
45  million  shares  or  share-based  awards,  such  as  stock  options,  stock  appreciation  rights  (“SARs”),  restricted  stock  units  (“RSUs”),  performance  share  units
(“PSUs”) and other stock-based awards to eligible directors, officers and employees of the Company and its subsidiaries.
 
As of December 31, 2017, the Company had an aggregate of approximately 21 million shares of common stock available for grant as share-based awards
under the Omnibus Plan. Additionally, as of December 31, 2017, the Company had approximately 9 million aggregate stock options and SARs outstanding and
approximately 6 million aggregate RSUs and PSUs outstanding, including deferred share units and dividend equivalent rights related to RSUs and PSUs.
 
Intrinsic value. The following table includes information related to the intrinsic value:
 
 
 
Year ended
 
 
 
 
December 31, 2017
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Share-based awards exercised and RSUs and PSUs vested
 
 $
100,264 
Stock options and SARs outstanding
 
  
112,604 
Stock options and SARs vested and expected to vest
 
  
111,284 
Stock options and SARs exercisable
 
  
78,865
 
 
As of December 31, 2017, there was a total of $127 million of unamortized compensation related to stock options, SARs, RSUs, and PSUs, which is
expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.1 years.
 
97

 
MGM Growth Properties 2016 Omnibus Incentive Plan and MGM China Share Option Plan. The Company’s subsidiaries, MGP and MGM China,
each adopted their own equity award plans for the issuance of share-based awards to each subsidiary’s eligible recipients. As of December 31, 2017, the MGP
Omnibus Plan had approximately 244,000 aggregate RSUs and PSUs outstanding, including deferred share units and dividend equivalent rights related to RSUs
and PSUs. As of December 31, 2017, MGM China had approximately 77 millio n stock options outstanding.
 
Recognition of compensation cost. Compensation cost was recognized as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
Compensation cost:
 
(In thousands)
 
Omnibus Plan
 $
49,383 
 $
43,661 
 $
33,742 
MGM Growth Properties Omnibus Incentive Plan
  
2,568 
  
3,401 
  
— 
MGM China Share Option Plan
  
10,571 
  
8,545 
  
9,260 
Total compensation cost
  
62,522 
  
55,607 
  
43,002 
Less:  Reimbursed costs and capitalized cost
  
(1,398)
  
(1,350)
  
(1,156)
Compensation cost after reimbursed costs and capitalized cost
  
61,124 
  
54,257 
  
41,846 
Less:  Related tax benefit
  
(18,650)
  
(16,782)
  
(11,230)
Compensation cost, net of tax benefit
 $
42,474 
 $
37,475 
 $
30,616
 
 
NOTE 15 — EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
 
Multiemployer benefit plans. The Company currently participates in multiemployer pension plans in which the risks of participating differs from single-
employer plans in the following aspects:
 
 
a)
Assets contributed to the multiemployer plan by one employer may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers;
 
b)
If  a  participating  employer  stops  contributing  to  the  plan,  the  unfunded  obligations  of  the  plan  may  be  borne  by  the  remaining  participating
employers;
 
c)
If an entity chooses to stop participating in some of its multiemployer plans, the entity may be required to pay those plans an amount based on the
underfunded status of the plan, referred to as a withdrawal liability; and
 
d)
If the plan is terminated by withdrawal of all employers and if the value of the nonforfeitable benefits exceeds plan assets and withdrawal liability
payments, employers are required by law to make up the insufficient difference.
 
The Company’s participation in these plans is presented below.
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
     
     
    
  
 
 
 
EIN/Pension
 
Pension
Protection Act
Zone Status (2)  
FIP/RP
 
Contributions by the
Company
(in thousands ) (4)
  Surcharge  
Expiration Dates
of Collective
Bargaining
Pension Fund (1)
 
Plan Number
 2016
 2015
 Status (3)  
2017    2016    2015   Imposed  
Agreements
Southern Nevada Culinary and
Bartenders Pension Plan
 
88-6016617/001
 Green  Green  
No
 $45,297   $44,001   $41,904  
No
 
5/31/2018 (5)
Legacy Plan of the National
Retirement Fund (NRF) (6)
 
13-6130178/001
 
Red
 
Red
 
Yes
 $ 9,416   $ 3,788  $
—  
Yes
 
2/29/2020
 
  
  
  
   
   
     
     
    
    
 
 
(1)
The Company was listed in the plan's Form 5500 as providing more than 5% of the total contributions for the plan years 2016 and 2015 for the Southern Nevada Culinary and
Bartenders Pension Plan and for the plan year 2016 for the NRF. At the date the financial statements were issued, Form 5500 was not available for the plan year 2017.
 
(2)
The zone status is based on information that the Company received from the plan and is certified by the plan's actuary. Plans in the red zone are generally less than 65% funded
(critical status) and plans in the green zone are at least 80% funded.
 
(3)
Indicates plans for which a Financial Improvement Plan (FIP) or a Rehabilitation Plan (RP) is either pending or has been implemented.
 
(4)
There have been no significant changes that affect the comparability of contributions, other than those for the Legacy Plan of the National Retirement Fund which reflect the
period from acquisition of Borgata of August 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016 within the 2016 column and a full-year of contributions within the 2017 column.
 
(5)
The Company is party to ten collective bargaining agreements (CBA) that require contributions. The agreements between CityCenter Hotel Casino, LLC, Bellagio, Mandalay
Corp., MGM Grand Hotel, LLC and the Local Joint Executive Board of Las Vegas are the most significant because more than half of the Company’s employee participants in
this plan are covered by those four agreements.
98

 
 
(6)
In December 2017, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation approved the spin-off of the UNITE HERE portion of the NRF to the plan of the newly-formed UNITE HERE
Retirement Fund (UHF). As a result of the spin-off, the pension liabilities as well as certain assets of the plan were transferred to the new UHF Plan. The terms of the UHF Plan
are identical to the NRF. The spin-off was effective as of January 1, 20 18.
 
Multiemployer Benefit Plans Other Than Pensions . Pursuant to its collective bargaining agreements referenced above, the Company also contributes to
UNITE HERE Health (the “Health Fund”), which provides healthcare benefits to its active and retired members. The Company contributed $183 million, $187
million, and $192 million to the Health Fund in the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016, and 2015, respectively.  
 
Self-insurance. The Company is self-insured for most health care benefits and workers compensation for its non-union employees. The liability for self-
insurance was $87 million and $83 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, which is included in “Other accrued liabilities.”
 
 
NOTE 16 — PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS, NET
 
Property transactions, net consisted of the following:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Grand Victoria investment impairment
 $
—  $
—  $
17,050 
Gain on sale of Circus Circus Reno and Silver Legacy investment
  
—   
—   
(23,002)
Other property transactions, net
  
50,279   
17,078   
41,903 
 
 $
50,279  $
17,078  $
35,951
 
 
Grand Victoria investment.  See Note 7 for additional information related to the Grand Victoria investment impairment charge in 2015.
 
Circus Circus Reno and Silver Legacy investment sale. See Note 5 for additional information related to the sale of Circus Circus Reno and Note 7 for
further discussion of the sale of the Company’s 50% investment in Silver Legacy in 2015.
 
Other. Other property transactions, net includes miscellaneous asset disposals and demolition costs in the periods presented in the above table, including a
loss of $34 million related to the rebranding of the Monte Carlo Resort and Casino to Park MGM and NoMad Las Vegas in 2017, and a loss of $18 million in
connection with the trade-in of Company aircraft in 2015.
 
NOTE 17 — SEGMENT INFORMATION
The Company’s management views each of its casino resorts as an operating segment. Operating segments are aggregated based on their similar economic
characteristics,  types  of  customers,  types  of  services  and  products  provided,  the  regulatory  environments  in  which  they  operate,  and  their  management  and
reporting  structure.  The  Company’s  principal  operating  activities  occur  in  two  geographic  regions:  the  United  States  and  Macau  S.A.R.  The  Company  has
aggregated its operations into two reportable segments based on the similar characteristics of the operating segments: domestic resorts and MGM China. The
Company’s operations related to investments in unconsolidated affiliates and certain other corporate operations and management services have not been identified
as separate reportable segments; therefore, these operations are included in “Corporate and other” in the following segment disclosures to reconcile to consolidated
results.
The Company’s management utilizes Adjusted Property EBITDA as the primary profit measure for its reportable segments. Adjusted Property EBITDA is a
measure defined as Adjusted EBITDA before corporate expense and stock compensation expense related to the Omnibus Plan and the MGM Growth Properties
Omnibus Incentive Plan, which are not allocated to the reportable segments or each operating segment, as applicable. MGM China recognizes stock compensation
expense related to the MGM China Share Option Plan which is included in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA for MGM China. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure
defined as earnings before interest and other non-operating income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization, preopening and start-up expenses, NV Energy
exit expense, gain on Borgata transaction, goodwill impairment charges, and property transactions, net.
99

 
The following tables present the Company’s segment information:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net Revenues
  
    
    
  
Domestic resorts
 $
8,322,403  $
7,055,718  $
6,497,361 
MGM China
  
1,970,494   
1,920,487   
2,214,767 
Reportable segment net revenues
  
10,292,897   
8,976,205   
8,712,128 
Corporate and other
  
481,007   
478,918   
477,940 
 
 $
10,773,904  $
9,455,123  $
9,190,068 
Adjusted Property EBITDA
   
    
    
 
Domestic resorts
 $
2,514,819  $
2,063,016  $
1,689,966 
MGM China
  
524,953   
520,736   
539,881 
Reportable segment Adjusted Property EBITDA
  
3,039,772   
2,583,752   
2,229,847 
 
   
    
    
 
Other operating income (expense)
   
    
    
 
Corporate and other
  
(202,675)   
211,932   
9,073 
NV Energy exit expense
  
40,629   
(139,335)   
— 
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
(118,475)   
(140,075)   
(71,327)
Property transactions, net
  
(50,279)   
(17,078)   
(35,951)
Goodwill impairment
  
—   
—   
(1,467,991)
Gain on Borgata transaction
  
—   
430,118   
— 
Depreciation and amortization
  
(993,480)   
(849,527)   
(819,883)
Operating income (loss)
  
1,715,492   
2,079,787   
(156,232)
Non-operating income (expense)
   
    
    
 
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
  
(668,745)   
(694,773)   
(797,579)
Non-operating items from unconsolidated affiliates
  
(34,751)   
(53,139)   
(76,462)
Other, net
  
(48,241)   
(72,698)   
(15,970)
 
  
(751,737)   
(820,610)   
(890,011)
Income (loss) before income taxes
  
963,755   
1,259,177   
(1,046,243)
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
  
1,132,663   
(22,299)   
6,594 
Net income (loss)
  
2,096,418   
1,236,878   
(1,039,649)
Less: Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
(136,132)   
(135,438)   
591,929 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,960,286  $
1,101,440  $
(447,720)
 
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total assets:
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic resorts
 $
16,428,885  $
16,451,461  $
13,261,882 
MGM China
  
9,461,535   
8,443,411   
7,895,376 
Reportable segment total assets
  
25,890,420   
24,894,872   
21,157,258 
Corporate and other
  
3,338,882   
3,333,625   
4,099,837 
Eliminated in consolidation
  
(70,124)   
(55,196)   
(41,917)
 
 $
29,159,178  $
28,173,301  $
25,215,178
 
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Property and equipment, net:
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic resorts
 $
14,320,824  $
14,353,971  $
11,853,802 
MGM China
  
3,827,391   
2,857,626   
1,896,815 
Reportable segment property and equipment, net
  
18,148,215   
17,211,597   
13,750,617 
Corporate and other
  
1,557,368   
1,268,622   
1,663,095 
Eliminated in consolidation
  
(70,124)   
(55,196)   
(41,917)
 
 $
19,635,459  $
18,425,023  $
15,371,795
 
100

 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capital expenditures:
 
(In thousands)
 
Domestic resorts
 
$
486,611  
$
317,951  
$
383,367 
MGM China
 
 
923,346  
 
984,355  
 
590,968 
Reportable segment capital expenditures
 
 
1,409,957  
 
1,302,306  
 
974,335 
Corporate and other
 
 
469,053  
 
973,446  
 
504,398 
Eliminated in consolidation
 
 
(14,928)  
 
(13,279)  
 
(11,914)
 
 $
1,864,082 
 $
2,262,473 
 $
1,466,819
 
 
NOTE 18 — RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
 
CityCenter
 
Management  agreements. The  Company  and  CityCenter  have  entered  into  agreements  whereby  the  Company  is  responsible  for  management  of  the
operations of CityCenter for a fee of 2% of revenue and 5% of EBITDA (as defined) for Aria and Vdara and $3 million per year for Crystals. The Company earned
fees of $49 million, $43 million and $41 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The Company is being reimbursed for
certain costs in performing its development and management services. During the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the Company incurred $390
million, $387 million and $393 million, respectively, of costs reimbursable by CityCenter, primarily for employee compensation and certain allocated costs. As of
December 31, 2017 and 2016, CityCenter owed the Company $75 million and $77 million, respectively, for management services and reimbursable costs recorded
in “Accounts receivable, net” in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
 
MGM China
 
Ms. Ho is a member of the Board of Directors of, and holds a minority ownership interest in, MGM China. Ms. Ho is also the managing director of Shun
Tak  Holdings  Limited  (together  with  its  subsidiaries  “Shun  Tak”),  a  leading  conglomerate  in  Hong  Kong  with  core  businesses  in  transportation,  property,
hospitality and investments. Shun Tak provides various services and products, including ferry tickets, travel products, rental of hotel rooms, laundry services,
advertising services and property cleaning services to MGM China. MGM China incurred expenses relating to Shun Tak of $13 million, $10 million and $16
million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
 
MGM Branding and Development Holdings, Ltd. (together with its subsidiary MGM Development Services, Ltd., “MGM Branding and Development”), an
entity included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements in which Ms. Ho indirectly holds a noncontrolling interest, is party to a brand license agreement
and a development services agreement with MGM China, for which the related amounts are eliminated in consolidation. An entity owned by Ms. Ho received
distributions of $15 million during each of the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 in connection with the ownership of a noncontrolling interest in
MGM Branding and Development Holdings, Ltd.  
 
MGP
 
As further described in Note 1, pursuant to the master lease, the tenant leases the real estate assets of The Mirage, Mandalay Bay, Luxor, New York-New
York, Monte Carlo, Excalibur, The Park, Gold Strike Tunica, MGM Grand Detroit and Beau Rivage from the landlord. On August 1, 2016, Borgata was added to
the existing master lease and, on October 5, 2017, MGM National Harbor was also added to the existing master lease.
 
The master lease has an initial lease term of ten years beginning on April 25, 2016 (other than with respect to MGM National Harbor, as described below)
with the potential to extend the term for four additional five-year terms thereafter at the option of the tenant. The master lease provides that any extension of its
term must apply to all of the real estate under the master lease at the time of the extension. The master lease has a triple-net structure, which requires the tenant to
pay  substantially  all  costs  associated  with  the  lease,  including  real  estate  taxes,  insurance,  utilities  and  routine  maintenance,  in  addition  to  the  base  rent.
Additionally,  the  master  lease  provides  the  landlord  with  a  right  of  first  offer  with  respect  to  the  Company’s  development  property  located  in  Springfield,
Massachusetts,  which  the  landlord  may  exercise  should  the  Company  elect  to  sell  this  property  in  the  future.  In  connection  with  the  MGM  National  Harbor
transaction, the master lease was amended to provide that the initial term with respect to MGM National Harbor ends on April 31, 2024. Thereafter, the initial term
of the master lease with respect to MGM National Harbor may be renewed at the option of the tenant for an initial renewal period lasting until the earlier of the end
of the then-current term of the master lease or
101

 
the next renewal term (depending on whether MGM elects to renew the other properties under the master lease in connection with the expiration of the initial ten-
year term). If, however, the tenant chooses not to renew the lease with respect to MGM National Harbor after the initial MGM National Harbor term under the
master Lease, the tenant would also lose the r ight to renew the master lease with respect to the rest of the properties when the initial ten-year lease term ends
related to the rest of the properties in 2026.
 
The  initial  annual  rent  under  the  master  lease,  for  the  first  lease  year  commencing  April  25,  2016, was  $550  million.  In  connection  with  the  Borgata
transaction on August 1, 2016, total annual rent under the master lease increased to $650 million. In connection with the commencement of the second lease year
on April 1, 2017, the total annual rent under the master lease increased to $662 million. Then, in connection with the MGM National Harbor Transaction on
October 5, 2017, the total annual rent payments under the master lease for the second lease year increased to $757 million. Rent under the master lease consists of a
“base rent” component and a “percentage rent” component. As of December 31, 2017, the base rent represents approximately 90% of the rent payments due under
the master lease and the percentage rent represents approximately 10% of the rent payments due under the master lease. The master lease also provides for fixed
annual escalators of 2% on the base rent in the second through sixth years and the possibility for additional 2% increases thereafter subject to the tenant meeting an
adjusted net revenue to rent ratio, as well as potential increases in percentage rent in year six and every five years thereafter based on a percentage of average actual
annual net revenue during the preceding five year period calculated in accordance with the terms under the master lease. The master lease also contains customary
events of default and financial covenants. The Company was in compliance with all applicable covenants as of December 31, 2017.
All intercompany transactions, including transactions under the master lease, have been eliminated in the Company’s consolidation of MGP. The public
ownership of MGP’s Class A shares is recognized as non-controlling interests in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
 
NOTE 19 —CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING FINANCIAL INFORMATION
 
As of December 31, 2017, all of the Company’s principal debt arrangements are guaranteed by each of its material domestic subsidiaries, other than MGP
and the Operating Partnership, MGM Grand Detroit, LLC, MGM National Harbor, LLC and Blue Tarp reDevelopment, LLC (the company that will own and
operate the Company’s casino in Springfield, Massachusetts), and each of their respective subsidiaries. The Company’s international subsidiaries, including MGM
China and its subsidiaries, are not guarantors of such indebtedness. Separate condensed financial statement information for the subsidiary guarantors and non-
guarantors  as  of  December  31,  2017  and  2016  and  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2017,  2016  and  2015,  are  presented  below.  Within  the  Condensed
Consolidating Statements of Cash Flows, the Company has presented net changes in intercompany accounts as investing activities if the applicable entities have a
net asset in intercompany accounts and as a financing activity if the applicable entities have a net intercompany liability balance.
 
Certain of the Company’s subsidiaries collectively own 73.4% of the Operating Partnership units as of December 31, 2017, and each subsidiary accounts for
its  respective  investment  under  the  equity  method  within  the  condensed  consolidating  financial  information  presented  below.  For  these  subsidiaries,  such
investment  constitutes  continuing  involvement,  and  accordingly,  the  contribution  and  leaseback  of  the  real  estate  assets  do  not  qualify  for  sale-leaseback
accounting. The real estate assets that were contributed to and owned by the Operating Partnership in connection with the IPO, along with the related transactions,
are reflected in the balance sheets of the MGM subsidiaries that contributed such assets. In addition, such subsidiaries recognized finance liabilities within “Other
long-term obligations” related to rent payments due under the master lease and recognized the related interest expense component of such payments. These real
estate  assets  are  also  reflected  on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  MGP  subsidiary  that  received  such  assets  in  connection  with  the  contribution.  The  condensed
consolidating  financial  information  presented  below  therefore  includes  the  accounting  for  such  activity  within  the  respective  columns  presented  and  in  the
elimination column. For all periods prior to the commencement of the master lease arrangement, the condensed consolidating financial information set forth herein
has  been  retrospectively  adjusted  to  conform  prior  periods  to  the  current  presentation,  as  the  transactions  occurred  between  entities,  which  are  considered
businesses under common control. Accordingly, the real estate assets and associated operations in all periods prior to the IPO date were reclassified to conform to
the current organizational structure, and are reflected in the MGP subsidiary that currently has legal title to such assets.
102

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING BALANCE SHEET INFORMATION
 
 
 
December 31, 2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  
Elimination   
Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Current assets
 
$
78,909  
$
1,014,074  
$
266,627  $
1,022,340  
$
(7,323)  
$
2,374,627 
Property and equipment, net
 
 
—  
 13,521,221  
 10,021,938   
6,125,722  
 (10,033,422)  
 
19,635,459 
Investments in subsidiaries
 
 21,085,194  
 
3,318,836  
 
—   
—  
 (24,404,030)  
 
— 
Investments in the MGP Operating Partnership
 
 
—  
 
3,549,063  
 
—   
862,037  
 
(4,411,100)  
 
— 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
 
 
—  
 
1,003,767  
 
—   
5,394  
 
25,000  
 
1,034,161 
Intercompany accounts
 
 
—  
 
5,983,656  
 
—   
—  
 
(5,983,656)  
 
— 
Other non-current assets
 
 
49,142  
 
913,602  
 
62,555   
5,134,220  
 
(44,588)  
 
6,114,931 
 
 
$ 21,213,245  
$ 29,304,219  
$ 10,351,120  $ 13,149,713  
$ (44,859,119)  
$ 29,159,178 
Current liabilities
 
$
153,159  
$
1,399,120  
$
144,537  $
1,609,106  
$
(213,540)  
$
3,092,382 
Intercompany accounts
 
 
5,783,579  
 
—  
 
962   
199,115  
 
(5,983,656)  
 
— 
Deferred income taxes, net
 
 
944,424  
 
—  
 
28,544   
360,411  
 
(28,544)  
 
1,304,835 
Long-term debt, net
 
 
6,682,571  
 
2,835  
 
3,934,628   
2,131,018  
 
—  
 
12,751,052 
Other long-term obligations
 
 
36,860  
 
7,268,664  
 
174,710   
2,305,353  
 
(9,501,171)  
 
284,416 
Total liabilities
 
 13,600,593  
 
8,670,619  
 
4,283,381   
6,605,003  
 (15,726,911)  
 
17,432,685 
Redeemable noncontrolling interests
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
—   
79,778  
 
—  
 
79,778 
MGM Resorts International stockholders' equity
 
 
7,612,652  
 20,633,600  
 
4,443,089   
4,055,519  
 (29,132,208)  
 
7,612,652 
Noncontrolling interests
 
 
—  
 
—  
 
1,624,650   
2,409,413  
 
—  
 
4,034,063 
Total stockholders' equity
 
 
7,612,652  
 20,633,600  
 
6,067,739   
6,464,932  
 (29,132,208)  
 
11,646,715 
 
 $ 21,213,245 
 $ 29,304,219 
 $ 10,351,120  $ 13,149,713 
 $ (44,859,119)
 $ 29,159,178
 
 
 
 
December 31, 2016
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  
Elimination   
Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Current assets
 $
103,934  
$
981,705  
$
368,622 
 $
783,920  
$
(8,594)  
$
2,229,587 
Property and equipment, net
  
—  
 13,599,127  
 
9,079,678 
  
4,837,868  
 
(9,091,650)  
 
18,425,023 
Investments in subsidiaries
  18,907,988  
 
3,338,752  
 
— 
  
—  
 (22,246,740)  
 
— 
Investments in the MGP Operating Partnership
  
—  
 
3,553,840  
 
— 
  
636,268  
 
(4,190,108)  
 
— 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
  
—  
 
1,189,590  
 
— 
  
5,853  
 
25,000  
 
1,220,443 
Intercompany accounts
  
—  
 
4,796,713  
 
— 
  
—  
 
(4,796,713)  
 
— 
Other non-current assets
  
50,741  
 
934,836  
 
58,440 
  
5,302,132  
 
(47,901)  
 
6,298,248 
 
 $ 19,062,663  
$ 28,394,563  
$
9,506,740 
 $ 11,566,041  
$ (40,356,706)  
$ 28,173,301 
Current liabilities
 $
184,281  
$
1,301,423  
$
139,099 
 $
837,844  
$
(169,226)  
$
2,293,421 
Intercompany accounts
  
3,406,699  
 
—  
 
166 
  
1,389,848  
 
(4,796,713)  
 
— 
Deferred income taxes, net
  
2,202,809  
 
—  
 
25,368 
  
348,419  
 
(25,368)  
 
2,551,228 
Long-term debt, net
  
7,019,745  
 
2,835  
 
3,613,567 
  
2,343,073  
 
—  
 
12,979,220 
Other long-term obligations
  
28,949  
 
7,360,887  
 
120,279 
  
1,051,754  
 
(8,235,888)  
 
325,981 
Total liabilities
  12,842,483  
 
8,665,145  
 
3,898,479 
  
5,970,938  
 (13,227,195)  
 
18,149,850 
Redeemable noncontrolling interests
  
—  
 
—  
 
— 
  
54,139  
 
—  
 
54,139 
MGM Resorts International stockholders' equity
  
6,220,180  
 19,729,418  
 
4,274,444 
  
3,125,649  
 (27,129,511)  
 
6,220,180 
Noncontrolling interests
  
—  
 
—  
 
1,333,817 
  
2,415,315  
 
—  
 
3,749,132 
Total stockholders' equity
  
6,220,180  
 19,729,418  
 
5,608,261 
  
5,540,964  
 (27,129,511)  
 
9,969,312 
 
 $ 19,062,663 
 $ 28,394,563 
 $
9,506,740 
 $ 11,566,041 
 $ (40,356,706)
 $ 28,173,301
 
 
 
103

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME INFORMATION
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2017
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  Elimination   Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net revenues
 $
—  $
7,516,836  $
765,695 
 $
3,260,883  $
(769,510)  $ 10,773,904 
Equity in subsidiaries' earnings
  
1,394,690   
157,348   
— 
  
—   
(1,552,038)   
— 
Expenses
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino and hotel operations
  
10,784   
4,127,270   
— 
  
2,031,768   
(3,816)   
6,166,006 
General and administrative
  
8,742   
1,181,329   
84,348 
  
369,844   
(84,348)   
1,559,915 
Corporate expense
  
127,092   
200,804   
34,085 
  
(515)   
(4,591)   
356,875 
NV Energy exit expense
  
—   
(40,629)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(40,629)
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
—   
8,258   
— 
  
110,217   
—   
118,475 
Property transactions, net
  
—   
43,985   
34,022 
  
6,294   
(34,022)   
50,279 
Depreciation and amortization
  
—   
649,676   
260,455 
  
343,804   
(260,455)   
993,480 
 
  
146,618   
6,170,693   
412,910 
  
2,861,412   
(387,232)   
9,204,401 
Income (loss) from unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
147,001   
— 
  
(1,012)   
—   
145,989 
Operating income
  
1,248,072   
1,650,492   
352,785 
  
398,459   
(1,934,316)   
1,715,492 
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
  
(466,907)   
(982)   
(184,175)   
(16,681)   
—   
(668,745)
Other, net
  
26,215   
(402,602)   
2,286 
  
(142,997)   
434,106   
(82,992)
Income before income taxes
  
807,380   
1,246,908   
170,896 
  
238,781   
(1,500,210)   
963,755 
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
  
1,152,906   
—   
(4,906)   
(15,337)   
—   
1,132,663 
Net income
  
1,960,286   
1,246,908   
165,990 
  
223,444   
(1,500,210)   
2,096,418 
Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
(41,775)   
(94,357)   
—   
(136,132)
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,960,286  $
1,246,908  $
124,215 
 $
129,087  $ (1,500,210)  $
1,960,286 
Net income
 $
1,960,286  $
1,246,908  $
165,990 
 $
223,444  $ (1,500,210)  $
2,096,418 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Foreign currency translation adjustment
  
(23,995)   
(23,995)   
— 
  
(43,188)   
47,990   
(43,188)
Unrealized gain on cash flow hedges
  
5,234   
—   
9,782 
  
—   
(7,021)   
7,995 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
  
(18,761)   
(23,995)   
9,782 
  
(43,188)   
40,969   
(35,193)
Comprehensive income
  
1,941,525   
1,222,913   
175,772 
  
180,256   
(1,459,241)   
2,061,225 
Less: Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
(44,536)   
(75,164)   
—   
(119,700)
Comprehensive income attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,941,525  $
1,222,913  $
131,236 
 $
105,092  $ (1,459,241)  $
1,941,525
 
 
104

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS INFORMATION
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2017
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  Elimination   Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 $
(584,251)  $
1,150,814  $
482,578 
 $
1,157,270  $
—  $
2,206,411 
Cash flows from investing activities
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Capital expenditures, net of construction payable
  
—   
(482,024)   
(488)   
(1,381,570)   
—   
(1,864,082)
Dispositions of property and equipment
  
—   
502   
— 
  
216   
—   
718 
Acquisition of National Harbor, net of cash acquired
  
—   
—   
(462,500)   
—   
462,500   
— 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
(16,727)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(16,727)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates in excess of cumulative earnings
  
—   
301,211   
— 
  
—   
—   
301,211 
Intercompany accounts
  
462,500   
(1,186,942)   
— 
  
—   
724,442   
— 
Other
  
—   
(1,754)   
— 
  
42   
—   
(1,712)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
  
462,500   
(1,385,734)   
(462,988)   
(1,381,312)   
1,186,942   
(1,580,592)
Cash flows from financing activities
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Net borrowings (repayments) under bank credit facilities - maturities of 90 days or
less
  
122,500   
—   
(466,875)   
359,376   
—   
15,001 
Issuance of long-term debt
  
—   
—   
350,000 
  
—   
—   
350,000 
Retirement of senior notes
  
(502,669)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(502,669)
Debt issuance costs
  
—   
—   
(5,598)   
(4,379)   
—   
(9,977)
Issuance of MGM Growth Properties Class A shares in public offering
  
—   
—   
404,685 
  
—   
—   
404,685 
MGM Growth Properties Class A share issuance costs
  
—   
—   
(17,137)   
—   
—   
(17,137)
Dividends paid to common shareholders
  
(252,014)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(252,014)
MGP dividends paid to consolidated subsidiaries
  
—   
—   
(290,091)   
—   
290,091   
— 
Distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
  
—   
—   
(95,344)   
(75,058)   
—   
(170,402)
Intercompany accounts
  
1,042,111   
249,893   
— 
  
185,029   
(1,477,033)   
— 
Purchases of common stock
  
(327,500)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(327,500)
Other
  
(33,802)   
(11,643)   
— 
  
(13,320)   
—   
(58,765)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
  
48,626   
238,250   
(120,360)   
451,648   
(1,186,942)   
(568,778)
Effect of exchange rate on cash
  
—   
—   
— 
  
(3,627)   
—   
(3,627)
Cash and cash equivalents
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Net increase (decrease) for the period
  
(73,125)   
3,330   
(100,770)   
223,979   
—   
53,414 
Balance, beginning of period
  
99,995   
307,713   
360,492 
  
678,381   
—   
1,446,581 
Balance, end of period
 $
26,870  $
311,043  $
259,722 
 $
902,360  $
—  $
1,499,995
 
 
105

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME INFORMATION
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2016
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  Elimination   Consolidated 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net revenues
 $
—  $
6,918,748  $
467,548 
 $
2,539,794  $
(470,967)  $
9,455,123 
Equity in subsidiaries' earnings
  
1,780,707   
175,729   
— 
  
—   
(1,956,436)   
— 
Expenses
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino and hotel operations
  
9,063   
3,894,478   
— 
  
1,595,542   
(3,419)   
5,495,664 
General and administrative
  
6,834   
1,137,110   
68,063 
  
214,839   
(48,229)   
1,378,617 
Corporate expense
  
131,938   
160,956   
20,360 
  
(194)   
(286)   
312,774 
NV Energy exit expense
  
—   
139,335   
— 
  
—   
—   
139,335 
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
—   
8,775   
— 
  
131,300   
—   
140,075 
Property transactions, net
  
—   
16,449   
4,684 
  
(246)   
(3,809)   
17,078 
Gain on Borgata transaction
  
—   
(430,118)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(430,118)
Depreciation and amortization
  
—   
524,123   
220,667 
  
261,730   
(156,993)   
849,527 
 
  
147,835   
5,451,108   
313,774 
  
2,202,971   
(212,736)   
7,902,952 
Income (loss) from unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
527,934   
— 
  
(318)   
—   
527,616 
Operating income
  
1,632,872   
2,171,303   
153,774 
  
336,505   
(2,214,667)   
2,079,787 
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
  
(562,536)   
(1,500)   
(115,438)   
(15,299)   
—   
(694,773)
Other, net
  
(7,864)   
(324,141)   
(726)   
(93,145)   
300,039   
(125,837)
Income before income taxes
  
1,062,472   
1,845,662   
37,610 
  
228,061   
(1,914,628)   
1,259,177 
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
  
38,968   
(22,579)   
(2,264)   
(36,424)   
—   
(22,299)
Net income
  
1,101,440   
1,823,083   
35,346 
  
191,637   
(1,914,628)   
1,236,878 
Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
(29,938)   
(105,500)   
—   
(135,438)
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,101,440  $
1,823,083  $
5,408 
 $
86,137  $ (1,914,628)  $
1,101,440 
Net income
 $
1,101,440  $
1,823,083  $
35,346 
 $
191,637  $ (1,914,628)  $
1,236,878 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Foreign currency translation adjustment
  
(1,477)   
(1,477)   
— 
  
(2,680)   
2,954   
(2,680)
Unrealized gain on cash flow hedges
  
1,434   
—   
1,879 
  
—   
(1,434)   
1,879 
Other comprehensive income (loss)
  
(43)   
(1,477)   
1,879 
  
(2,680)   
1,520   
(801)
Comprehensive income
  
1,101,397   
1,821,606   
37,225 
  
188,957   
(1,913,108)   
1,236,077 
Less: Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
(30,383)   
(104,297)   
—   
(134,680)
Comprehensive income attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
1,101,397  $
1,821,606  $
6,842 
 $
84,660  $ (1,913,108)  $
1,101,397
 
 
106

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS INFORMATION
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2016
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  Elimination   Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 $
(603,136)  $
1,312,165  $
297,781 
 $
527,162  $
—  $
1,533,972 
Cash flows from investing activities
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Capital expenditures, net of construction payable
  
—   
(290,455)   
(138,987)   
(1,833,031)   
—   
(2,262,473)
Dispositions of property and equipment
  
—   
1,940   
— 
  
2,004   
—   
3,944 
Proceeds from partial disposition of investment in unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
15,000   
— 
  
—   
—   
15,000 
Acquisition of Borgata, net of cash acquired
  
—   
(559,443)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(559,443)
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
(3,633)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(3,633)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates in excess of cumulative earnings
  
—   
542,097   
— 
  
—   
—   
542,097 
Intercompany accounts
  
—   
(1,562,442)   
— 
  
—   
1,562,442   
— 
Other
  
—   
(7,651)   
— 
  
(4,045)   
—   
(11,696)
Net cash used in investing activities
  
—   
(1,864,587)   
(138,987)   
(1,835,072)   
1,562,442   
(2,276,204)
Cash flows from financing activities
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Net borrowings (repayments) under bank credit facilities - maturities of 90 days or
less
  
(2,016,000)   
4,094,850   
(2,411,600)   
823,782   
—   
491,032 
Borrowings under bank credit facilities - maturities longer than 90 days
  
1,845,375   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
1,845,375 
Repayments under bank credit facilities - maturities longer than 90 days
  
(1,845,375)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(1,845,375)
Issuance of long-term debt
  
500,000   
—   
1,550,000 
  
—   
—   
2,050,000 
Retirement of senior notes
  
(2,255,392)   
(2,661)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(2,258,053)
Repayment of Borgata credit facility
  
—   
(583,598)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(583,598)
Debt issuance costs
  
(29,871)   
—   
(77,163)   
(32,550)   
—   
(139,584)
Issuance of MGM Growth Properties Class A shares in public offering
  
—   
—   
1,207,500 
  
—   
—   
1,207,500 
MGM Growth Properties Class A share issuance costs
  
—   
—   
(75,032)   
—   
—   
(75,032)
Acquisition of MGM China shares
  
(100,000)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(100,000)
MGP dividends paid to consolidated subsidiaries
  
—   
—   
(113,414)   
—   
113,414   
— 
Distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
  
—   
—   
(37,415)   
(65,952)   
—   
(103,367)
Intercompany accounts
  
4,082,303   
(2,952,624)   
158,822 
  
387,355   
(1,675,856)   
— 
Proceeds from issuance of redeemable noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
— 
  
47,325   
—   
47,325 
Other
  
(16,765)   
—   
— 
  
(36)   
—   
(16,801)
Net cash provided by financing activities
  
164,275 
  
555,967 
  
201,698 
  
1,159,924 
  
(1,562,442)   
519,422 
Effect of exchange rate on cash
  
—   
—   
— 
  
(921)   
—   
(921)
Cash and cash equivalents
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Net increase (decrease) for the period
  
(438,861)   
3,545   
360,492 
  
(148,907)   
—   
(223,731)
Balance, beginning of period
  
538,856   
304,168   
— 
  
827,288   
—   
1,670,312 
Balance, end of period
 $
99,995  $
307,713  $
360,492 
 $
678,381  $
—  $
1,446,581
 
 
107

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATE MENT OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME INFORMATION
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2015
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  Elimination   Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net revenues
 $
—  $
6,429,103  $
— 
 $
2,763,862  $
(2,897)  $
9,190,068 
Equity in subsidiaries' earnings
  
376,074   
(566,270)   
— 
  
—   
190,196   
— 
Expenses
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino and hotel operations
  
6,717   
3,807,569   
— 
  
1,813,987   
(2,897)   
5,625,376 
General and administrative
  
4,959   
1,038,053   
58,473 
  
207,619   
—   
1,309,104 
Corporate expense
  
120,615   
154,424   
— 
  
(488)   
—   
274,551 
Preopening and start-up expenses
  
—   
4,973   
— 
  
66,354   
—   
71,327 
Property transactions, net
  
—   
24,688   
6,665 
  
1,472,589   
—   
1,503,942 
Depreciation and amortization
  
—   
348,159   
196,816 
  
274,908   
—   
819,883 
 
  
132,291   
5,377,866   
261,954 
  
3,834,969   
(2,897)   
9,604,183 
Income (loss) from unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
259,002   
— 
  
(1,119)   
—   
257,883 
Operating income (loss)
  
243,783 
  
743,969   
(261,954)   
(1,072,226)   
190,196   
(156,232)
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized
  
(762,529)   
(1,057)   
— 
  
(33,993)   
—   
(797,579)
Other, net
  
49,497   
(84,958)   
— 
  
(56,971)   
—   
(92,432)
Income (loss) before income taxes
  
(469,249)   
657,954 
  
(261,954)   
(1,163,190)   
190,196 
  
(1,046,243)
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
  
21,529   
(7,125)   
— 
  
(7,810)   
—   
6,594 
Net income (loss)
  
(447,720)   
650,829   
(261,954)   
(1,171,000)   
190,196   
(1,039,649)
Less: Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
— 
  
591,929   
—   
591,929 
Net income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
(447,720)  $
650,829  $
(261,954)  $
(579,071)  $
190,196  $
(447,720)
Net income (loss)
 $
(447,720)  $
650,829  $
(261,954)  $ (1,171,000)  $
190,196  $
(1,039,649)
Other comprehensive income, net of tax:
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
  
Foreign currency translation adjustment
  
1,703   
1,703   
— 
  
3,727   
(3,406)   
3,727 
Other
  
(672)   
(672)   
— 
  
—   
672   
(672)
Other comprehensive income
  
1,031   
1,031   
— 
  
3,727   
(2,734)   
3,055 
Comprehensive income (loss)
  
(446,689)   
651,860   
(261,954)   
(1,167,273)   
187,462   
(1,036,594)
Less: Comprehensive loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
— 
  
589,905   
—   
589,905 
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to MGM Resorts International
 $
(446,689)  $
651,860  $
(261,954)  $
(577,368)  $
187,462  $
(446,689)
 
108

 
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATING STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS INFORMATION
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31, 2015
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
Non-Guarantor
Subsidiaries
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Parent
  
Guarantor
Subsidiaries   
MGP
  
Other
  Elimination   Consolidated  
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
 $
(776,996)  $
1,375,703  $
(58,473)  $
464,845  $
—  $
1,005,079 
Cash flows from investing activities
  
    
    
  
  
    
     
 
Capital expenditures, net of construction payable
  
—   
(353,245)   
(129,308)   
(984,266)   
—   
(1,466,819)
Dispositions of property and equipment
  
—   
7,901   
— 
  
131   
—   
8,032 
Proceeds from sale of business units and investment in unconsolidated affiliates
  
—   
92,207   
— 
  
—   
—   
92,207 
Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
  
(141,390)   
(54,672)   
— 
  
—   
—   
(196,062)
Distributions from unconsolidated affiliates in excess of cumulative earnings
  
—   
201,612   
— 
  
—   
—   
201,612 
Investments in cash deposits - maturities longer than 90 days
  
(200,205)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(200,205)
Proceeds from cash deposits - maturities longer than 90 days
  
770,205   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
770,205 
Intercompany accounts
  
—   
(1,059,181)   
— 
  
—   
1,059,181   
— 
Other
  
—   
(7,516)   
— 
  
3,488   
—   
(4,028)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
  
428,610   
(1,172,894)   
(129,308)   
(980,647)   
1,059,181   
(795,058)
Cash flows from financing activities
  
    
    
  
  
    
     
 
Net borrowings (repayments) under bank credit facilities - maturities of 90 days or
less
  
(28,000)   
—   
— 
  
1,005,275   
—   
977,275 
Borrowings under bank credit facilities - maturities longer than 90 days
  
3,768,750   
—   
— 
  
1,350,000   
—   
5,118,750 
Repayments under bank credit facilities - maturities longer than 90 days
  
(3,768,750)   
—   
— 
  
(1,350,000)   
—   
(5,118,750)
Retirement of senior notes
  
(875,504)   
—   
— 
  
—   
—   
(875,504)
Debt issuance costs
  
—   
—   
— 
  
(46,170)   
—   
(46,170)
Intercompany accounts
  
1,003,750   
(157,958)   
187,781 
  
25,608   
(1,059,181)   
— 
Distributions to noncontrolling interest owners
  
—   
—   
— 
  
(307,227)   
—   
(307,227)
Proceeds from issuance of redeemable noncontrolling interests
  
—   
—   
— 
  
6,250   
—   
6,250 
Other
  
(12,512)   
—   
— 
  
9   
—   
(12,503)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
  
87,734   
(157,958)   
187,781 
  
683,745   
(1,059,181)   
(257,879)
Effect of exchange rate on cash
  
—   
—   
— 
  
793   
—   
793 
Cash and cash equivalents
  
    
    
  
  
    
    
— 
Net increase (decrease) for the period
  
(260,652)   
44,851   
— 
  
168,736   
—   
(47,065)
Change in cash related to assets held for sale
  
—   
3,662   
— 
  
—   
—   
3,662 
Balance, beginning of period
  
799,508   
255,655   
— 
  
658,552   
—   
1,713,715 
Balance, end of period
 $
538,856  $
304,168  $
— 
 $
827,288  $
—  $
1,670,312
 
 
 
 
109

 
NOTE 20 — SELECTED QUARTERLY FINANCIAL RESULTS (UNAUDITED)
 
 
 
Quarter
 
 
 
First
  
Second
  
Third
  
Fourth
  
Total
 
2017
 
(In thousands, except per share data)
 
Net revenues
 $
2,708,179  $
2,641,737  $
2,826,740  $
2,597,248  $
10,773,904 
Operating income
  
497,181   
501,046   
493,861   
223,404   
1,715,492 
Net income
  
253,009   
241,620   
176,496   
1,425,293   
2,096,418 
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts
   International
  
206,847   
210,611   
149,115   
1,393,713   
1,960,286 
Earnings per share-basic
 $
0.36  $
0.37  $
0.26  $
2.43  $
3.39 
Earnings per share-diluted
 $
0.36  $
0.36  $
0.26  $
2.40  $
3.35 
2016
  
     
    
    
    
 
Net revenues
 $
2,209,686  $
2,269,502  $
2,515,115  $
2,460,820  $
9,455,123 
Operating income
  
315,954   
769,055   
712,755   
282,023   
2,079,787 
Net income
  
91,198   
514,498   
561,260   
69,922   
1,236,878 
Net income attributable to MGM Resorts
   International
  
66,799   
474,353   
535,619   
24,669   
1,101,440 
Earnings per share-basic
 $
0.12  $
0.84  $
0.94  $
0.04  $
1.94 
Earnings per share-diluted
 $
0.12  $
0.83  $
0.93  $
0.04  $
1.92
 
 
Because earnings per share amounts are calculated using the weighted average number of common and dilutive common equivalent shares outstanding
during each quarter, the sum of the per share amounts for the four quarters does not equal the total earnings per share amounts for the year. T he following sections
list  certain  items  affecting  comparability  of  quarterly  and  year-to-date  results  and  related  per  share  amounts.  Additional  information  related  to  these  items  is
included elsewhere in the notes to the accompanying financial statements.
 
Certain items affecting comparability for the year ended December 31, 2017 are as follows:
 
 
•
First Quarter. None;
 
•
Second Quarter. The Company recorded a $41 million gain ($0.05 per share in the quarter and full year of 2017) related to a modification of the 2016
NV Energy exit fee. Additionally, the Company recorded a $36 million gain ($0.04 per share in the quarter and full year of 2017) related to Borgata’s
share of a property tax settlement from Atlantic City;
 
•
Third Quarter. None; and
 
•
Fourth Quarter. The Company recorded a $1.4 billion tax benefit ($2.50 per share in the quarter and $2.47 per share for full year of 2017) related to
the enactment of the Tax Act.
 
Certain items affecting comparability for the year ended December 31, 2016 are as follows:
 
 
•
First Quarter. None;
 
•
Second Quarter. In the second quarter and the full year, the Company recorded a $406 million and a $401 million gain, respectively, ($0.57 and $0.56
per share in the quarter and full year of 2016, respectively) for its share of CityCenter’s gain related to the sale of Crystals;
 
•
Third Quarter. The Company recorded a $430 million gain ($0.60 and $0.61 per share in the quarter and full year of 2016, respectively) related to the
acquisition of Borgata. Additionally, the Company recorded a $139 million charge ($0.18 loss per share in the quarter and full year of 2016) related to
NV Energy exit expense and a $13 million charge ($0.02 loss per share in the quarter and full year of 2016) related to our share of CityCenter’s NV
Energy exit expense associated with the Company’s strategic decision to exit the fully bundled sales system of NV Energy; and
 
•
Fourth Quarter. None.
 
 
ITEM 16.
FORM 10K SUMMARY
 
None.
110

 
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
MGM Resorts International
 
By:  /s/ JAMES J. MURREN
 
 James J. Murren
 
 Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
 
 (Principal Executive Officer)
 
Dated: March 1, 2018
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in
the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
SIGNATURE
 
TITLE
 
DATE
 
/ S / JAMES J. MURREN
 
 
 
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
 
 
March 1, 2018
James J. Murren
 
 
 
/ S / ROBERT H. BALDWIN
 
 
 
Chief Customer
Development Officer and Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Robert H. Baldwin
 
 
 
/ S / DANIEL J. D’ARRIGO
 
 
 
Executive Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
 
 
March 1, 2018
Daniel J. D’Arrigo
 
 
 
/ S / ROBERT C. SELWOOD
 
 
 
Executive Vice President
and Chief Accounting Officer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
 
March 1, 2018
Robert C. Selwood
 
 
 
/ S / WILLIAM A. BIBLE
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
William A. Bible
 
 
 
 
/ S / MARY CHRIS GAY
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Mary Chris Gay
 
 
 
 
/ S / WILLIAM W. GROUNDS
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
William W. Grounds
 
 
 
 
/ S / ALEXIS M. HERMAN
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Alexis M. Herman
 
 
 
 
/ S / ROLAND HERNANDEZ
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Roland Hernandez
 
 
 
111

 
SIGNATURE
 
TITLE
 
DATE
 
/ S / JOHN B. KILROY, JR.
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
John B. Kilroy, Jr.
 
 
 
 
/ S / ROSE MCKINNEY-JAMES
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Rose McKinney-James
 
 
  
 
/ S / GREGORY M. SPIERKEL
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Gregory M. Spierkel
 
 
  
 
/ S / DANIEL J. TAYLOR
 
 
Director
 
 
 
March 1, 2018
Daniel J. Taylor
  
  
 
 
 
112

 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
 
SCHEDULE II — VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
(In thousands)
 
 
 
Balance at
  Provision for   
Write-offs,
   
 
 
 
 
Beginning of
  
Doubtful
  
Net of
  
Balance at
 
 
 
Period
  
Accounts
  
Recoveries
  
End of Period
 
Allowance for doubtful accounts:
    
       
       
       
 
Year Ended December 31, 2017
 $
97,920  $
20,603  $
(25,952)  $
92,571 
Year Ended December 31, 2016
  
89,789   
10,863   
(2,732)   
97,920 
Year Ended December 31, 2015
  
89,602   
54,691   
(54,504)   
89,789
 
 
 
 
Balance at
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Beginning of
   
 
   
 
  
Balance at
 
 
 
Period
  
Increase
  
Decrease
  
End of Period
 
Deferred income tax valuation allowance:
   
    
    
    
 
Year Ended December 31, 2017
 $
2,583,274  $
—  $
(69,536)  $
2,513,738 
Year Ended December 31, 2016
  
2,807,131   
2,975   
(226,832)   
2,583,274 
Year Ended December 31, 2015
  
2,558,767   
248,504   
(140)   
2,807,131
 
 
113

Exhibit 10.5(40)
 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL 
RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS AGREEMENT
No. of Restricted Stock Units:                    
This Agreement (including its Exhibit, the “Agreement”) is made by and between MGM Resorts International (formerly
MGM MIRAGE), a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), and                      ______________ (the “Participant”) with an effective
date of ______________ (the “Effective Date”).
RECITALS
A. The Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”) has adopted the Company’s 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan, as
amended (the “Plan”), which provides for the granting of Restricted Stock Units (as that term is defined in Section 1 below) to
selected service providers. Capitalized terms used and not defined in this Agreement shall have the same meanings as in the Plan.
B. The Board believes that the grant of Restricted Stock Units will stimulate the interest of selected employees in, and
strengthen their desire to remain with, the Company or a Parent or Subsidiary (as those terms are hereinafter defined).
C. The Compensation Committee of the Board (the “Committee”) has authorized the grant of Restricted Stock Units to the
Participant pursuant to the terms of the Plan and this Agreement.
D. The Committee and the Participant intend that the Plan and this Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the
parties hereto with regard to the subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings
(whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the
Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether previously
entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future) which relate to the subject matter hereof.
Accordingly, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
1. Definitions .
1.1 “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
1.2 “Employer” means the Company, the Subsidiaries and any Parent and affiliated companies, but specifically excludes
Tracinda Corporation, its stockholder or stockholders, and its subsidiaries.
1.3 “Fair Market Value” means the closing price of a share of Stock reported on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”)
or other applicable established stock exchange or over the

 
counter market on the applicable date of determination, or if no closing price was reported on such date, the first trading day
immediately preceding the applicable date of determination on which such a closing price was reported. In the event shares of Stock
are not publicly traded at the time a determination of their value is required to be made hereunder, the determination of their Fair
Market Value shall be made by the Committee in such manner as it deems appropriate.
1.4 “Parent” means a parent corporation as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code.
1.5 “Restricted Stock Unit” means an award granted to a Participant pursuant to Article 8 of the Plan, except that no shares
of Stock are actually awarded or granted to the Participant on the date of grant.
1.6 “Section 409A” means Section 409A of the Code, and the regulations and guidance promulgated thereunder to the
extent applicable.
1.7 “Stock” means the Company’s common stock, $.01 par value per share.
1.8 “Subsidiary” means a subsidiary corporation of the Company as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code or corporation or
other entity, whether domestic or foreign, in which the Company has or obtains a proprietary interest of more than fifty percent
(50%) by reason of stock ownership or otherwise.
2. Grant to Participant . The Company hereby grants to the Participant, subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and
this Agreement, an award of ______________ Restricted Stock Units. Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan or this Agreement,
each Restricted Stock Unit represents the right to receive one (1) share of Stock in respect thereof that shall be paid to the Participant
within thirty (30) days following the earlier to occur of (i) a change of control (as defined in the Company’s Change of Control
Policy for Executive Officers, as amended from time to time, provided such change of control meets the definition of a change in
control event for purposes of Section 409A and (ii) the third anniversary of the Effective Date.
3. Terms and Conditions .
3.1 Vesting . The Restricted Stock Units shall be fully vested as of the date of grant and shall not be subject to forfeiture in
the event Participant’s employment with Employer terminates for any reason. For the avoidance of doubt, the Restricted Stock Units
shall be paid out under Section 2 notwithstanding any prior termination of employment.
3.2 Stockholder Rights and Dividend Equivalents .
(i)    Participant will have no rights as a stockholder with respect to any shares of Stock subject to Restricted
Stock Units until the shares of Stock relating thereto have been issued and recorded on the records of the Company or its
transfer agent or registrars.
(ii)    Notwithstanding the foregoing, this award shall accrue dividend equivalents with respect to dividends that
would otherwise be paid on the shares of Stock underlying the award during the period from the Effective Date to the date
such underlying shares of Stock are delivered. Any such dividend equivalent shall be deemed reinvested in additional full
and
2

 
fractional Restricted Stock Units immediately upon the related dividend’s payment date, based on the then-
current Fair Market Value, and shall be subject to the same vesting, settlement and other conditions applicable to the
Restricted Stock Units on which such dividend equivalents are paid. Any fractional shares shall be paid in cash upon the
settlement of such Restricted Share Units.
3.3 Limits on Transferability . The Restricted Stock Units granted under this Agreement may be transferred solely to a
trust in which the Participant or the Participant’s spouse control the management of the assets. Any transfer of Restricted Stock Units
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement and the transferee shall be subject to the same terms and
conditions as if it were the Participant. No interest of the Participant under this Agreement shall be subject to attachment, execution,
garnishment, sequestration, the laws of bankruptcy or any other legal or equitable process.
3.4 Adjustments . If there is any change in the Stock by reason of any stock dividend, recapitalization, reorganization,
merger, consolidation, split-up, combination or exchange of shares of Stock, or any similar change affecting the Stock the Committee
will make appropriate and proportionate adjustments (including relating to the Stock, other securities, cash or other consideration
which may be acquired upon payment or settlement of the Restricted Stock Units) that it deems necessary to the number and class of
securities subject to the Restricted Stock Units and any other terms of this Agreement. Any adjustment so made shall be final and
binding upon the Participant.
3.5 No Right to Continued Performance of Services . The grant of the Restricted Stock Units does not confer upon the
Participant any right to continue to be employed by the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or
Subsidiary) nor may it interfere in any way with the right of the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any
Parent or Subsidiary) for which the Participant performs services to terminate the Participant’s employment at any time.
3.6 Compliance With Law and Regulations . The grant of Restricted Stock Units and the obligation of the Company to
issue shares of Stock under this Agreement are subject to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations, including those
related to disclosure of financial and other information to the Participant and to approvals by any government or regulatory agency as
may be required. The Company shall not be required to issue or deliver any certificates for shares of Stock prior to (A) the listing of
such shares on any stock exchange on which the Stock may then be listed and (B) the completion of any registration or qualification
of such shares under any federal or state law, or any rule or regulation of any government body which the Company shall, in its sole
discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable.
3.7 Corporate Transaction . Subject to Section 2, upon the occurrence of a reorganization, merger, consolidation,
recapitalization, or similar transaction, unless otherwise specifically prohibited under applicable laws or by the applicable rules and
regulations of any governing governmental agencies or national securities exchanges, the Committee is authorized (but not obligated)
to make adjustments in the terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock Units, including without limitation the following (or any
combination thereof): (i) continuation or assumption of the Restricted Stock Units by the Company (if it is the surviving company or
3

 
corporation) or by the surviving company or corporation or its parent; (ii) substitution by the surviving company or corporation or its
parent of an award with substantially the same terms for the Restricted Stock Units; and (iii) cancellation of all or any portion of the
Restricted Stock Units for fair value (in the form of cash or its equivalent (e.g., by check), other property or any combination thereof)
as determined in the sole discretion of the Committee and which value may be zero (if the value of the underlying stock is zero), and
payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days thereafter.
4. Investment Representation . The Participant must, within five (5) days of demand by the Company furnish the Company
an agreement satisfactory to the Company in which the Participant represents that the shares of Stock acquired upon payment are
being acquired for investment. The Company will have the right, at its election, to place legends on the certificates representing the
shares of Stock so being issued with respect to limitations on transferability imposed by federal and/or state laws, and the Company
will have the right to issue “stop transfer” instructions to its transfer agent.
5. Participant Bound by Plan . The Participant hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Plan and agrees to be bound
by all the terms and provisions thereof as amended from time to time.
6. Withholding . The Company or any Parent or Subsidiary shall have the right and is hereby authorized to withhold, any
applicable withholding taxes in respect of the Restricted Stock Units awarded by this Agreement, their grant or otherwise, and to take
such other action as may be necessary in the opinion of the Company to satisfy all obligations for the payment of such withholding
taxes, which may include, without limitation, reducing the number of shares otherwise distributable to the Participant by the number
of shares of Stock whose Fair Market Value is equal to the amount of tax required to be withheld by the Company or a Parent or
Subsidiary as a result of the settlement or otherwise of the Restricted Stock Units.
7. Notices . Any notice hereunder to the Company must be addressed to: MGM Resorts International, 3600 Las Vegas
Boulevard South, Las Vegas, Nevada 89109, Attention: 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan Administrator, and any notice hereunder to the
Participant must be addressed to the Participant at the Participant’s last address on the records of the Company, subject to the right of
either party to designate at any time hereafter in writing some other address. Any notice shall be deemed to have been duly given on
personal delivery or three (3) days after being sent in a properly sealed envelope, addressed as set forth above, and deposited (with
first class postage prepaid) in the United States mail.
8. Entire Agreement . This Agreement and the Plan constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard
to the subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and
whether express or implied, and including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company
or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether previously entered into, currently effective or
entered into in the future that includes terms and conditions regarding equity awards) which relate to the subject matter hereof.
4

 
9. Waiver . No waiver of any breach or condition of this Agreement shall be deemed a waiver of any other or subsequent
breach or condition whether of like or different nature.
10. Participant Undertaking . The Participant agrees to take whatever additional action and execute whatever additional
documents the Company may deem necessary or advisable to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions
imposed on either the Participant or the Restricted Stock Units pursuant to this Agreement.
11. Successors and Assigns . The provisions of this Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, the
Company and its successors and assigns and upon the Participant, the Participant’s assigns and the legal representatives, heirs and
legatees of the Participant’s estate, whether or not any such person shall have become a party to this Agreement and agreed in writing
to be joined herein and be bound by the terms hereof.
12. Governing Law . The parties hereto agree that the validity, construction and interpretation of this Agreement shall be
governed by the laws of the state of Nevada.
13. Arbitration . Except as otherwise provided in Exhibit A to this Agreement (which constitutes a material provision of
this Agreement), disputes relating to this Agreement shall be resolved by arbitration pursuant to Exhibit A hereto.
14. Clawback Policy . By accepting this award the Participant hereby agrees that this award and any other compensation
paid or payable to the Participant is subject to Company’s Policy on Recovery of Incentive Compensation in Event of Financial
Restatement (or any successor policy) as in effect from time to time, and that this award shall be considered a bonus for purposes of
such policy. In addition, the Participant agrees that such policy may be amended from time to time by the Board in a manner
designed to comply with applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements. The Participant also hereby agrees that the
award granted hereunder and any other compensation payable to the Participant shall be subject to recovery (in whole or in part) by
the Company to the minimum extent required by applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements.
15. Amendment . This Agreement may not be altered, modified, or amended except by written instrument signed by the
parties hereto; provided that the Company may alter, modify or amend this Agreement unilaterally if such change is not materially
adverse to the Participant or to cause this Agreement to comply with applicable law.
16. Severability . The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any portion of this Agreement is declared contrary
to any law, regulation or is otherwise invalid, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall nevertheless be
binding and enforceable.
17. Execution . Each party agrees that an electronic, facsimile or digital signature or an online acceptance or
acknowledgment will be accorded the full legal force and effect of a handwritten signature under Nevada law. This Agreement may
be signed in counterparts, each of which shall be an original, with the same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon
the same instrument.
5

 
18. Variation of Pronouns . All pronouns and any variations thereof contained herein shall be deemed to refer to masculine,
feminine, neuter, singular or plural, as the identity of the person or persons may require.
19. Tax Treatment; Section 409A . The Participant shall be responsible for all taxes with respect to the Restricted Stock
Units. Notwithstanding the forgoing or any provision of the Plan or this Agreement:
19.1 The parties agree that this Agreement shall be interpreted to comply with or be exempt from Section 409A, and all
provisions of this Agreement shall be construed in a manner consistent with the requirements for avoiding taxes or penalties under
Section 409A. If any provision of this Agreement or the Plan contravenes Section 409A or could cause the Participant to incur any
tax, interest or penalties under Section 409A, the Committee may, in its sole discretion and without the Participant’s consent, modify
such provision in order to comply with the requirements of Section 409A or to satisfy the conditions of any exception therefrom, or
otherwise to avoid the imposition of the additional income tax and interest under Section 409A, while maintaining, to the maximum
extent practicable, the original intent and economic benefit to the Participant, without materially increasing the cost to the Company,
of the applicable provision. However, the Company makes no guarantee regarding the tax treatment of the Restricted Stock Units
and none of the Company, its Parent, Subsidiaries or affiliates, nor any of their employees or representatives shall have any liability
to the Participant with respect thereto.
19.2 A termination of employment shall not be deemed to have occurred for purposes of any provision of this Agreement
providing for the payment of any amounts or benefits considered “nonqualified deferred compensation” under Section 409A upon or
following a termination of employment unless such termination is also a “separation from service” within the meaning of Section
409A and, for purposes of any such provision of this Agreement, references to a “termination,” “termination of employment” or like
terms shall mean “separation from service.” If the Participant is deemed on the date of termination to be a “specified employee”
within the meaning of that term under Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B), then with regard to any payment or the provision of any benefit
that is considered nonqualified deferred compensation under Section 409A payable on account of a “separation from service,” such
payment or benefit shall be made or provided at the date which is the earlier of (i) the expiration of the six (6)-month period
measured from the date of such “separation from service” of the Participant, and (ii) the date of the Participant’s death (the “Delay
Period”). Upon the expiration of the Delay Period, all payments and benefits delayed pursuant to this Section 19.2 (whether they
would have otherwise been payable in a single sum or in installments in the absence of such delay) shall be paid or reimbursed on the
first business day following the expiration of the Delay Period to the Participant in a lump sum, and any remaining payments and
benefits due under this Agreement shall be paid or provided in accordance with the normal payment dates specified for them herein.
19.3 For purposes of Section 409A, the Participant’s right to receive any installment payments pursuant to this Agreement
shall be treated as a right to receive a series of separate and distinct payments. Whenever a payment under this Agreement specifies a
payment period with reference to a number of days (e.g., “payment shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of
termination”), the actual date of payment within the specified period shall be within the sole discretion of the Company.
6

 
*            *             *
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
 
 
7

Exhibit 10.5(40)
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Restricted Stock Units Agreement as of the date first written above.
 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
 
  
By:
  
Name:
  
Title:
  
 
  
PARTICIPANT
 
  
By:
  
Name:
  
 
 

 
[Signature Page to Restricted Stock Units Agreement]
 
9

Exhibit 10.5(40)
 
EXHIBIT A
ARBITRATION
This Exhibit A sets forth the methods for resolving disputes should any arise under the Agreement, and
accordingly, this Exhibit A shall be considered a part of the Agreement.
1.    Except for a claim by either Participant or the Company for injunctive relief where such would be otherwise
authorized by law, any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the Agreement or the breach hereof including without
limitation any claim involving the interpretation or application of the Agreement or the Plan, shall be submitted to binding arbitration
in accordance with the employment arbitration rules then in effect of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service (“JAMS”), to the
extent not inconsistent with this paragraph. This Exhibit A covers any claim Participant might have against any officer, director,
employee, or agent of the Company, or any of the Company’s subsidiaries, divisions, and affiliates, and all successors and assigns of
any of them. The promises by the Company and Participant to arbitrate differences, rather than litigate them before courts or other
bodies, provide consideration for each other, in addition to other consideration provided under the Agreement.
2.     Claims Subject to Arbitration . This Exhibit A contemplates mandatory arbitration to the fullest extent permitted by
law. Only claims that are justiciable under applicable state or federal law are covered by this Exhibit A. Such claims include any and
all alleged violations of any state or federal law whether common law, statutory, arising under regulation or ordinance, or any other
law, brought by any current or former employees.
3.     Non-Waiver of Substantive Rights . This Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies available under applicable
statutes or common law. However, it does waive Participant’s right to pursue those rights and remedies in a judicial forum. By
signing the Agreement and the acknowledgment at the end of this Exhibit A, the undersigned Participant voluntarily agrees to
arbitrate his or her claims covered by this Exhibit A.
4.     Time Limit to Pursue Arbitration; Initiation : To ensure timely resolution of disputes, Participant and the Company
must initiate arbitration within the statute of limitations (deadline for filing) provided for by applicable law pertaining to the claim.
The failure to initiate arbitration within this time limit will bar any such claim. The parties understand that the Company and
Participant are waiving any longer statutes of limitations that would otherwise apply, and any aggrieved party is encouraged to give
written notice of any claim as soon as possible after the event(s) in dispute so that arbitration of any differences may take place
promptly. The parties agree that the aggrieved party must, within the time frame provided by this Exhibit A, give written notice of a
claim pursuant to Section 7 of the Agreement. In the event such notice is to be provided to the Company, the Participant shall
provide a copy of such notice of a claim to the Company’s Executive Vice President and General Counsel. Written notice shall
identify and describe the nature of the claim, the supporting facts and the relief or remedy sought.

 
5.     Selecting an Arbitrator : This Exhibit A mandates Arbitration under the then current rules of the Judicial Arbitration
and Mediation Service (JAMS) regarding employment disputes. The arbitrator shall be either a retired judge or an attorney
experienced in employment law and licensed to practice in the state in which arbitration is convened. The parties shall select one
arbitrator from among a list of three qualified neutral arbitrators provided by JAMS. If the parties are unable to agree on the
arbitrator, each party shall strike one name and the remaining named arbitrator shall be selected.
6.     Representation/Arbitration Rights and Procedures :
a.    Participant may be represented by an attorney of his/her choice at his/her own expense.
b.    The arbitrator shall apply the substantive law (and the law of remedies, if applicable) of Nevada (without
regard to its choice of law provisions) and/or federal law when applicable. In all cases, this Exhibit A shall provide for the
broadest level of arbitration of claims between the Company and Participant under Nevada or applicable federal law. The
arbitrator is without jurisdiction to apply any different substantive law or law of remedies.
c.    The arbitrator shall have no authority to award non-economic damages or punitive damages except where
such relief is specifically authorized by an applicable state or federal statute or common law. In such a situation, the
arbitrator shall specify in the award the specific statute or other basis under which such relief is granted.
d.    The applicable law with respect to privilege, including attorney-client privilege, work product, and offers to
compromise must be followed.
e.    The parties shall have the right to conduct reasonable discovery, including written and oral (deposition)
discovery and to subpoena and/or request copies of records, documents and other relevant discoverable information
consistent with the procedural rules of JAMS. The arbitrator shall decide disputes regarding the scope of discovery and
shall have authority to regulate the conduct of any hearing and/or trial proceeding. The arbitrator shall have the right to
entertain a motion to dismiss and/or motion for summary judgment.
f.    The parties shall exchange witness lists at least 30 days prior to the trial/hearing procedure. The arbitrator
shall have subpoena power so that either Participant or the Company may summon witnesses. The arbitrator shall use the
Federal Rules of Evidence. Both parties have the right to file a post hearing brief. Any party, at its own expense, may
arrange for and pay the cost of a court reporter to provide a stenographic record of the proceedings.
g.    Any arbitration hearing or proceeding shall take place in private, not open to the public, in Las Vegas,
Nevada.
7.     Arbitrator’s Award : The arbitrator shall issue a written decision containing the specific issues raised by the parties,
the specific findings of fact, and the specific conclusions of law. The award shall be rendered promptly, typically within 30 days after
conclusion of the arbitration hearing, or the submission of post-hearing briefs if requested. The arbitrator may not award any relief or
remedy in excess of what a court could grant under applicable law. The
11

 
arbitrator’s decision is final and binding on both parties. Judgment upon an award rendered by the arbitrator may be entered in any
court having competent jurisdiction.
a.    Either party may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel arbitration under this
Exhibit A and to enforce an arbitration award.
b.    In the event of any administrative or judicial action by any agency or third party to adjudicate a claim on
behalf of Participant which is subject to arbitration under this Exhibit A, Participant hereby waives the right to participate
in any monetary or other recovery obtained by such agency or third party in any such action, and Participant’s sole remedy
with respect to any such claim shall be any award decreed by an arbitrator pursuant to the provisions of this Exhibit A.
8.     Fees and Expenses : The Company shall be responsible for paying any filing fee and the fees and costs of the
arbitrator; provided, however, that if Participant is the party initiating the claim, Participant will contribute an amount equal to the
filing fee to initiate a claim in the court of general jurisdiction in the state in which Participant is (or was last) employed by the
Company. Participant and the Company shall each pay for their own expenses, attorney’s fees (a party’s responsibility for his/her/its
own attorney’s fees is only limited by any applicable statute specifically providing that attorney’s fees may be awarded as a remedy),
and costs and fees regarding witness, photocopying and other preparation expenses. If any party prevails on a statutory claim that
affords the prevailing party attorney’s fees and costs, or if there is a written agreement providing for attorney’s fees and/or costs, the
arbitrator may award reasonable attorney’s fees and/or costs to the prevailing party, applying the same standards a court would apply
under the law applicable to the claim(s).
9.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A shall survive the termination of Participant’s employment with the
Company and the expiration of the Agreement. These arbitration provisions can only be modified or revoked in a writing signed by
both parties and which expressly states an intent to modify or revoke the provisions of this Exhibit A.
10.    The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A do not alter or affect the termination provisions of this Agreement.
11.    Capitalized terms not defined in this Exhibit A shall have the same definition as in the Agreement to which this is
Exhibit A.
12.    If any provision of this Exhibit A is adjudged to be void or otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the remainder of Exhibit A. All other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
 
12

Exhibit 10.5(40)
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
BOTH PARTIES ACKNOWLEDGE THAT: THEY HAVE CAREFULLY READ THIS EXHIBIT A IN ITS
ENTIRETY, THEY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS, EXHIBIT A CONSTITUTES A MATERIAL TERM AND CONDITION OF
THE RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES TO WHICH IT IS EXHIBIT A, AND THEY
AGREE TO ABIDE BY ITS TERMS.
The parties also specifically acknowledge that by agreeing to the terms of this Exhibit A, they are waiving the right to
pursue claims covered by this Exhibit A in a judicial forum and instead agree to arbitrate all such claims before an arbitrator without
a court or jury. It is specifically understood that this Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies which are available under
applicable state and federal statutes or common law. Both parties enter into this Exhibit A voluntarily and not in reliance on any
promises or representation by the other party other than those contained in the Agreement or in this Exhibit A.
Participant further acknowledges that Participant has been given the opportunity to discuss this Exhibit A with
Participant’s private legal counsel and that Participant has availed himself/herself of that opportunity to the extent Participant wishes
to do so.
*            *             *
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
 
 

Exhibit 10.5(41)
 
 
FORM
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
PERFORMANCE SHARE UNITS AGREEMENT
 
 
Target No. of Performance Share Units: [●]
This Agreement (including its Exhibits, the “ Agreement ”) is made by and between MGM Resorts International (formerly MGM MIRAGE), a Delaware
corporation (the “ Company ”), and [●] (the “ Participant ”) with an effective date of [●] (the “ Effective Date ”).
RECITALS
A. The Board of Directors of the Company (the “ Board ”) has adopted the Company’s 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan, as amended (the “ Plan ”), which
provides for the granting of Performance Share Units (as that term is defined in Section 1 below) to selected service providers. Capitalized terms used and not
defined in this Agreement shall have the same meanings as in the Plan.
B. The Board believes that the grant of Performance Share Units will stimulate the interest of selected employees in, and strengthen their desire to remain
with, the Company or a Parent or Subsidiary (as those terms are hereinafter defined).
C. The Compensation Committee of the Board (the “ Committee ”) has authorized the grant of Performance Share Units to the Participant pursuant to the
terms of the Plan and this Agreement.
D. The Committee and the Participant intend that the Plan and this Agreement constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to the
subject matter hereof and shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and
including, without limitation, any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent
or Subsidiary) whether previously entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future) which relate to the subject matter hereof.
Accordingly, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
1. Definitions .
1.1 “ Beginning Average Share Price ” means the average closing price of either (a) the Shares or (b) the stock of a member of the Comparison
Group, as applicable, in any such case over the sixty (60) calendar day period ending on the Effective Date.
1.2 “ Bankrupt Comparator Entity ” means a company that is a member of the Comparison Group as of the Effective Date and that becomes
subject to any of the following conditions during the Performance Period: (a) bankruptcy, (b) liquidation, (c) dissolution or (d) other than as part of a merger,
acquisition or similar corporate transaction, cessation of business operations. Determinations with respect to a Bankrupt Comparator Entity shall be made by the
Committee in its sole discretion.
 

 
1.3 “ Change of Control ” means:
A. the date that a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar transaction is consummated, unless: (i) at least 50%
of the outstanding voting securities of the surviving or resulting entity (including, without limitation, an entity which as a result of such transaction owns the
Company either directly or through one or more subsidiaries) (“ Resulting Entity ”) are beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, by the persons who were the
beneficial owners of the outstanding voting securities of the Corporation immediately prior to such transaction in substantially the same proportions as their
beneficial ownership, immediately prior to such transaction, of the outstanding voting securities of the Corporation and (ii) immediately following such transaction
no person or persons acting as a group beneficially owns capital stock of the Resulting Entity possessing thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the total voting power
of the stock of the Resulting Entity;
B. the date that a majority of members of the Company’s Board is replaced during any twelve (12) month period by directors whose
appointment or election is not endorsed by a majority of the members of the Company’s Board before the date of the appointment or election;
C. the date that any one person, or persons acting as a group, acquires (or has or have acquired as of the date of the most recent
acquisition by such person or persons) beneficial ownership of stock of the Company possessing thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the total voting power of the
stock of the Company; or
D. the date that any one person acquires, or persons acting as a group acquire (or has or have acquired as of the date of the most recent
acquisition by such person or persons), assets from the Company that have a total gross fair market value equal to or more than forty percent (40%) of the total
gross fair market value of all of the assets of the Company immediately before such acquisition or acquisitions.
1.4 “ Code ” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. For purposes of the Plan and this Agreement,
references to sections of the Code shall be deemed to include references to any applicable regulations thereunder and any successor or similar provision.
1.5 “ Comparison Group ” means the S&P 500 as constituted as of the Effective Date. Determinations with respect to the Comparison Group shall
be made by the Committee in its sole discretion.
1.6 “ Current Employment Agreement ” means the Participant’s employment agreement with the Company or any of its affiliates (including,
without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) in effect as of the applicable date of determination.
1.7 “ Disability ” means that the Participant is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve (12) months or is, by
reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not
less than twelve (12) months, receiving income replacement benefits for a period of not less than three (3) months under an accident and health plan covering
employees of the Employer.
1.8 “ Employer ” means the Company, the Subsidiaries and any Parent and affiliated companies, but specifically excludes Tracinda Corporation,
its stockholder or stockholders, and its subsidiaries.
1.9 “ Employer’s Good Cause ” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment Agreement; provided ,
that if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a comparable term, “ Employer’s Good Cause ” means:
A. Participant’s failure to abide by the Employer’s policies and procedures, misconduct, insubordination, inattention to the Employer’s
business, failure to perform the duties required of the Participant up to the standards established by the Employer’s senior management, or material breach of the
Current Employment Agreement, which failure or breach is not cured by the Participant within ten (10) days after written notice thereof from the Employer
specifying the facts and circumstances of the alleged failure or breach, provided , however , that
2
 

 
such notice and opportunity to cure shall not be required if, in the good faith judgment of the Board , such breach is not capable of being cured within ten (10) days;
B. Participant’s failure or inability to apply for and obtain any license, qualification, clearance or other similar approval which the
Employer or any regulatory authority which has jurisdiction over the Employer requests or requires that the Participant obtain;
C. the Employer is directed by any governmental authority in Nevada, Michigan, Mississippi, Illinois, Macau S.A.R., or any other
jurisdiction in which the Employer is engaged in a gaming business or where the Employer has applied to (or during the term of the Participant’s employment
under the Current Employment Agreement, may apply to) engage in a gaming business to cease business with the Participant;
D. the Employer determines, in its reasonable judgment, that the Participant was, is or might be involved in, or is about to be involved
in, any activity, relationship(s) or circumstance which could or does jeopardize the Employer’s business, reputation or licenses to engage in the gaming business; or
E. any of the Employer’s gaming business licenses are threatened to be, or are, denied, curtailed, suspended or revoked as a result of the
Participant’s employment by the Employer or as a result of the Participant’s actions.
1.10 “ Ending Average Share Value ” means the sum of (a) the average closing price of either (i) the Shares or (ii) the stock of a member of the
Comparison Group, as applicable, in any such case over the sixty (60) calendar day period ending on the last day of the Performance Period plus (b) the sum of all
dividends paid on (x) a Share or (y) a share of stock, as applicable, in any such case during the Performance Period (assuming such dividends are reinvested in
Shares or stock, as applicable); provided , however , that in the event of a Change of Control prior to the third anniversary of the Effective Date, the “ Ending
Average Share Value ” for purposes of the Company shall equal the sum of (I) the price per share of the Company’s Shares to be paid to the holders thereof in
accordance with the definitive agreement governing the transaction constituting the Change of Control (or, in the absence of such agreement, the closing price per
Share for the last trading day prior to the consummation of the Change of Control) and (II) the sum of all dividends paid on a Share during the Performance Period
(assuming such dividends are reinvested in Shares).
1.11 “ Fair Market Value ” or “ FMV ” shall have the meaning set forth for such term in the Plan.
1.12 “ Merged Comparator Entity ” means a company, other than a Bankrupt Comparator Entity, that is a member of the Comparison Group as of
the Effective Date but that ceases to have a class of equity securities that is both registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and actively traded on a U.S.
public securities market during the Performance Period. Determinations with respect to a Merged Comparator Entity shall be made by the Committee in its sole
discretion.
1.13 “ Parent ” means a parent corporation as defined in Section 424(e) of the Code.
1.14 “ Participant’s Good Cause ” shall have the meaning given such term or a comparable term in the Current Employment Agreement; provided
, that if there is no Current Employment Agreement or if such agreement does not include such term or a comparable term, “Participant’s Good Cause” means:
A. The failure of the Employer to pay the Participant any compensation when due; or
B. A material reduction in the scope of duties or responsibilities of the Participant or any reduction in the Participant’s salary.
If a breach constituting Participant’s Good Cause occurs, the Participant shall give the Employer thirty (30) days’ advance written notice specifying the facts and
circumstances of the alleged breach. During such thirty (30) day period, the Employer may either cure the breach (in which case such notice will be considered
withdrawn) or declare that the Employer disputes that Participant’s Good Cause exists, in which case Participant’s Good Cause shall not
3
 

 
exist until the dispute is resolved in accordance with the methods for resolving disputes specified in Exhibit A hereto.
1.15 “ Performance Period ” means the period beginning on the Effective Date and ending on third anniversary thereof or, if earlier, the date of
consummation of a Change of Control.
1.16 “ Performance Share Units ” means an award of Performance Share Units granted to a Participant pursuant to Article 9 of the Plan.
1.17 “ Section 409A ” means Code Section 409A, the regulations thereunder promulgated by the United States Department of Treasury and other
guidance issued thereunder.
1.18 “ Share ” means the Company’s common stock, $.01 per share.
1.19 “ Subsidiary ” means a subsidiary corporation of the Company as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code or corporation or other entity,
whether domestic or foreign, in which the Company has or obtains a proprietary interest of more than fifty percent (50%) by reason of stock ownership or
otherwise.
1.20 “ Total Shareholder Return ” or “ TSR ” means, with respect to (a) the Company or (b) any member of the Comparison Group (but, for
avoidance of doubt, excluding any Merged Comparator Entity), the quotient of the Ending Average Share Value over the Beginning Average Share Price for the
applicable entity, expressed as a percentage return; provided , however , that TSR for a Bankrupt Comparator Entity will be negative one hundred percent (-100%).
Determinations with respect to TSR shall be made by the Committee in its sole discretion.
2. Grant to Participant . The Company hereby grants to the Participant, subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement, a target award
of [●] Performance Share Units (the “ Target Award ”). Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan or this Agreement, (i) the grant of Performance Share Units
represents the right to receive a percentage of the Target Award upon vesting of such Performance Share Units, with each Performance Share Unit that vests
representing the right to receive one (1) Share upon vesting thereof, (ii) unless and until the Performance Share Units have vested in accordance with the terms of
this Agreement, the Participant shall not have any right to delivery of the Shares underlying such Performance Share Units or any other consideration in respect
thereof, and (iii) the portion of the Target Award that vests hereunder shall be paid to the Participant as set forth in Section 3 hereof.
3. Terms and Conditions .
3.1 Vesting .
(i) Subject to Section 3.3 herein, a percentage of the Target Award shall vest as set forth in the table below based on the Company’s
percentile rank of TSR against the Comparison Group over the Performance Period; provided , however , that, notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if
the Company’s absolute TSR is negative during the Performance Period and the Relative TSR Percentile is below the 75 th percentile, the maximum portion of the
Target Award that shall be eligible for vesting in accordance with the following table shall be 100%.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Level
  
Relative TSR Percentile
  
Vested % of Target Award
Maximum
  
75th or greater
  
150%
Target
  
50th
  
100%
Threshold
  
25th
  
50%
(ii) In no event shall the Participant be awarded more than 150% of the Target Award. If the Company’s percentile rank of TSR is
below the 25 th percentile, no portion of the Target Award will vest.
(iii) If the Company’s percentile rank of TSR should fall between two of the percentiles set forth above, the percentage of the Target
Award that shall vest shall be determined based on straight-line interpolation between the applicable figures.
4
 

 
(iv) Any Performance Share Units that are not vested as of the last day of the Performance Period shall immediately be forfeited and
cancelled without consideration.
3.2 Payment . Any Performance Share Units which vest in accordance with Section 3.1 (following application of Section 3.3), and any Dividend
Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid to the Participant in Shares, less applicable withholding taxes, within thirty (30) days
following the last day of the Performance Period; provided , that any fractional Shares shall be paid in cash.
3.3 Termination of Service . Upon termination of employment (or other service) with the Employer for any reason on or prior to the last day of the
Performance Period, the Performance Share Units shall be forfeited without any consideration; provided , however , that, upon termination of employment by the
Employer without Employer’s Good Cause, by the Participant with Participant’s Good Cause, or due to the Participant’s death or Disability, a pro-rata portion of
the Performance Share Units, if any, that would have become vested (but for such termination) under the schedule determined in Section 3.1 herein, shall vest, such
proration determined based on the number of days Participant was employed during the Performance Period plus an additional twelve (12) months (or, if shorter,
through the end of the Performance Period), and, together with any Dividend Equivalent Rights which vest as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, shall be paid on the
same schedule determined in Section 3.2 herein; provided , however , that such continued vesting shall immediately cease and unvested Performance Share Units
shall be forfeited in the event the Participant breaches any post-termination covenant with the Company or its affiliate in an employment agreement (after taking
into account any applicable cure period).
3.4 Committee Discretion . The Committee, in its discretion, may accelerate the vesting of the Target Award up to the maximum amount
described in Section 3.1 above, at any time, subject to the terms of the Plan and this Agreement and Section 409A. If so accelerated, the Performance Share Units
will be considered as having vested as of the date specified by the Committee or an applicable written agreement, but the Committee will have no right to
accelerate any payment under this Agreement if such acceleration would cause this Agreement to fail to comply with, or give rise to any tax, penalty or interest
under, Section 409A.
3.5 Stockholder Rights and Dividend Equivalents .
A. Participant will have no rights as a stockholder with respect to any Shares subject to Performance Share Units until the Performance
Share Units have vested and Shares relating thereto have been issued and recorded on the records of the Company or its transfer agent or registrars.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this award shall accrue dividend equivalents with respect to dividends that would otherwise be paid
on the Shares underlying the award during the period from the date of grant to the date such Performance Share Unit is earned and the underlying Shares delivered.
On each dividend payment date during such period, the award shall accrue a target number of dividend equivalents equal to (A) the sum of (i) the number of
Performance Share Units subject to the Target Award, plus (ii) the number of dividend equivalents previously accrued, multiplied by (B) the applicable per-share
dividend amount and divided by (C) the then-current Fair Market Value. The dividend equivalent shall be subject to the same vesting, settlement and other
conditions applicable to the Performance Share Units on which such dividend equivalents are accrued. As such, the determination of the number of dividend
equivalents which vest and are payable pursuant to the award shall be determined as the product of (a) the sum of all dividend equivalents determined in
accordance with this Section 3.5(ii) and (b) a fraction equal to (i) the number of Performance Share Units which vest in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement divided by (ii) the number of Performance Share Units subject to the Target Award.
3.6 Limits on Transferability . The Performance Share Units granted under this Agreement may be transferred solely to a trust in which the
Participant or the Participant’s spouse control the management of the assets. With respect to Performance Share Units, if any, that have been transferred to a trust,
references in this Agreement to vesting related to such Performance Share Units shall be deemed to include such trust. Any transfer of Performance Share Units
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement and the transferee shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as if it were the
Participant. No interest of the Participant under this Agreement shall be subject to attachment, execution, garnishment, sequestration, the laws of bankruptcy or any
other legal or equitable process.
5
 

 
3.7 Adjustments . If there is any change in the Shares by reason of any stock dividend, recapitalization, reorganization, merger, consolidation,
split-up, combination or exchange of Shares , or any similar change affecting the Shares the Committee will make appropriate and proportionate adjustments
(including relating to the Shares, other securities, cash or other consideration which may be acquired upon vesting of the Performance Share Units) that it deems
necessary to the number and class of securities subject to the Performance Share Units and any other terms of this Agreement. Any adjustment so made shall be
final and binding upon the Participant.
3.8 No Right to Continued Performance of Services . The grant of the Performance Share Units does not confer upon the Participant any right to
continue to be employed by the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) nor may it interfere in any way with the
right of the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) for which the Participant performs services to terminate the
Participant’s employment at any time.
3.9 Compliance With Law and Regulations . The grant and vesting of Performance Share Units and the obligation of the Company to issue Shares
under this Agreement are subject to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations, including those related to disclosure of financial and other
information to the Participant and to approvals by any government or regulatory agency as may be required. The Company shall not be required to issue or deliver
any certificates for Shares prior to (A) the listing of such shares on any stock exchange on which the Shares may then be listed and (B) the completion of any
registration or qualification of such shares under any federal or state law, or any rule or regulation of any government body which the Company shall, in its sole
discretion, determine to be necessary or advisable.
3.10 Corporate Transaction . Upon the occurrence of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, recapitalization, or similar transaction, unless
otherwise specifically prohibited under applicable laws or by the applicable rules and regulations of any governing governmental agencies or national securities
exchanges, the Committee is authorized (but not obligated) to make adjustments in the terms and conditions of the Performance Share Units, including without
limitation the following (or any combination thereof): (i) continuation or assumption of the Performance Share Units by the Company (if it is the surviving
company or corporation) or by the surviving company or corporation or its parent; (ii) substitution by the surviving company or corporation or its parent of an
award with substantially the same terms for the Performance Share Units; (iii) accelerated vesting with respect to the Performance Share Units immediately prior to
the occurrence of such event and payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days thereafter; and (iv) cancellation of all or any portion of the Performance Share
Units for fair value (in the form of cash or its equivalent (e.g., by check), other property or any combination thereof) as determined in the sole discretion of the
Committee and which value may be zero (if the value of the underlying stock is zero), and payment to the Participant within thirty (30) days thereafter.
4. Investment Representation . The Participant must, within five (5) days of demand by the Company furnish the Company an agreement satisfactory to the
Company in which the Participant represents that the Shares acquired upon vesting are being acquired for investment. The Company will have the right, at its
election, to place legends on the certificates representing the Shares so being issued with respect to limitations on transferability imposed by federal and/or state
laws, and the Company will have the right to issue “stop transfer” instructions to its transfer agent.
5. Participant Bound by Plan . The Participant hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Plan and agrees to be bound by all the terms and provisions
thereof as amended from time to time.
6. Withholding . The Company or any Parent or Subsidiary shall have the right and is hereby authorized to withhold, any applicable withholding taxes in
respect of the Performance Share Units awarded by this Agreement, their grant, vesting or otherwise, and to take such other action as may be necessary in the
opinion of the Company to satisfy all obligations for the payment of such withholding taxes, which may include, without limitation, reducing the number of shares
otherwise distributable to the Participant by the number of Shares whose Fair Market Value is equal to the amount of tax required to be withheld by the Company
or a Parent or Subsidiary as a result of the vesting or settlement or otherwise of the Performance Share Units.
7. Notices . Any notice hereunder to the Company must be addressed to: MGM Resorts International, 3600 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas,
Nevada 89109, Attention: 2005 Omnibus Incentive Plan Administrator, and any
6
 

 
notice hereunder to the Participant must be addressed to the Participant at the Participant’s last address on the records of the Company, subject to the right of either
party to designate at any time hereafter in writing some other address. Any notice shall be deemed to have been duly given on personal delivery or three (3) days
after being sent in a properly sealed envelope, addressed as set forth above, and deposited (with first class postage prepaid) in the United States mail.
8. Entire Agreement . This Agreement and the Plan constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto with regard to the subject matter hereof and
shall supersede any other agreements, representations or understandings (whether oral or written and whether express or implied, and including, without limitation,
any employment agreement between the Participant and the Company or any of its affiliates (including, without limitation, any Parent or Subsidiary) whether
previously entered into, currently effective or entered into in the future that includes terms and conditions regarding equity awards) which relate to the subject
matter hereof.
9. Waiver . No waiver of any breach or condition of this Agreement shall be deemed a waiver of any other or subsequent breach or condition whether of
like or different nature.
10. Participant Undertaking . The Participant agrees to take whatever additional action and execute whatever additional documents the Company may deem
necessary or advisable to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed on either the Participant or the Performance Share Units pursuant
to this Agreement.
11. Successors and Assigns . The provisions of this Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon, the Company and its successors and
assigns and upon the Participant, the Participant’s assigns and the legal representatives, heirs and legatees of the Participant’s estate, whether or not any such person
shall have become a party to this Agreement and agreed in writing to be joined herein and be bound by the terms hereof.
12. Governing Law . The parties hereto agree that the validity, construction and interpretation of this Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the state
of Nevada.
13. Arbitration . Except as otherwise provided in Exhibit A to this Agreement (which constitutes a material provision of this Agreement), disputes relating
to this Agreement shall be resolved by arbitration pursuant to Exhibit A hereto.
14. Clawback Policy . By accepting this award the Participant hereby agrees that this award and any other compensation paid or payable to the Participant
is subject to Company’s Policy on Recovery of Incentive Compensation in Event of Financial Restatement (or any successor policy) as in effect from time to time,
and that this award shall be considered a bonus for purposes of such policy. In addition, the Participant agrees that such policy may be amended from time to time
by the Board in a manner designed to comply with applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements. The Participant also hereby agrees that the award
granted hereunder and any other compensation payable to the Participant shall be subject to recovery (in whole or in part) by the Company to the minimum extent
required by applicable law and/or stock exchange listing requirements.
15. Amendment . This Agreement may not be altered, modified, or amended except by written instrument signed by the parties hereto; provided , that the
Company may alter, modify or amend this Agreement unilaterally if such change is not materially adverse to the Participant or to cause this Agreement to comply
with applicable law or avoid the imposition of any tax, interest or penalty under Section 409A.
16. Severability . The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any portion of this Agreement is declared contrary to any law, regulation or is
otherwise invalid, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall nevertheless be binding and enforceable.
17. Execution . Each party agrees that an electronic, facsimile or digital signature or an online acceptance or acknowledgment will be accorded the full
legal force and effect of a handwritten signature under Nevada law. This Agreement may be signed in counterparts, each of which shall be an original, with the
same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon the same instrument.
7
 

 
18. Variation of Pronouns .. All pronouns and any variations thereof contained herein shall be deemed to refer to masculine, feminine, neuter, singular or
plural, as the identity of the pe rson or persons may require.
19. Tax Treatment; Section 409A . The Participant shall be responsible for all taxes with respect to the Performance Share Units.  Notwithstanding the
forgoing or any provision of the Plan or this Agreement:
19.1 The parties agree that this Agreement shall be interpreted to comply with or be exempt from Section 409A, and all provisions of this
Agreement shall be construed in a manner consistent with the requirements for avoiding taxes or penalties under Section 409A.  If any provision of this Agreement
or the Plan contravenes Section 409A or could cause the Participant to incur any tax, interest or penalties under Section 409A, the Committee may, in its sole
discretion and without the Participant’s consent, modify such provision in order to comply with the requirements of Section 409A or to satisfy the conditions of any
exception therefrom, or otherwise to avoid the imposition of the additional income tax and interest under Section 409A, while maintaining, to the maximum extent
practicable, the original intent and economic benefit to the Participant, without materially increasing the cost to the Company, of the applicable
provision.  However, the Company makes no guarantee regarding the tax treatment of the Performance Share Units and none of the Company, its Parent,
Subsidiaries or affiliates, nor any of their employees or representatives shall have any liability to the Participant with respect thereto.
19.2 A termination of employment shall not be deemed to have occurred for purposes of any provision of this Agreement providing for the
payment of any amounts or benefits considered “nonqualified deferred compensation” under Section 409A upon or following a termination of employment unless
such termination is also a “separation from service” within the meaning of Section 409A and, for purposes of any such provision of this Agreement, references to a
“termination,” “termination of employment” or like terms shall mean “separation from service.”  If the Participant is deemed on the date of termination to be a
“specified employee” within the meaning of that term under Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B), then with regard to any payment or the provision of any benefit that is
considered nonqualified deferred compensation under Section 409A payable on account of a “separation from service,” such payment or benefit shall be made or
provided at the date which is the earlier of (i) the expiration of the six (6)-month period measured from the date of such “separation from service” of the Participant,
and (ii) the date of the Participant’s death (the “ Delay Period ”).  Upon the expiration of the Delay Period, all payments and benefits delayed pursuant to this
Section 19.2 (whether they would have otherwise been payable in a single sum or in installments in the absence of such delay) shall be paid or reimbursed on the
first business day following the expiration of the Delay Period to the Participant in a lump sum, and any remaining payments and benefits due under this Agreement
shall be paid or provided in accordance with the normal payment dates specified for them herein.
19.3 For purposes of Section 409A, the Participant’s right to receive any installment payments pursuant to this Agreement shall be treated as a
right to receive a series of separate and distinct payments.  Whenever a payment under this Agreement specifies a payment period with reference to a number of
days (e.g., “payment shall be made within thirty (30) days following the date of termination”), the actual date of payment within the specified period shall be within
the sole discretion of the Company.
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
 
8
 

Exhibit 10.5(41)
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Performance Share Units Agreement as of the date first written above.
 
 
  
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
 
 
By:
  
Name:
  
Title:
  
 
PARTICIPANT
 
 
By:
  
Name:
  
 
 
 
 
 
[Signature Page to Performance Share Units Agreement]

Exhibit 10.5(41)
 
EXHIBIT A
ARBITRATION
This Exhibit A sets forth the methods for resolving disputes should any arise under the Agreement, and accordingly, this Exhibit A shall be considered a
part of the Agreement.
 
1. 
Except for a claim by either Participant or the Company for injunctive relief where such would be otherwise authorized by law, any controversy or claim
arising out of or relating to the Agreement or the breach hereof including without limitation any claim involving the interpretation or application of the Agreement
or the Plan, shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with the employment arbitration rules then in effect of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation
Service (“ JAMS ”), to the extent not inconsistent with this paragraph. This Exhibit A covers any claim Participant might have against any officer, director,
employee, or agent of the Company, or any of the Company’s subsidiaries, divisions, and affiliates, and all successors and assigns of any of them. The promises by
the Company and Participant to arbitrate differences, rather than litigate them before courts or other bodies, provide consideration for each other, in addition to
other consideration provided under the Agreement.
 
2. Claims Subject to Arbitration : This Exhibit A contemplates mandatory arbitration to the fullest extent permitted by law. Only claims that are justiciable
under applicable state or federal law are covered by this Exhibit A. Such claims include any and all alleged violations of any state or federal law whether common
law, statutory, arising under regulation or ordinance, or any other law, brought by any current or former employees.
 
3. Non-Waiver of Substantive Rights : This Exhibit A does not waive any rights or remedies available under applicable statutes or common law. However, it
does waive Participant’s right to pursue those rights and remedies in a judicial forum. By signing the Agreement and the acknowledgment at the end of this Exhibit
A, the undersigned Participant voluntarily agrees to arbitrate his or her claims covered by this Exhibit A.
 
4. Time Limit to Pursue Arbitration; Initiation : To ensure timely resolution of disputes, Participant and the Company must initiate arbitration within the statute
of limitations (deadline for filing) provided for by applicable law pertaining to the claim. The failure to initiate arbitration within this time limit will bar any such
claim. The parties understand that the Company and Participant are waiving any longer statutes of limitations that would otherwise apply, and any aggrieved party
is encouraged to give written notice of any claim as soon as possible after the event(s) in dispute so that arbitration of any differences may take place promptly. The
parties agree that the aggrieved party must, within the time frame provided by this Exhibit A, give written notice of a claim pursuant to Section 7 of the Agreement.
In the event such notice is to be provided to the Company, the Participant shall provide a copy of such notice of a claim to the Company’s Executive Vice President
and General Counsel. Written notice shall identify and describe the nature of the claim, the supporting facts and the relief or remedy sought.
 
5. Selecting an Arbitrator : This Exhibit A mandates Arbitration under the then current rules of the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service (JAMS)
regarding employment disputes. The arbitrator shall be either a retired judge or an attorney experienced in employment law and licensed to practice in the state in
which arbitration is convened. The parties shall select one arbitrator from among a list of three qualified neutral arbitrators provided by JAMS. If the parties are
unable to agree on the arbitrator, each party shall strike one name and the remaining named arbitrator shall be selected.
 
6. Representation/Arbitration Rights and Procedures :
 
  
a. 
Participant may be represented by an attorney of his/her choice at his/her own expense.
 
  
b. 
The arbitrator shall apply the substantive law (and the law of remedies, if applicable) of Nevada (without regard to its choice of law provisions)
and/or federal law when applicable. In all cases, this Exhibit A shall provide for the broadest level of arbitration of claims between the Company and Participant
under Nevada or applicable federal law. The arbitrator is without jurisdiction to apply any different substantive law or law of remedies.
 
  
c. 
The arbitrator shall have no authority to award non-economic damages or punitive damages except where such relief is specifically authorized by
an applicable state or federal statute or common law. In such a situation, the arbitrator shall specify in the award the specific statute or other basis under which such
relief is granted.
 
 

 
  
d. 
The applicable law with respect to privilege, including attorney-client privilege, work product, and offers to compromise must be followed.
 
  
e. 
The parties shall have the right to conduct reasonable discovery, including written and oral (deposition) discovery and to subpoena and/or request
copies of records, documents and other relevant discoverable information consistent with the procedural rules of JAMS. The arbitrator shall decide disputes
regarding the scope of discovery and shall have authority to regulate the conduct of any hearing and/or trial proceeding. The arbitrator shall have the right to
entertain a motion to dismiss and/or motion for summary judgment.
 
  
f. 
The parties shall exchange witness lists at least 30 days prior to the trial/hearing procedure. The arbitrator shall have subpoena power so that either
Participant or the Company may summon witnesses. The arbitrator shall use the Federal Rules of Evidence. Both parties have the right to file a post hearing brief.
Any party, at its own expense, may arrange for and pay the cost of a court reporter to provide a stenographic record of the proceedings.
 
  
g. 
Any arbitration hearing or proceeding shall take place in private, not open to the public, in Las Vegas, Nevada.
 
7. Arbitrator’s Award : The arbitrator shall issue a written decision containing the specific issues raised by the parties, the specific findings of fact, and the
specific conclusions of
 
  
law. The award shall be rendered promptly, typically within 30 days after conclusion of the arbitration hearing, or the submission of post-hearing briefs if
requested. The arbitrator may not award any relief or remedy in excess of what a court could grant under applicable law. The arbitrator’s decision is final and
binding on both parties.. Judgment upon an award rendered by the arbitrator may be entered in any court having competent jurisdiction.
 
  
a. 
Either party may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel arbitration under this Exhibit A and to enforce an arbitration
award.
 
  
b. 
In the event of any administrative or judicial action by any agency or third party to adjudicate a claim on behalf of Participant which is subject to
arbitration under this Exhibit A, Participant hereby waives the right to participate in any monetary or other recovery obtained by such agency or third party in any
such action, and Participant’s sole remedy with respect to any such claim shall be any award decreed by an arbitrator pursuant to the provisions of this Exhibit A.
 
8. Fees and Expenses : The Company shall be responsible for paying any filing fee and the fees and costs of the arbitrator; provided, however, that if
Participant is the party initiating the claim, Participant will contribute an amount equal to the filing fee to initiate a claim in the court of general jurisdiction in the
state in which Participant is (or was last) employed by the Company. Participant and the Company shall each pay for their own expenses, attorney’s fees (a party’s
responsibility for his/her/its own attorney’s fees is only limited by any applicable statute specifically providing that attorney’s fees may be awarded as a remedy),
and costs and fees regarding witness, photocopying and other preparation expenses. If any party prevails on a statutory claim that affords the prevailing party
attorney’s fees and costs, or if there is a written agreement providing for attorney’s fees and/or costs, the arbitrator may award reasonable attorney’s fees and/or
costs to the prevailing party, applying the same standards a court would apply under the law applicable to the claim(s).
 
9. 
The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A shall survive the termination of Participant’s employment with the Company and the expiration of the
Agreement. These arbitration provisions can only be modified or revoked in a writing signed by both parties and which expressly states an intent to modify or
revoke the provisions of this Exhibit A.
 
10. 
The arbitration provisions of this Exhibit A do not alter or affect the termination provisions of this Agreement.
 
11. 
Capitalized terms not defined in this Exhibit A shall have the same definition as in the Agreement to which this is Exhibit A.
 
12. 
If any provision of this Exhibit A is adjudged to be void or otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of Exhibit A. All other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
 
 
A-2
 

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
BOTH PARTIES ACKNOWLEDGE THAT: THEY HAVE CAREFULLY READ THIS EXHIBIT A IN ITS ENTIRETY, THEY UNDERSTAND ITS TERMS,
EXHIBIT A CONSTITUTES A MATERIAL TERM AND CONDITION OF THE PERFORMANCE SHARE UNITS AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES
TO WHICH IT IS EXHIBIT A, AND THEY AGREE TO ABIDE BY ITS TERMS.
The parties also specifically acknowledge that by agreeing to the terms of this Exhibit A, they are waiving the right to pursue claims covered by this Exhibit A in a
judicial forum and instead agree to arbitrate all such claims before an arbitrator without a court or jury. It is specifically understood that this Exhibit A does not
waive any rights or remedies which are available under applicable state and federal statutes or common law. Both parties enter into this Exhibit A voluntarily and
not in reliance on any promises or representation by the other party other than those contained in the Agreement or in this Exhibit A.
Participant further acknowledges that Participant has been given the opportunity to discuss this Exhibit A with Participant’s private legal counsel and that
Participant has availed himself/herself of that opportunity to the extent Participant wishes to do so.
[The remainder of this page is left blank intentionally.]
 
 
 
A-3
 

Exhibit 12
 
MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL
 
COMPUTATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
(In thousands, except ratio data)
 
 
 
Years Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
 
 
2013
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Earnings:
  
    
    
    
    
  
Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes and
(income) loss from unconsolidated affiliates
 $
852,517  $
787,868  $
(1,224,189)  $
435,761  $
202,550 
Fixed charges (see below)
  
806,030   
814,731   
862,377   
846,321   
862,417 
Distributed income from unconsolidated affiliates
  
13,050   
16,905   
29,333   
15,568   
17,038 
Less: Preference security dividend requirements of consolidated
subsidiaries (c)
  
(26,175)   
(546)   
—   
—   
— 
Less: Capitalized interest
  
(111,110)   
(119,958)   
(64,798)   
(29,260)   
(5,070)
    Total earnings
  
1,534,312   
1,499,000   
(397,277)   
1,268,390   
1,076,935 
Fixed charges:
   
    
    
    
    
 
Interest expense, net (a)
 $
668,745  $
694,773  $
797,579  $
817,061  $
857,347 
Preference security dividend requirements of consolidated
subsidiaries (c)
  
26,175   
546   
—   
—   
— 
Capitalized interest
  
111,110   
119,958   
64,798   
29,260   
5,070 
    Total fixed charges
  
806,030   
815,277   
862,377   
846,321   
862,417 
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
 
1.90x 
 
1.84x 
 
(b) 
 
1.50x 
 
1.25x 
Deficiency
 $
—  $
—  $
1,259,654  $
—  $
—
 
 
(a)
Interest expense does not include the interest factor of rental expense as these amounts are not material. 
(b)
Earnings were inadequate to cover fixed charges.
(c)  
Preference security dividend is the amount of pretax earnings that is required to pay the dividends as well as the accretion of the carrying value of redeemable
noncontrolling interest, both relating to the non-voting economic interests of MGM National Harbor.

Exhibit 21
 
Subsidiaries of MGM Resorts International
 
Listed below are the majority-owned subsidiaries of MGM Resorts International as of December 31, 2017. The names of certain subsidiaries have been omitted
because considered in the aggregate as a single subsidiary they would not constitute a significant subsidiary.
 
Blue Tarp reDevelopment, LLC
Massachusetts
MGM Springfield reDevelopment, LLC
Massachusetts
Beau Rivage Resorts, LLC
Mississippi
Destron, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Grand (International), Pte Ltd.
Singapore
MGM Resorts International Marketing, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Resorts International Marketing, Ltd.
Hong Kong
Las Vegas Arena Management, LLC
Nevada
Mandalay Resort Group
Nevada
550 Leasing Company II, LLC
Nevada
Circus Circus Casinos, Inc.
Nevada
Diamond Gold, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Elgin Sub, Inc.
Nevada
Mandalay Bay, LLC
Nevada
Mandalay Employment, LLC
Nevada
Mandalay Place LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Festival Grounds, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Festival Grounds II, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Mississippi, Inc.
Mississippi
M.S.E. Investments, Incorporated (“ MSE ”)
Nevada
Gold Strike L.V.
Nevada
Victoria Partners
Nevada
Arena Land Holdings, LLC
Nevada
New York-New York Tower, LLC
Nevada
Park District Holdings, LLC
Nevada
New Castle Corp.
Nevada
Ramparts, Inc.
Nevada
Vintage Land Holdings, LLC
Nevada
Metropolitan Marketing, LLC
Nevada
MMNY Land Company, Inc.
New York
MGM Finance Corp.
Delaware
MGM Grand Detroit, Inc.
Delaware
MGM Grand Detroit, LLC
Delaware
MGM Grand Hotel, LLC
Nevada
Grand Laundry, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Grand Condominiums,  LLC
Nevada
MGM Grand Condominiums II, LLC
Nevada
MGM Grand Condominiums III, LLC
Nevada
Tower B, LLC
Nevada
Tower C, LLC
Nevada
MGM Growth Properties LLC
Delaware
MGM Growth Properties OP GP LLC
Delaware
MGM Growth Properties Operating Partnership LP
Delaware
MGP Finance Co-Issuer Inc.
Delaware
MGP Lessor Holdings, LLC
Delaware
MGP Lessor, LLC
Delaware
MGM Hospitality, LLC
Nevada
MGM Hospitality Global, LLC
MGM Hospitality International, LP
MGM Hospitality International, GP, Ltd.
Nevada
Cayman Islands
Cayman Islands
MGM  Hospitality Holdings, LLC
Dubai
MGM Hospitality Development, LLC
Dubai
 

 
MGM Hospitality International Holdings, Ltd.
Isle of Man
MGM Asia Pacific Limited (f/k/a MGM Resorts China Holdings Limited)
Hong Kong
MGM  (Beijing) Hospitality Services, Ltd.
Beijing
MGM Hospitality India Private, Ltd.
India
MGM International, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts International Holdings, Ltd.
Isle of Man
MGM China Holdings, Ltd.
Cayman Islands
MGM Resorts Japan, LLC
Japan
MGM Resorts West Japan, LLC
Japan
MGM Branding and Development Holdings, Ltd.
BVI
MGM Development Services Limited
Macau
MGM Lessee, LLC
Delaware
MGM National Harbor, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Advertising, Inc.
Nevada
VidiAd
Nevada
MGM Resorts Arena Holdings, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Development, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Global Development, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts International Operations, Inc.
Nevada
MGM Resorts Land Holdings, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Interactive, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Regional Operations, LLC
MGM Resorts Retail
Nevada
Nevada
MGM Resorts Sub 1, LLC
Nevada
Las Vegas Basketball Ventures, LLC
Nevada
MGM Public Policy, LLC
Nevada
Park Theater, LLC
Nevada
Grand Garden Arena Management, LLC
Nevada
MGM Resorts Venue Management, LLC
Nevada
MGM Springfield, LLC
Massachusetts
MGMM Insurance Company
Nevada
Mirage Resorts, Incorporated
Nevada
AC Holding Corp.
Nevada
AC Holding Corp. II
Nevada
Bellagio, LLC
Nevada
LV Concrete Corp.
Nevada
MAC, CORP.
New Jersey
        Marina District Development Holding Co., LLC
New Jersey
Marina District Development Company, LLC (dba Borgata)
New Jersey
MGM Resorts Aviation Corp.
Nevada
MGM Resorts Corporate Services
Nevada
MGM Resorts Design & Development (fka MGM Resorts International Design)
Nevada
MGM Resorts Manufacturing Corp.
Nevada
MH, Inc.
Nevada
Mirage Laundry Services Corp.
Nevada
MGM CC, LLC
Nevada
Project CC, LLC
Nevada
       Aria Resort & Casino, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Facilities Management, LLC
Nevada
CityCenter Realty Corporation
Nevada
       CityCenter Retail Holdings Management, LLC
Nevada
Vdara Condo Hotel, LLC
Nevada
New York-New York Hotel & Casino, LLC
Nevada
Vintage Land Holdings II, LLC
Nevada
PRMA, LLC
Nevada
PRMA Land Development Company
Nevada
The Mirage Casino-Hotel, LLC
Nevada
The Signature Condominiums, LLC
Nevada
Signature Tower I, LLC
Nevada
Signature Tower 2, LLC
Nevada
Signature Tower 3, LLC
Nevada
Vendido, LLC
Nevada
 
 
 
 
 

Exhibit 23.1
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement Nos. 333-00187, 333-22957, 333- 42729, 333-73155, 333-77061,
333-50880, 333-105964, 333-124864, 333-160117, and 333-198011 on Form S-8 and No. 333-202427 on Form S-3, of our reports dated
March 1, 2018, relating to the consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule of MGM Resorts International and
subsidiaries, and the effectiveness of MGM Resorts International and subsidiaries’ internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this
Annual Report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International for the year ended December 31, 2017.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
Las Vegas, Nevada 
March 1, 2018
 
 

Exhibit 23.2
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement Nos. 333-00187, 333-22957, 333- 42729, 333-73155, 333-77061,
333-50880, 333-105964, 333-124864, 333-160117, and 333-198011 on Form S-8 and No. 333-202427 on Form S-3, of our report dated
February 19, 2018, relating to the consolidated financial statements of CityCenter Holdings, LLC and subsidiaries, appearing in this Annual
Report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International for the year ended December 31, 2017.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
Las Vegas, Nevada 
March 1, 2018
 
 

 
Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATION
I, James J. Murren, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
 
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
 
b)
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision,
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
 
c)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness
of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
 
d)
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
 
a)
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
 
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
 
March 1, 2018
 
/s/ J AMES J. M URREN
 
 
James J. Murren
 
 
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
 
 

 
Exhibit 31.2
CERTIFICATION
I, Daniel J. D’Arrigo, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of MGM Resorts International;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
 
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
 
b)
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision,
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
 
c)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness
of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
 
d)
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
 
a)
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely
to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
 
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
 
March 1, 2018
 
/s/ D ANIEL  J. D’A RRIGO
 
 
Daniel J. D’Arrigo
 
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
 
 

 
Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the Annual Report of MGM Resorts International (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2017 as filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, James J. Murren, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of the Company,
certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and result of operations of the Company.
 
 
/s/ J AMES J. M URREN
James J. Murren
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
March 1, 2018
A signed original of this certification has been provided to the Company and will be retained by the Company and furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission or its staff upon request.
 

 
Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the Annual Report of MGM Resorts International (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2017 as filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Daniel J. D’Arrigo, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the
Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge, that:
(1)
The Report fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2)
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and result of operations of the Company.
 
 
/s/ D ANIEL J. D’A RRIGO
Daniel J. D’Arrigo
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer 
March 1, 2018
A signed original of this certification has been provided to the Company and will be retained by the Company and furnished to the Securities and Exchange
Commission or its staff upon request.
 

 
Exhibit 99.1
DESCRIPTION OF OUR OPERATING RESORTS
The following information describes each of our operating resorts, including their key amenities, features and awards.
Bellagio
Bellagio is located at the heart of the Las Vegas Strip and has earned the prestigious Five Diamond award from the American Automobile Association
(“AAA”) since 2001.  The resort is richly decorated, including a conservatory filled with unique botanical displays that change with the seasons.  At the front of
Bellagio is an eight-acre lake featuring over 1,000 fountains that come alive at regular intervals in a choreographed ballet of water, music and lights.  Bellagio also
offers  over  200,000  square  feet  of  convention  space.   For  both  business  and  leisure  customers,  Bellagio’s  restaurants  offer  the  finest  choices,  including  Five
Diamond award winners Picasso and Le Cirque.  Leisure travelers can also enjoy Bellagio’s expansive pool, world-class spa and Gallery of Fine Arts.  Via Bellagio
features luxury retail shops and restaurants.  
Bellagio features O, the Cirque du Soleil production where world-class acrobats, synchronized swimmers, divers and characters perform in, on, and above
water.   Other  entertainment  options  include  the  nightclub  The  Bank,  Hyde  Lounge  overlooking  the  Bellagio  fountains  and  several  other  unique  bars  and
lounges.  Bellagio is connected via a covered walkway with Vdara and by a people mover to Crystals.
MGM Grand Las Vegas
MGM Grand Las Vegas, located on the corner of the Las Vegas Strip and Tropicana Avenue is a recipient of the prestigious AAA Four Diamond award.  In
addition to the standard room offerings, the resort also offers several unique room offerings, including: StayWell, a unique wellness hotel experience; Skylofts,
ultra-luxurious penthouse suites featuring the ultimate in personal service and a AAA Five Diamond award winner; and the exclusive Mansion for premium gaming
customers.  Additionally, The Signature at MGM Grand is a connecting AAA Four Star all-suite, non-smoking, non-gaming development featuring three towers.
The resort boasts an extensive array of restaurants including two restaurants by renowned chef Joël Robuchon – whose self-titled restaurant is a AAA Five
Diamond award recipient and a recipient of a Michelin three-star rating.  Other celebrity chef restaurants include Craftsteak by Tom Colicchio, Michael Mina’s Pub
1842, Emeril Lagasse’s New Orleans Fish House, and Hakkasan.
MGM Grand offers unique entertainment options including the spectacular show KÀ , by Cirque du Soleil, performed in a custom-designed theatre seating
almost 2,000 guests.  The MGM Grand Garden Arena, with a seating capacity of over 16,000, hosts premier concerts, award shows, sporting events including
championship boxing, and other special events.  The David Copperfield Theatre and Brad Garrett’s Comedy Club entertain guests seven nights a week.  
For Daylife and Nightlife club goers, Hakkasan Las Vegas is the ultimate mega-night club and Wet Republic is the ultra-pool dayclub with shared global
superstar resident DJs.  
Other amenities include a traditional Wedding Chapel, numerous retail shopping outlets, a 380,000 square foot conference center, a 90,000 square foot
pillar-less trade show pavilion, and an extensive pool and spa complex.
Mandalay Bay
Mandalay Bay is the first major resort on the Las Vegas Strip to greet visitors arriving by automobile from Southern California.  This AAA Four Diamond
resort features numerous restaurants, such as Charlie Palmer's Aureole, Wolfgang Puck's Lupo, Hubert Keller’s Fleur, Shawn McClain’s Libertine Social and
Michael Mina’s Stripsteak.  Mandalay Bay offers multiple entertainment venues that include a 12,000-seat special events arena, the House of Blues, and a 1,700-
seat showroom which is the home of the Cirque du Soleil Michael Jackson ONE production show.
Mandalay Bay also offers 2.1 million square feet of convention, ballroom and meeting rooms.  At the south end of the convention center is the Shark Reef
Aquarium, exhibiting sharks, other fascinating sea creatures and a Komodo dragon.  Mandalay Bay’s expansive pool and beach area plays host to an array of
evening open air concerts during the pool season and includes a 155,000 square foot casino, a large wave pool, and Moorea, a European-style “ultra” beach and
Daylight Beach Club.  The resort also features Spa Mandalay, a 30,000 square-foot spa and fitness center.
Included within Mandalay Bay is a Four Seasons Hotel with its own lobby, restaurants and pool and spa, providing visitors with 13 years of AAA Five-
Diamond-rated hospitality experience.  The Delano is an all-suite hotel tower within the Mandalay Bay
 

 
complex.  The Delano includes its own spa and fitness center, a lounge and two restaurants, inc luding Rivea and the Skyfall lounge, created by famed chef Alain
Ducasse and located on the top floor of The Delano.
The Mirage
The Mirage is a tropically-themed hotel and casino resort located at the center of the Las Vegas Strip and is recognized by AAA as a Four Diamond
resort.  The exterior of the resort is landscaped with lagoons and other water features centered around a volcano that erupts at scheduled intervals.  Inside the front
entrance is an atrium with a tropical garden and additional water features capped by a 100-foot-high glass dome.  Located at the rear of the hotel, adjacent to the
swimming pool area, is Siegfried & Roy’s Secret Garden and Dolphin Habitat , an attraction featuring bottlenose dolphins that allow guests to view the beautiful
exotic animals of Siegfried & Roy, the world-famous illusionists.
The Mirage features a wide array of restaurants, including Tom Colicchio’s Heritage Steak, Stack, Osteria Costa and Fin.  Casual dining options include
Cravings Buffet, Carnegie Deli, California Pizza Kitchen and Pantry.  Entertainment at The Mirage features The Beatles Love, by Cirque du Soleil; celebrity
impressionist and ventriloquist Terry Fator, winner of NBC’s America’s Got Talent competition; and The Mirage Aces of Comedy series featuring acts such as
Daniel Tosh, Ron White, Ray Romano and others.  Nightlife options at The Mirage include 1OAKand Parlor, an intimate piano lounge.  The Mirage has numerous
retail shopping outlets and 170,000 square feet of meetings and convention space, including the 90,000-square foot Mirage Events Center.
Luxor
Luxor is a 4,400 room pyramid-shaped hotel and casino resort situated at the south end of the Las Vegas strip between Mandalay Bay and Excalibur.  In
addition to the well-known beam of light, brilliantly shining from the top of the pyramid, Luxor offers over 20,000 square feet of convention and meeting space,
Nurture Spa, and food and entertainment venues on three different levels beneath a soaring hotel atrium.  Nightlife and dining at Luxor includes, Centra, an exotic
and inviting lounge located in the center of the casino, TENDER steak & seafood, rated one of Las Vegas’ top steakhouses, Public House, the popular East Coast
hangout featuring casual cocktails, comfortable food and spectacular sports and Tacos & Tequila, a Mexican style menu intermixed with a rock-n-roll flair.  The
Luxor is home to Titanic: The Artifacts Exhibition, and Bodies… The Exhibition .  With some of the most popular entertainment in Las Vegas, Luxor features the
popular entertainment show Blue Man Group, the Cirque du Soleil production show CRISS ANGEL Mindfreak Live! , “Entertainer of the Year” prop comic Carrot
Top and the adult dance revue Fantasy .
Excalibur
Excalibur  is  a  castle-themed  hotel  and  casino  complex  situated  immediately  north  of  Luxor  at  the  corner  of  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  and  Tropicana
Avenue.  Entertainment options at Excalibur include the long-running Tournament of Kings dinner show, The Australian Bee Gees and the male revue Thunder
from Down Under .  Excalibur’s other world-class venues include the Fun Dungeon, featuring the Excalibur arcade and midway, and the Castle Walk, a shopping
expedition featuring artisans’ booths and specialty shops.  In addition, Excalibur has several restaurants and bars including Dick’s Last Resort, a wacky and wild
down-to-earth dining and entertainment option, Buca di Beppo, serving fresh, authentic family style Italian food and the Steakhouse at Camelot, offering the finest
cuts of beef, along with the freshest seafood flown in daily.  The property also features a fitness facility and spa, as well as a pool with over 30,000 square feet of
deck space.  Excalibur, Luxor and Mandalay Bay are connected by a tram allowing guests to travel easily from resort to resort.
New York-New York
New York-New York is located at the corner of the Las Vegas Strip and Tropicana Avenue.  Pedestrian bridges link New York-New York with both MGM
Grand Las Vegas and Excalibur.  The architecture at New York-New York replicates many of New York City’s landmark buildings and icons, including the Statue
of Liberty, the Empire State Building, the Brooklyn Bridge, and a Coney Island-style roller coaster.  New York-New York also features several restaurants and
numerous bars and lounges, including nationally recognized Tom’s Urban, Shake Shack, and Nine Fine Irishmen, an authentic Irish Pub.   New York-New York’s
entertainment options include Zumanity by Cirque du Soleil and The Bar at Times Square piano bar. New York-New York, Monte Carlo and the T-Mobile Arena
are connected by The Park, an eclectic blend of restaurants, bars, and entertainment.  
Monte Carlo
Monte Carlo is located on the Las Vegas Strip adjacent to New York-New York.  The resort currently offers a variety of restaurant offerings, including fine
dining at Bavette’s Steakhouse & Bar, Primrose and Double Barrel Roadhouse. Monte Carlo is being reimagined and rebranded as Park MGM. The transformation,
which is expected to be completed within the next year, will include two distinct experiences: a Las Vegas version of the widely acclaimed NoMad Hotel, as well
as innovative food & beverage offerings, highlighted by Eataly, a vibrant Italian marketplace with cafes, to-go counters and full-service restaurants interspersed
with
 
2

 
high-quality products from sust ainable Italian and local producers. Monte Carlo’s newest attraction is The Park Theater, which opened in December 2016. The
5,200 seat-entertainment venue was created to host word-renowned performers.
Circus Circus Las Vegas
Circus Circus Las Vegas is situated on the north end of the Las Vegas Strip and features the Adventuredome, a five-acre indoor theme park, and the
Midway, which houses performances by circus acts and provides amusement for all ages.  Circus Circus is home to the awarding winning THE Steak House, which
has been voted Best of Las Vegas for over 30 years.  In 2014 the Adventuredome introduced the El Loco roller coaster, where riders will experience twists, turns
and drops very unique in the coaster world as they ascend 90 feet before dropping to experience a feeling of flying.
MGM Grand Detroit
MGM Grand Detroit is the city’s first and only downtown hotel, gaming, and entertainment destination built from the ground up.  The resort features
Wolfgang Puck Steak, TAP sports pub, exciting nightlife amenities, and a luxurious spa.  Additional amenities include a private entrance and lobby for hotel guests
and 30,000 square feet of meeting and events space.
Beau Rivage
Beau Rivage is located on a beachfront site where Interstate 110 meets the Gulf Coast in Biloxi, Mississippi.  Beau Rivage blends world-class amenities
with southern hospitality and features elegantly remodeled guest rooms and suites, numerous restaurants, nightclubs and bars, a 1,550-seat theatre, an upscale
shopping promenade, and a world-class spa and salon.  The resort also has 50,000 square feet of convention space.
Gold Strike Tunica
Gold Strike Tunica is a dockside casino located along the Mississippi River, 20 miles south of Memphis and approximately three miles west of Mississippi
State Highway 61, a major north/south highway connecting Memphis with Tunica County.  The property features an 800-seat showroom, the Chicago Steakhouse,
a coffee shop, a buffet, and 17,000 square feet of meeting space.  Gold Strike Tunica is part of a three-casino development covering approximately 72 acres. The
other two casinos are owned and operated by unaffiliated third parties.  
Borgata
The Borgata Hotel Casino and Spa is located at Renaissance Pointe in Atlantic City, New Jersey.  In addition to its guest rooms and suites and extensive
gaming floor, Borgata offers several specialty restaurants, including Angeline by Michael Symon, Bobby Flay Steak, Izakaya and Wolfgang Puck American Grille.
Borgata also includes various retail  shops, a European-style  health  spa, approximately  90,000 square feet  of meeting  space and unique entertainment  venues,
including the Event Center with 30,000 square feet of event space and The Music Box, a concert venue with 1,000 seats.  
National Harbor
National Harbor is a destination casino resort in Prince George’s County at National Harbor, which is a waterfront development located on the Potomac
River just outside of Washington, D.C. The casino resort includes a boutique hotel with 308 well-appointed rooms, including 74 suites. The resort offers exclusive
restaurants by celebrated chefs José Andrés, Marcus Samuelsson and Michael and Bryan Voltaggio, complementing an array of specialty and quick-casual dining.
The  Theater  at  MGM  National  Harbor,  an  intimate  3,000-seat  entertainment  venue  delivers  A-list  performers  normally  reserved  for  arena-sized  settings.  The
Conservatory at MGM National Harbor is a spectacular 15,000-square-foot floral attraction that changes seasonally.
National Harbor also offers 3 bars and lounges, a two-level, 27,000-square-foot spa and salon with, and an eclectic retail district with multiple offerings
ranging from Fink’s Jewelers, Stitched and Ella Rue to the first standalone boutique for SJP by Sarah Jessica Parker.
MGM Macau
We own approximately 56% of MGM China Holdings Limited, an entity which indirectly owns MGM Macau, a hotel casino resort in Macau S.A.R. MGM
Macau is an award-winning, five-star integrated casino and luxury hotel resort located on the Macau Peninsula, the center of gaming activity in the greater China
region.  The resort’s focal point is the signature Grande Praca and features Portuguese-inspired architecture, dramatic landscapes and a glass ceiling rising over 80
feet above the floor of the resort.  The Grande Praca features unique themed displays and events throughout the year.  MGM Macau has over 1,000 slot machines,
427 gaming tables and multiple VIP and private gaming areas.  The hotel comprises a 35-story tower with over 580 rooms, suites and
 
3

 
private luxury villas .  In addition, MGM Macau offers luxurious amenities, including a variety of diverse restaurants, world-class pool and spa facilities, and over
15,000 square feet of convertible convention space.  The hotel is directly connected to the prestigious 200,000 square foot One Central Complex, which features
many of the world’s leading luxury retailers.
MGM Cotai
MGM Cotai opened February 13, 2018, and is a luxury, award-winning integrated casino and resort located on the Cotai Strip in Macau. The resort offers 1,400
hotel rooms and suites, meeting space, a high-end spa, retail offerings, food and beverage outlets and the Mansion for the ultimate luxury experience. MGM Cotai
also offers Asia’s first dynamic theater and a spectacle that introduces more advanced and innovative forms of entertainment to Macau.
 
4

 
Exhibit 99.2
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF REGULATION AND LICENSING
 
The gaming industry is highly regulated, and we must maintain our licenses and pay gaming taxes to continue our operations. Each of our casinos is subject
to  extensive  regulation  under  the  laws,  rules,  and  regulations  of  the  jurisdiction  where  it  is  located.  These  laws,  rules,  and  regulations  generally  concern  the
responsibility, financial stability, and character of the owners, managers, and persons with financial interest in the gaming operations. Violations of laws in one
jurisdiction could result in disciplinary action in other jurisdictions.
 
In addition to gaming regulations, our businesses are subject to various federal, state, and local laws and regulations of the countries and states in which we
operate. These laws and regulations include, but are not limited to, restrictions and conditions concerning alcoholic beverages, smoking, environmental matters,
employment  and  immigration,  currency  transactions,  taxation,  zoning  and  building  codes,  land  use,  marketing  and  advertising,  timeshare,  lending,  privacy,
telemarketing,  regulations  applicable  under  the  Office  of  Foreign  Asset  Control,  the  Foreign  Corrupt  Practices  Act  and  the  various  reporting  and  anti-money
laundering regulations. Such laws and regulations could change or could be interpreted differently in the future, or new laws and regulations could be enacted. Any
material changes, new laws or regulations, or material differences in interpretations by courts or governmental authorities could adversely affect our business and
operating results.
 
Nevada Government Regulation
 
The ownership and operation of our casino gaming facilities in Nevada are subject to the Nevada Gaming Control Act and the regulations promulgated
thereunder (collectively, the “Nevada Act”), and various local regulations. Our gaming operations are subject to the licensing and regulatory control of the Nevada
Gaming Commission (the “Nevada Commission”), the Nevada State Gaming Control Board (the “Nevada Board”), and various county and city licensing agencies
(the “local authorities”). The Nevada Commission, the Nevada Board, and the local authorities are collectively referred to as the “Nevada Gaming Authorities.”
 
The laws, regulations, and supervisory procedures of the Nevada Gaming Authorities are based upon declarations of public policy that are concerned with,
among other things:
 
 
•
the prevention of unsavory or unsuitable persons from having direct or indirect involvement with gaming at any time or in any capacity;
 
 
•
the establishment and maintenance of responsible accounting practices;
 
 
•
the maintenance of effective controls over the financial practices of licensees, including the establishment of minimum procedures for internal fiscal
affairs and the safeguarding of assets and revenues;
 
 
•
providing reliable record keeping and requiring the filing of periodic reports with the Nevada Gaming Authorities;
 
 
•
the prevention of cheating and fraudulent practices; and
 
 
•
providing a source of state and local revenues through taxation and licensing fees.
 
Any change in the laws, regulations, and supervisory procedures of the Nevada Gaming Authorities could have an adverse effect on our gaming operations.
 
Each of our subsidiaries that currently operate casinos in Nevada (collectively, the “Nevada casino licensees”) is required to be licensed by the Nevada
Gaming Authorities. Each gaming license requires the periodic payment of fees and taxes and is not transferable. MGM Grand Hotel, LLC, New York-New York
Hotel & Casino, LLC, Bellagio, LLC, MGM Resorts Manufacturing Corp., and Aria Resort & Casino, LLC are also licensed as manufacturers and distributors of
gaming  devices  (collectively,  the  “Nevada  manufacturer  and  distributor  licensees”).  Certain  of  our  subsidiaries  have  also  been  licensed  or  found  suitable  as
shareholders, members, or general partners, as relevant, of the Nevada casino licensees and of the Nevada manufacturer and distributor licensees. The Nevada
casino licensees, Nevada manufacturer and distributor licensees, and the foregoing subsidiaries are collectively referred to as the “Nevada licensed subsidiaries.”
 
We, along with Mandalay Resort Group, are required to be registered by the Nevada Commission as publicly traded corporations (collectively, the “Nevada
registered corporations”) and Mirage Resorts, Incorporated is required to be registered as an intermediary company and, as such, each of us is required periodically
to submit detailed financial and operating reports to the Nevada
 

 
Commission and furnish any other information that the Nevada Commission may require. No person may become a stockholder or member of, or receive any
percentage of profits from, the Nevada licensed subsidiaries without first registering with (for equity ownership of 5% or less), or obtaining licenses and approvals
from the Nevada Gaming Authorities. Additionally, the local authorities have taken the position that they have the authority to approve all persons owning or
controlling the stock of any corporation controlling a gaming licensee. The Nevada registered corporations, Mirage Resorts, Incorporated and the Nevada licensed
subsidiaries have obtained from the Nevada Gaming Authorities the various registrations, approvals, permits, and licenses required in order to engage in gaming
activities in Nevada.
 
The Nevada Gaming Authorities may investigate any individual who has a material relationship to, or material involvement with, the Nevada registered
corporations or any of the Nevada licensed subsidiaries to determine whether such individual is suitable or should be licensed as a business associate of a gaming
licensee. Officers, directors, and certain key employees of the Nevada licensed subsidiaries must file applications with the Nevada Gaming Authorities and may be
required to be licensed by the Nevada Gaming Authorities. Officers, directors, and key employees of the Nevada registered corporations who are actively and
directly involved in the gaming activities of the Nevada licensed subsidiaries may be required to be licensed or found suitable by the Nevada Gaming Authorities.
The Nevada Gaming Authorities may deny an application for licensing or a finding of suitability for any cause they deem reasonable. A finding of suitability is
comparable  to  licensing,  and  both  require  submission  of  detailed  personal  and  financial  information  followed  by  a  thorough  investigation.  The  applicant  for
licensing or a finding of suitability, or the gaming licensee by which the applicant is employed or for whom the applicant serves, must pay all the costs of the
investigation. Changes in licensed positions must be reported to the Nevada Gaming Authorities, and, in addition to their authority to deny an application for a
finding of suitability or licensure, the Nevada Gaming Authorities have jurisdiction to disapprove a change in a corporate position.
 
If the Nevada Gaming Authorities were to find an officer, director, or key employee unsuitable for licensing or to continue having a relationship with the
Nevada registered corporations or the Nevada licensed subsidiaries, such Nevada registered corporations or Nevada licensed subsidiaries, as applicable, would have
to sever all relationships with that person. In addition, the Nevada Commission may require the Nevada registered corporations or the Nevada licensed subsidiaries
to terminate the employment of any person who refuses to file appropriate applications. Determinations of suitability or of questions pertaining to licensing are not
subject to judicial review in Nevada.
 
The  Nevada  registered  corporations  and  the  Nevada  casino  licensees  are  required  to  submit  detailed  financial  and  operating  reports  to  the  Nevada
Commission. Substantially all of the Nevada registered corporations’ and the Nevada licensed subsidiaries’ material loans, leases, sales of securities, and similar
financing transactions must be reported to or approved by the Nevada Commission.
 
If the Nevada Commission determined that we or a Nevada licensed subsidiary violated the Nevada Act, it could limit, condition, suspend, or revoke,
subject to compliance with certain statutory and regulatory procedures, our gaming licenses and those of the Nevada licensed subsidiaries. In addition, the Nevada
registered corporations and the Nevada licensed subsidiaries and the persons involved could be subject to substantial fines for each separate violation of the Nevada
Act at the discretion of the Nevada Commission. Further, a supervisor could be appointed by the Nevada Commission to operate the gaming establishments and,
under certain circumstances, earnings generated during the supervisor’s appointment (except for the reasonable rental value of the gaming establishments) could be
forfeited to the State of Nevada. Limitation, conditioning, or suspension of any gaming license or the appointment of a supervisor could (and revocation of any
gaming license would) materially adversely affect our gaming operations.
 
Any beneficial holder of our voting securities, regardless of the number of shares owned, may be required to file an application, be investigated, and have
his or her suitability as a beneficial holder of the voting securities determined if the Nevada Commission has reason to believe that such ownership would otherwise
be inconsistent with the declared policies of the State of Nevada. The applicant must pay all costs of investigation incurred by the Nevada Gaming Authorities in
conducting any such investigation.
 
The Nevada Act requires any person who acquires more than 5% of any class of our voting securities to report the acquisition to the Nevada Commission.
The Nevada Act requires that beneficial owners of more than 10% of any class of our voting securities apply to the Nevada Commission for a finding of suitability
within 30 days after the Chairman of the Nevada Board mails the written notice requiring such filing. Under certain circumstances, an “institutional investor” as
defined in the Nevada Act, which acquires more than 10% but not more than 25% of any class of our voting securities, may apply to the Nevada Commission for a
waiver of such finding of suitability if such institutional investor holds the voting securities for investment purposes only. An institutional investor that has obtained
a waiver may, in certain circumstances, own up to 29% of the voting securities of a registered company for a limited period of time and maintain the waiver.
 
An institutional investor will be deemed to hold voting securities for investment purposes if it acquires and holds the voting securities in the ordinary course
of business as an institutional investor and not for the purpose of causing, directly or indirectly, the election of a majority of the members of our board of directors,
any change in our corporate charter, bylaws, management, policies, or
 
2

 
operations,  or  any  of  our  gaming  affiliates,  or  any  other  action  that  the  Nevada  Commission  finds  to  be  inconsistent  with  holding  our  voting  securities  for
investment purposes only. Activities that are not deemed to be inconsistent with holding voting securities for investment purposes only include:
 
 
•
voting on all matters voted on by stockholders;
 
 
•
making financial and other inquiries of management of the type normally made by securities analysts for informational purposes and not to cause a
change in its management, policies, or operations; and
 
 
•
such other activities as the Nevada Commission may determine to be consistent with such investment intent.
 
If the beneficial holder of voting securities who must be found suitable is a corporation, partnership, or trust, it must submit detailed business and financial
information including a list of beneficial owners. The applicant is required to pay all costs of investigation.
 
Any person who fails or refuses to apply for a finding of suitability or a license within 30 days after being ordered to do so by the Nevada Commission or
the  Chairman  of  the  Nevada  Board,  or  who  refuses  or  fails  to  pay  the  investigative  costs  incurred  by  the  Nevada  Gaming  Authorities  in  connection  with
investigation of its application, may be found unsuitable. The same restrictions apply to a record owner if the record owner, after request, fails to identify the
beneficial owner. Any stockholder found unsuitable and who holds, directly or indirectly, any beneficial ownership of our common stock beyond such period of
time as may be prescribed by the Nevada Commission may be guilty of a criminal offense. We will be subject to disciplinary action if, after we receive notice that a
person is unsuitable to be a stockholder or to have any other relationship with us or a Nevada licensed subsidiary, we or any of the Nevada licensed subsidiaries:
 
 
•
pays that person any dividend or interest upon any of our voting securities;
 
 
•
allows that person to exercise, directly or indirectly, any voting right conferred through securities held by that person;
 
 
•
pays remuneration in any form to that person for services rendered or otherwise; or
 
 
•
fails to pursue all lawful efforts to require such unsuitable person to relinquish his or her voting securities including if necessary, the immediate
purchase of the voting securities for cash at fair market value.
 
The Nevada Commission may, in its discretion, require the holder of any debt security of the Nevada registered corporations to file an application, be
investigated, and be found suitable to hold the debt security. If the Nevada Commission determines that a person is unsuitable to own such security, then pursuant
to the Nevada Act, the registered corporation can be sanctioned, including the loss of its approvals, if, without the prior approval of the Nevada Commission, it:
 
 
•
pays to the unsuitable person any dividend, interest, or any distribution whatsoever;
 
 
•
recognizes any voting right by such unsuitable person in connection with such securities;
 
 
•
pays the unsuitable person remuneration in any form; or
 
 
•
makes any payment to the unsuitable person by way of principal, redemption, conversion, exchange, liquidation, or similar transaction.
 
We are required to maintain a current stock ledger in Nevada that may be examined by the Nevada Gaming Authorities at any time. If any securities are held
in trust by an agent or by a nominee, the record holder may be required to disclose the identity of the beneficial owner to the Nevada Gaming Authorities. A failure
to make such disclosure may be grounds for finding the record holder unsuitable. We are also required to render maximum assistance in determining the identity of
the beneficial owner. The Nevada Commission has the power to require the Nevada registered corporations’ stock certificates to bear a legend indicating that such
securities are subject to the Nevada Act. However, to date, the Nevada Commission has not imposed such a requirement on the Nevada registered corporations.
 
The Nevada registered corporations may not make a public offering of any securities without the prior approval of the Nevada Commission if the securities
or the proceeds therefrom are intended to be used to construct, acquire, or finance gaming facilities in Nevada, or to retire or extend obligations incurred for those
purposes or for similar purposes. An approval, if given, does not
 
3

 
constitute  a  finding,  recommendation,  or  approval  by  the  Nevada  Commission  or  the  Nevada  Board  as  to  the  accuracy  or  adequacy  of  the  prospectus  or  the
investment merits of the securities. Any representation to the contrary is unlawful.
 
On July 27, 2017, the Nevada Commission granted the Nevada registered corporations prior approval to make public offerings for a period of three years,
subject to certain conditions.
 
Changes in control of the Nevada registered corporations through merger, consolidation, stock or asset acquisitions, management or consulting agreements,
or any act or conduct by a person whereby he or she obtains control may not occur without the prior approval of the Nevada Commission. Entities seeking to
acquire control of a registered corporation must satisfy the Nevada Board and the Nevada Commission concerning a variety of stringent standards prior to assuming
control of the registered corporation. The Nevada Commission may also require controlling stockholders, officers, directors, and other persons having a material
relationship or involvement with the entity proposing to acquire control to be investigated and licensed as part of the approval process relating to the transaction.
 
The Nevada legislature has declared that some corporate acquisitions opposed by management, repurchases of voting securities, and corporate defensive
tactics affecting Nevada gaming licensees and registered corporations that are affiliated with those operations may be injurious to stable and productive corporate
gaming. The Nevada Commission has established a regulatory scheme to ameliorate the potentially adverse effects of these business practices upon Nevada’s
gaming industry and to further Nevada’s policy to:
 
 
•
assure the financial stability of corporate gaming operators and their affiliates;
 
 
•
preserve the beneficial aspects of conducting business in the corporate form; and
 
 
•
promote a neutral environment for the orderly governance of corporate affairs.
 
Approvals are, in certain circumstances, required from the Nevada Commission before we can make exceptional repurchases of voting securities above the
current market price and before a corporate acquisition opposed by management can be consummated. The Nevada Act also requires prior approval of a plan of
recapitalization proposed by a registered corporation’s board of directors in response to a tender offer made directly to the registered corporation’s stockholders for
the purpose of acquiring control of that corporation.
 
License fees and taxes, computed in various ways depending on the type of gaming or activity involved, are payable to the State of Nevada and to the local
authorities. Depending upon the particular fee or tax involved, these fees and taxes are payable either monthly, quarterly, or annually and are based upon either:
 
 
•
a percentage of the gross revenues received;
 
 
•
the number of gaming devices operated; or
 
 
•
the number of table games operated.
 
The tax on gross revenues received is generally 6.75%. A live entertainment tax is also paid on charges for admission to any facility where certain forms of
live entertainment are provided. The Nevada manufacturer and distributor licensees also pay certain fees and taxes to the State of Nevada.
 
Because we are involved in gaming ventures outside of Nevada, we are required to deposit with the Nevada Board, and thereafter maintain, a revolving fund
in the amount of $10,000 to pay the expenses of investigation by the Nevada Board of our participation in such foreign gaming. The revolving fund is subject to
increase or decrease at the discretion of the Nevada Commission. Thereafter, we are also required to comply with certain reporting requirements imposed by the
Nevada Act. We would be subject to disciplinary action by the Nevada Commission if we:
 
 
•
knowingly violate any laws of the foreign jurisdiction pertaining to the foreign gaming operation;
 
 
•
fail to conduct the foreign gaming operation in accordance with the standards of honesty and integrity required of Nevada gaming operations;
 
 
4

 
 
•
engage in any activity or enter into any association that is unsuitable because it poses an unreasonable threat to the control of gaming in Nevada,
reflects or tends to reflect discredit or disrepute upon the State of Nevada or gaming in Nevada, or is contrary to the gaming policies of Nevada;
 
 
•
engage in any activity or enter into any association that interferes with the ability of the State of Nevada to collect gaming taxes and fees; or
 
 
•
employ, contract with, or associate with any person in the foreign gaming operation who has been denied a license or a finding of suitability in Nevada
on the ground of personal unsuitability, or who has been found guilty of cheating at gambling.
 
The sale of alcoholic beverages by the Nevada licensed subsidiaries is subject to licensing, control, and regulation by the applicable local authorities. All
licenses are revocable and are not transferable. The agencies involved have full power to limit, condition, suspend, or revoke any such license, and any such
disciplinary action could (and revocation would) have a material adverse effect upon our operations.
 
Michigan Government Regulation and Taxation
 
The Michigan Gaming Control and Revenue Act (the “Michigan Act”) subjects the owners and operators of casino gaming facilities to extensive state
licensing and regulatory requirements. The Michigan Act also authorizes local regulation of casino gaming facilities by the City of Detroit, provided that any such
local ordinances regulating casino gaming are consistent with the Michigan Act and rules promulgated to implement it. We are subject to the Michigan Act through
our ownership interest in MGM Grand Detroit, LLC (the “licensed subsidiary”) which operates MGM Grand Detroit. Our ownership interest in MGM Grand
Detroit, LLC is held by our wholly-owned subsidiary MGM Grand Detroit, Inc.
 
The Michigan Act creates the Michigan Gaming Control Board (the “Michigan Board”) and authorizes it to grant casino licenses to not more than three
applicants who have entered into development agreements with the City of Detroit. The Michigan Board is granted extensive authority to conduct background
investigations  and  determine  the  suitability  of  casino  license  applicants,  affiliated  companies,  officers,  directors,  or  managerial  employees  of  applicants  and
affiliated companies and persons or entities holding a one percent or greater direct or indirect interest in an applicant or affiliated company. Institutional investors
holding less than certain specified amounts of our debt or equity securities are exempted from meeting the suitability requirements of the Michigan Act since we
are a publicly traded corporation, and provided that the securities were purchased for investment purposes only and not for the purpose of influencing or affecting
our affairs. Any person who supplies goods or services to the licensed subsidiary which are directly related to, used in connection with, or affecting gaming, and
any person who supplies other goods or services to the licensed subsidiary on a regular and continuing basis, must obtain a supplier’s license from the Michigan
Board. In addition, any individual employed by the licensed subsidiary or by a supplier licensee whose work duties are related to or involved in the gaming
operation or are performed in a restricted area or a gaming area of the licensed subsidiary must obtain an occupational license from the Michigan Board.
 
The Michigan Act imposes the burden of proof on the applicant for a casino license to establish its suitability to receive and hold the license. The applicant
must establish its suitability as to integrity, moral character and reputation, business probity, financial ability and experience, responsibility, and other criteria
deemed appropriate by the Michigan Board. A casino license is valid for a period of one year and the Michigan Board may refuse to renew it upon a determination
that the licensee no longer meets the requirements for licensure.
 
The Michigan Board may, among other things, revoke, suspend or restrict the licensed subsidiary’s casino license. The licensed subsidiary is also subject to
fines or forfeiture of assets for violations of gaming or liquor control laws or rules. In the event that the licensed subsidiary’s license is revoked or suspended for
more than 120 days, the Michigan Act provides for the appointment of a conservator who, among other things, is required to preserve the assets to ensure that they
shall continue to be operated in a sound and businesslike manner, or upon order of the Michigan Board, to sell or otherwise transfer the assets to another person or
entity who meets the requirements of the Michigan Act for licensure, subject to certain approvals and consultations.
 
The Michigan Board has adopted administrative rules to implement the terms of the Michigan Act. Among other things, the rules impose more detailed
substantive and procedural requirements with respect to casino licensing and operations.
 
Included are requirements regarding such things as licensing investigations and hearings, record keeping and retention, contracting, reports to the Michigan
Board, internal control and accounting procedures, security and surveillance, extensions of credit to gaming patrons, conduct of gaming, and transfers of ownership
interests in licensed casinos. The rules also establish numerous
 
5

 
Michigan  Board procedures  regarding  licensing,  disciplinary  and  other hearings,  and similar  matters.  The rules have the force  of law and are  binding on the
Michigan Board as well as on applicants for or holders of casino licenses.
 
Under rules of the Michigan Board, a person or company which intends to acquire shares representing more than a 5% equity interest in a publicly traded
company  which  is  the  holding  company  of  a  Michigan  casino  licensee  must  obtain  approval  of  the  acquisition  from  the  Michigan  Board.  Subsequent  to  the
acquisition, the person or company acquiring the shares must be determined by the Michigan Board to be “suitable” and “qualified” to own the shares. In addition,
if the acquisition is by a company, “key persons” in the company (generally the officers, directors, managerial employees, and significant owners) must also be
determined  to be “suitable”  and “qualified.”  “Institutional  investors” (as that term is defined in the Michigan Act) may generally  obtain a waiver from these
requirements if the institutional investor has less than 15% ownership interest in the publicly traded company. Upon attaining equity ownership of 5% or more, or
filing Schedule 13D or 13G with the SEC, the Michigan Board must be notified by the investor. Unless otherwise ordered by the Michigan Board, institutional
investors acquiring less than 10% equity ownership in the publicly traded company are entitled to an exemption from the approval requirements, but are required to
file an institutional waiver application with the Michigan Board. Institutional investors acquiring 10% or more equity ownership must apply for an institutional
waiver, supplying certain information delineated in Rule 504(3). Pursuant to Rule 504(4), institutional investors acquiring more than 15% equity ownership must
apply  to  the  Michigan  Board  for  approval  of  the  acquisition  within  45  days  after  it  occurs.  The  institutional  investor  and  its  key  persons  may  be  subject  to
suitability and qualification determinations.
 
The term “institutional investor” includes financial institutions, insurance companies, pension funds, mutual funds, etc. The shares held by the institutional
investor must be held for investment purposes only. The following activities are deemed consistent with holding the shares for investment purposes: voting by
proxy furnished by the board of directors, on all matters voted on by the holders of the voting securities; serving as a member of a committee of creditors or
security holders formed in connection with a debt restructuring; nominating a candidate for election or appointment to the board of directors in connection with a
debt restructuring; accepting appointment or election as a member of the board of directors in connection with a debt restructuring and serving in that capacity until
the  conclusion  of  the  member’s  term;  making  financial  and  other  inquiries  of  management  of  the  type  normally  made  by  securities  analysts  for  information
purposes and not to cause a change in its management, policies, or operations; and other activities that the board determines to be consistent with the investment
intent.
 
The  Michigan  Liquor  Control  Commission  licenses,  controls  and  regulates  the  sale  of  alcoholic  beverages  by  the  licensed  subsidiary  pursuant  to  the
Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. The Michigan Act also requires that the licensed subsidiary sell in a manner consistent with the Michigan Liquor Control
Code.
 
The Detroit City Council enacted an ordinance entitled “Casino Gaming Authorization and Casino Development Agreement Certification and Compliance.”
The ordinance authorizes casino gaming only by operators who are licensed by the Michigan Board and are parties to a development agreement which has been
approved and certified by the City Council and is currently in effect, or are acting on behalf of such parties. The development agreement among the City of Detroit,
MGM Grand Detroit, LLC and the Economic Development Corporation of the City of Detroit has been so approved and certified and is currently in effect. Under
the ordinance, the licensed subsidiary is required to submit to the Mayor of Detroit and to the City Council periodic reports regarding its compliance with the
development agreement or, in the event of non-compliance, reasons for non-compliance and an explanation of efforts to comply. The ordinance requires the Mayor
of Detroit to monitor each casino operator’s compliance with its development agreement, to take appropriate enforcement action in the event of default and to
notify the City Council of defaults and enforcement action taken; and, if a development agreement is terminated, it requires the City Council to transmit notice of
such action to the Michigan Board within five business days along with Detroit’s request that the Michigan Board revoke the relevant operator’s casino license. If a
development agreement is terminated, the Michigan Act requires the Michigan Board to revoke the relevant operator’s casino license upon the request of Detroit.
 
The administrative rules of the Michigan Board prohibit the licensed subsidiary or us from entering into a debt transaction affecting the capitalization or
financial viability of MGM Grand Detroit without prior approval from the Michigan Board.
 
The Michigan Act effectively provides for a wagering tax equal to 19% of adjusted gross receipts from gaming operations conducted at a casino. Proceeds
of the wagering tax are shared between the State of Michigan and the City of Detroit. In addition to the wagering tax, the Michigan Act establishes an annual
municipal service fee equal to the greater of $4 million or 1.25% of adjusted gross receipts to be paid to Detroit to defray its cost of hosting casinos, and an annual
assessment, as adjusted annually based upon a consumer price index, in the initial amount of approximately $8.3 million to be paid to Michigan to defray its
regulatory enforcement and other casino-related costs. These payments are in addition to the taxes, fees and assessments customarily paid by business entities
situated in Detroit. The licensed subsidiary is also obligated to pay 1% of its adjusted gross receipts to Detroit, to be increased to 2% of its adjusted gross receipts in
any calendar year in which adjusted gross receipts exceed $400 million.
 
 
6

 
Mississippi Government Regulation
 
We  conduct  our  Mississippi  gaming  operations  through  two  indirect  subsidiaries,  Beau  Rivage  Resorts,  LLC  which  operates  Beau  Rivage  in  Biloxi,
Mississippi, and MGM Resorts Mississippi, LLC, which operates the Gold Strike Casino in Tunica County, Mississippi (collectively, the “casino licensees”). The
operation of casino facilities in Mississippi is subject to extensive state and local regulation, but primarily the licensing and regulatory control of the Mississippi
Gaming Commission and the Mississippi Department of Revenue.
 
The  Mississippi  Gaming  Control  Act  (the  “Mississippi  Act”)  legalized  casino  gaming  in  Mississippi.  The  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission  adopted
regulations in furtherance of the Mississippi Act. The laws, regulations and supervisory procedures of Mississippi and the Mississippi Gaming Commission seek to:
 
 
•
prevent unsavory or unsuitable persons from having any direct or indirect involvement with gaming at any time or in any capacity;
 
 
•
establish and maintain responsible accounting practices and procedures;
 
 
•
maintain  effective  control  over  the  financial  practices  of  licensees,  including  establishing  minimum  procedures  for  internal  fiscal  affairs  and
safeguarding of assets and revenues, providing reliable record keeping and making periodic reports to the Mississippi Gaming Commission;
 
 
•
prevent cheating and fraudulent practices;
 
 
•
provide a source of state and local revenues through taxation and licensing fees; and
 
 
•
ensure that gaming licensees, to the extent practicable, employ Mississippi residents.
 
The regulations are subject to amendment and interpretation by the Mississippi Gaming Commission. Changes in Mississippi law or the regulations or the
Mississippi Gaming Commission’s interpretations thereof may limit or otherwise materially affect the types of gaming that may be conducted, and could have a
material adverse effect on us and our Mississippi gaming operations.
 
The Mississippi Act provides for legalized gaming at the discretion of the 14 counties that either border the Gulf Coast or the Mississippi River, but only if
the voters in such counties have not voted to prohibit gaming in that county. As of December 31, 2017, gaming was permissible in nine of the 14 eligible counties
in the state and gaming operations had commenced in Adams, Coahoma, Hancock, Harrison, Tunica, Warren and Washington counties. Prior to Hurricane Katrina,
Mississippi law required that gaming vessels be located on the Mississippi River or on navigable waters in eligible counties along the Mississippi River, or in the
waters of the State of Mississippi lying south of the state in eligible counties along the Mississippi Gulf Coast. Subsequent to Hurricane Katrina, changes to the law
became effective which allowed gaming facilities to be constructed on land in the three Gulf Coast counties, provided that no portion of the gaming facilities is
located more than 800 feet from the mean high water line of the Mississippi Sound or designated bays on the Sound. The 800-foot limit does not apply to non-
gaming facilities. The law permits unlimited stakes gaming on permanently moored dockside vessels or in land-based facilities on a 24-hour basis and does not
restrict the percentage of space which may be utilized for gaming. There are no limitations on the number of gaming licenses which may be issued in Mississippi.
 
The  casino  licensees  are  subject  to  the  licensing  and  regulatory  control  of  the  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission.  Gaming  licenses  require  the  periodic
payment of fees and taxes and are not transferable. Gaming licenses are issued for a maximum term of three years and must be renewed periodically thereafter. The
current license of Beau Rivage Resorts, LLC is effective through April 20, 2019 and the current license of MGM Resorts Mississippi, LLC. is effective through
June 22, 2018.
 
We are registered by the Mississippi Gaming Commission under the Mississippi Act as a publicly traded holding company of the casino licensees. As a
registered  publicly  traded  corporation,  we  are  subject  to  the  licensing  and  regulatory  control  of  the  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission,  and  are  required  to
periodically submit detailed financial, operating and other reports to the Mississippi Gaming Commission and furnish any other information which the Mississippi
Gaming Commission may require. If we are unable to satisfy the registration requirements of the Mississippi Act, we and our casino licensees cannot own or
operate  gaming  facilities  in  Mississippi.  The  casino  licensees  are  also  required  to  periodically  submit  detailed  financial,  operating  and  other  reports  to  the
Mississippi Gaming Commission and the Mississippi Department of Revenue and to furnish any other information required thereby. With certain exceptions, no
person  may  become  a  stockholder  of  or  receive  any  percentage  of  profits  from  the  casino  licensees  without  first  obtaining  licenses  and  approvals  from  the
Mississippi Gaming Commission.
 
 
7

 
Certain of our officers, directors and employees must be found suitable or be licensed by the Mississippi Gaming Commission. We believe that we have
applied for all necessary findings of suitability with respect to these persons, although the Mississippi Gaming Commission, in its discretion, may require additional
persons to file applications for findings of suitability. In addition, any person having a material relationship or involvement with us may be required to be found
suitable, in which case those persons must pay the costs and fees associated with the investigation. A finding of suitability requires submission of detailed personal
and financial information followed by a thorough investigation. There can be no assurance that a person who is subject to a finding of suitability will be found
suitable by the Mississippi Gaming Commission. The Mississippi Gaming Commission may deny an application for a finding of suitability for any cause that it
deems reasonable. Findings of suitability must be periodically renewed.
 
Changes in certain licensed positions must be reported to the Mississippi Gaming Commission. In addition to its authority to deny an application for a
finding of suitability, the Mississippi Gaming Commission has jurisdiction to disapprove a change in a licensed position. The Mississippi Gaming Commission has
the power to require us to suspend or dismiss officers, directors and other key employees or sever relationships with other persons who refuse to file appropriate
applications or whom the authorities find unsuitable to act in their capacities.
 
Employees associated with gaming must obtain work permits that are subject to immediate suspension. The Mississippi Gaming Commission will refuse to
issue a work permit to a person convicted of a felony and it may refuse to issue a work permit to a gaming employee if the employee has committed various
misdemeanors or knowingly violated the Mississippi Act or for any other reasonable cause.
 
At  any  time,  the  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission  has  the  power  to  investigate  and  require  a  finding  of  suitability  of  any  of  our  record  or  beneficial
stockholders, regardless of the percentage of ownership. Mississippi law requires any person who acquires more than 5% of our voting securities to report the
acquisition to the Mississippi Gaming Commission, and that person may be required to be found suitable. Also, any person who becomes a beneficial owner of
more than 10% of our voting securities, as reported to the Mississippi Gaming Commission, must apply for a finding of suitability by the Mississippi Gaming
Commission. An applicant for finding of suitability must pay the costs and fees that the Mississippi Gaming Commission incurs in conducting the investigation.
 
The Mississippi Gaming Commission has generally exercised its discretion to require a finding of suitability of any beneficial owner of more than 5% of a
registered public or private company’s voting securities. However, the Mississippi Gaming Commission has adopted a regulation that permits certain institutional
investors to own beneficially up to 25% and, under certain circumstances, up to 29%, of a registered or licensed company’s voting securities without a finding of
suitability. Under the regulations, an “institutional investor,” as defined therein, may apply to the Executive Director of the Mississippi Gaming Commission for a
waiver of a finding of suitability if such institutional investor (i) beneficially owns up to 25% (or, in certain circumstances, up to 29%) of the voting securities of a
registered or licensed company, and (ii) holds the voting securities for investment purposes only. An institutional investor shall not be deemed to hold voting
securities for investment purposes unless the voting securities were acquired and are held in the ordinary course of business as an institutional investor and not for
the purpose of causing, directly or indirectly, the election of a majority of the members of the board of directors of the registered or licensed company, any change
in the registered or licensed company’s corporate charter, bylaws, management, policies or operations of the registered public or private company or any of its
gaming affiliates, or any other action which the Mississippi Gaming Commission finds to be inconsistent with holding the registered or licensed company’s voting
securities for investment purposes only.
 
Activities that are not deemed to be inconsistent with holding voting securities for investment purposes only include:
 
 
•
voting, directly or indirectly through the delivery of a proxy furnished by the board of directors, on all matters voted upon by the holders of such
voting securities;
 
 
•
serving as a member of any committee of creditors or security holders formed in connection with a debt restructuring;
 
 
•
nominating any candidate for election or appointment to the board of directors in connection with a debt restructuring;
 
 
•
accepting appointment or election (or having a representative accept appointment or election) as a member of the board of directors in connection with
a debt restructuring and serving in that capacity until the conclusion of the member’s term;
 
 
•
making financial and other inquiries of management of the type normally made by securities analysts for informational purposes and not to cause a
change in management, policies or operations; and
 
 
•
such other activities as the Mississippi Gaming Commission may determine to be consistent with such investment intent.
 
 
8

 
If a stockholder who must be found suitable is a corporation, partnership or trust, it must submit detailed business and financial information including a list
of beneficial owners. The Mississippi Gaming Commission may at any time dissolve, suspend, condition, limit or restrict a finding of suitability to own a registered
public company’s equity interests for any cause it deems reasonable.
 
We may be required to disclose to the Mississippi Gaming Commission upon request the identities of the holders of any of our debt or other securities. In
addition, under the Mississippi Act, the Mississippi Gaming Commission may, in its discretion, require holders of our debt securities to file applications, investigate
the holders, and require the holders to be found suitable to own the debt securities.
 
Although the Mississippi Gaming Commission generally does not require the individual holders of obligations such as notes to be investigated and found
suitable, the Mississippi Gaming Commission retains the discretion to do so for any reason, including but not limited to a default, or where the holder of the debt
instrument exercises a material influence over the gaming operations of the entity in question. Any holder of debt securities required to apply for a finding of
suitability must pay all investigative fees and costs of the Mississippi Gaming Commission in connection with the investigation.
 
Any person who fails or refuses to apply for a finding of suitability or a license within 30 days after being ordered to do so by the Mississippi Gaming
Commission may be found unsuitable. Any person found unsuitable and who holds, directly or indirectly, any beneficial ownership of our securities beyond the
time that the Mississippi Gaming Commission prescribes, may be guilty of a misdemeanor. After receiving notice that a person is unsuitable to be a stockholder, a
holder of our debt securities or to have any other relationship with us, we will be subject to disciplinary action if we:
 
 
•
pay the unsuitable person any dividend, interest or other distribution whatsoever;
 
 
•
recognize the exercise, directly or indirectly, of any voting rights conferred through such securities held by the unsuitable person;
 
 
•
pay the unsuitable person any remuneration in any form for services rendered or otherwise, except in limited and specific circumstances;
 
 
•
make any payment to the unsuitable person by way of principal, redemption, conversion, exchange, liquidation or similar transaction; or
 
 
•
fail to pursue all lawful efforts to require the unsuitable person to divest himself or herself of the securities, including, if necessary, the immediate
purchase of the securities for cash at a fair market value.
 
The  casino  licensees  must  maintain  in  Mississippi  a  current  ledger  with  respect  to  the  ownership  of  their  equity  securities  and  we  must  maintain  in
Mississippi a current list of our stockholders which must reflect the record ownership of each outstanding share of any equity security issued by us. The ledger and
stockholder lists must be available for inspection by the Mississippi Gaming Commission at any time. If any of our securities are held in trust by an agent or by a
nominee,  the  record  holder  may  be  required  to  disclose  the  identity  of  the  beneficial  owner  to  the  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission.  A  failure  to  make  that
disclosure may be grounds for finding the record holder unsuitable. We must also render maximum assistance in determining the identity of the beneficial owner.
 
The Mississippi Act requires that the certificates representing securities of a registered publicly traded corporation bear a legend to the general effect that the
securities are subject to the Mississippi Act and the regulations of the Mississippi Gaming Commission. On May 28, 2009, the Mississippi Gaming Commission
granted us a waiver of this legend requirement. The Mississippi Gaming Commission has the power to impose additional restrictions on us and the holders of our
securities at any time.
 
Substantially  all  loans,  leases,  sales  of  securities  and  similar  financing  transactions  by  the  casino  licensees  must  be  reported  to  or  approved  by  the
Mississippi Gaming Commission. The licensed subsidiaries may not make a public offering of their securities, but may pledge or mortgage casino facilities with the
prior approval of the Mississippi Gaming Commission. We may not make a public offering of our securities without the prior approval of the Mississippi Gaming
Commission if any part of the proceeds of the offering is to be used to finance the construction, acquisition or operation of gaming facilities in Mississippi or to
retire or extend obligations incurred for those purposes. The approval, if given, does not constitute a recommendation or approval of the accuracy or adequacy of
the prospectus or the investment merits of the securities subject to the offering. Effective June 23, 2015, the Mississippi Gaming Commission granted us a waiver
of the prior approval requirement for our securities offerings for a period of three years, subject to certain conditions. The waiver may be rescinded for good cause
without prior notice upon the issuance of an interlocutory stop order by the Executive Director of the Mississippi Gaming Commission.
 
 
9

 
Under the regulations of the Mississippi Gaming Commission, the casino licensees may not guarantee a security issued by us pursuant to a public offering,
or pledge their assets to secure payment or performance of the obligations evidenced by such a security issued by us, without the prior approval of the Mississippi
Gaming Commission. Similarly, we may not pledge the stock or other ownership interests of the casino licensees, nor may the pledgee of such ownership interests
foreclose on such a pledge, without the prior approval of the Mississippi Gaming Commission. Moreover, restrictions on the transfer of an equity security issued by
us and agreements not to encumber such securities granted by us are ineffective without the prior approval of the Mississippi Gaming Commission. The waiver of
the prior approval requirement for our securities offerings received from the Mississippi Gaming Commission effective June 23, 2015 includes a waiver of the prior
approval requirement for such guarantees, pledges and restrictions of the casino licensees, subject to certain conditions.
 
We cannot change our control through merger, consolidation, acquisition of assets, management or consulting agreements or any form of takeover without
the prior approval of the Mississippi Gaming Commission. The Mississippi Gaming Commission may also require controlling stockholders, officers, directors, and
other persons having a material relationship or involvement with the entity proposing to acquire control, to be investigated and licensed as part of the approval
process relating to the transaction.
 
The Mississippi Legislature has declared that some corporate acquisitions opposed by management, repurchases of voting securities and other corporate
defensive tactics that affect corporate gaming licensees in Mississippi and corporations whose stock is publicly traded that are affiliated with those licensees may be
injurious to stable and productive corporate gaming. The Mississippi Gaming Commission has established a regulatory scheme to ameliorate the potentially adverse
effects of these business practices upon Mississippi’s gaming industry and to further Mississippi’s policy to assure the financial stability of corporate gaming
operators and their affiliates, preserve the beneficial aspects of conducting business in the corporate form, and promote a neutral environment for the orderly
governance of corporate affairs.
 
We may be required to obtain approval from the Mississippi Gaming Commission before we may make exceptional repurchases of voting securities in
excess  of  the  current  market  price  of  its  common  stock  (commonly  called  “greenmail”)  or  before  we  may  consummate  a  corporate  acquisition  opposed  by
management. The regulations also require prior approval by the Mississippi Gaming Commission if we adopt a plan of recapitalization proposed by our Board of
Directors opposing a tender offer made directly to the stockholders for the purpose of acquiring control of us.
 
Neither we nor the casino licensees may engage in gaming activities in Mississippi while we, the casino licensees and/or persons found suitable to be
associated  with  the  gaming  license  of  the  casino  licensees  conduct  gaming  operations  outside  of  Mississippi  without  approval  of  the  Mississippi  Gaming
Commission.  The  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission  may  require  that  it  have  access  to  information  concerning  our,  and  our  affiliates’,  out-of-state  gaming
operations. We believe that we have applied for all necessary waivers of foreign gaming approval from the Mississippi Gaming Commission for the conduct of our
active or planned gaming operations outside of Mississippi.
 
If the Mississippi Gaming Commission decides that the casino licensees violated a gaming law or regulation, the Mississippi Gaming Commission could
limit, condition, suspend or revoke the license of the subsidiary. In addition, we, the casino licensees and the persons involved could be subject to substantial fines
for each separate violation. A violation under any of our other operating subsidiaries’ gaming licenses may be deemed a violation of the casino licensees’ gaming
license.
 
Because of a violation, the Mississippi Gaming Commission could attempt to appoint a supervisor to operate the casino facilities. Limitation, conditioning
or suspension of the casino licensees’ gaming license or our registration as a publicly traded holding company, or the appointment of a supervisor could, and the
revocation of any gaming license or registration would, materially adversely affect our Mississippi gaming operations.
 
The casino licensees must pay license fees and taxes, computed in various ways depending on the type of gaming involved, to the State of Mississippi and to
the county or city in which the licensed gaming subsidiary conducts operations. Depending upon the particular fee or tax involved, these fees and taxes are payable
either monthly, quarterly or annually and are based upon a percentage of gross gaming revenues, the number of slot machines operated by the casino, and the
number of table games operated by the casino.
 
The license fee payable to the State of Mississippi is based upon “gross revenues,” generally defined as cash receipts less cash payouts to customers as
winnings, and generally equals 8% of gross revenue. These license fees are allowed as a credit against our Mississippi income tax liability for the year paid. The
gross revenue fee imposed by the Mississippi cities and counties in which casino operations are located is in addition to the fees payable to the State of Mississippi
and equals approximately 4% of gross revenue.
 
The Mississippi Gaming Commission adopted a regulation in 1994 requiring as a condition of licensure or license renewal that a gaming establishment’s
plan include a 500-car parking facility in close proximity to the casino complex and infrastructure facilities
 
10

 
which will amount to at least 25% of the casino cost. Infrastructure facilities are defined in the regulation to include a hotel with at least 250 rooms, theme park,
golf course and other similar facilities. Beau Rivage and Gold Strike Tunica are in compliance with this requirement. On January 21, 1999, the Mississippi Gaming
Commission adopted an amendment to this regulation which increased the infrastructure requirement to 100% from the existing 25%; however, the regulation
grandfathers existing licensees and applies only to new casino projects and casinos that are not operating at the time of acquisition or purchase, and would therefore
not apply to Beau Rivage and Gold Strike Tunica. In any event, Beau Rivage and Gold Strike Tunica would comply with such requirement. On February 21, 2013,
the  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission  adopted  further  amendments  to  this  regulation  to  impose  additional  requirements  on  new  casino  projects.  However,  the
amended  regulation  grandfathers  any  licensee  who  has  been  licensed  by  the  Mississippi  Gaming  Commission  prior  to  December  31,  2013;  therefore,  the
amendments do not apply to Beau Rivage or Gold Strike Tunica.
 
Both the local jurisdiction and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Division of the Mississippi Department of Revenue license, control and regulate the sale of
alcoholic beverages by the casino licensees. Beau Rivage and Gold Strike Tunica are in areas designated as special resort areas, which allows casinos located
therein to serve alcoholic beverages on a 24-hour basis. The Alcoholic Beverage Control Division requires that our key officers and managers and the casino
licensees’ key officers and managers and all owners of more than 5% of the casino licensees’ equity submit detailed personal, and in some instances, financial
information to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Division and be investigated and licensed. All such licenses are non-transferable. The Alcohol Beverage Control
Division has the full power to limit, condition, suspend or revoke any license for the service of alcoholic beverages or to place a licensee on probation with or
without conditions. Any disciplinary action could, and revocation would, have a material adverse effect upon the casino’s operations.
 
Illinois Government Regulation
 
Our 50% joint venture ownership interest in Grand Victoria Riverboat Casino, located in Elgin, Illinois (“Grand Victoria”) is subject to extensive state
regulation under the Illinois Riverboat Gambling Act (the “Illinois Act”) and the regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board (the “Illinois Board”).
 
In February 1990, the State of Illinois legalized  riverboat gambling. The Illinois Act authorizes  the Illinois Board to issue up to ten riverboat  gaming
owners’ licenses on any water within the State of Illinois or any water other than Lake Michigan which constitutes a boundary of the State of Illinois. The Illinois
Act restricts the location of certain of the ten owners’ licenses. Three of the licenses must be located on the Mississippi River. One license must be at a location on
the Illinois River south of Marshall County and another license must be located on the Des Plaines River in Will County. The remaining licenses are not restricted
as to location. Currently, all ten owner’s licenses are in operation in Alton, Aurora, East Peoria, East St. Louis, Elgin, Metropolis, Rock Island, Des Plaines, and
two licenses in Joliet.
 
The Illinois Act strictly regulates the facilities, persons, associations and practices related to gaming operations. It grants the Illinois Board specific powers
and duties, and all other powers necessary and proper to fully and effectively execute the Illinois Act for the purpose of administering, regulating and enforcing the
system  of  riverboat  gaming.  The  Illinois  Board  has  authority  over  every  person,  association,  corporation,  partnership  and  trust  involved  in  riverboat  gaming
operations in the State of Illinois.
 
The Illinois Act requires the owner of a riverboat gaming operation to hold an owner’s license issued by the Illinois Board. Each owner’s license permits the
holder to own up to two riverboats as part of its gaming operation; however, gaming participants are limited to 1,200 for any owner’s license. The number of
gaming participants will be determined by the number of gaming positions available at any given time. Gaming positions are counted as follows:
 
 
•
positions for electronic gaming devices will be determined as 90% of the total number of devices available for play;
 
 
•
craps tables will be counted as having ten gaming positions; and
 
 
•
games utilizing live gaming devices, except for craps, will be counted as having five gaming positions.
 
Each owner’s license initially runs for a period of three years. Thereafter, the license must be renewed annually. The Board may renew an owner’s license
for up to four years. An owner licensee is eligible for renewal upon payment of the applicable fee and a determination by the Illinois Board that the licensee
continues to meet all of the requirements of the Illinois Act and Illinois Board’s rules. The owner’s license for Grand Victoria was issued in October 1994 and was
renewed for a four-year period that ends in October 2020. An ownership interest in an owner’s license may not be transferred or pledged as collateral without the
prior approval of the Illinois Board.
 
 
11

 
Pursuant to the Illinois Act, the Illinois Board established certain rules to follow in deciding whether to approve direct or indirect ownership or control of an
owner’s license. The Illinois Board must consider the impact of any economic concentration caused by the ownership or control. No direct or indirect ownership or
control  may  be  approved  which  will  result  in  undue  economic  concentration  of  the  ownership  of  a  riverboat  gambling  operation  in  Illinois.  The  Illinois  Act
specifies a number of criteria for the Illinois Board to consider in determining whether the approval of the issuance, transfer or holding of a license will create
undue economic concentration. The application of such criteria could reduce the number of potential purchasers for the Grand Victoria or our 50% joint venture
interest therein.
 
The Illinois Act does not limit the maximum bet or per patron loss. Minimum and maximum wagers on games are set by the holder of the owner’s license.
Wagering may not be conducted with money or other negotiable currency. No person under the age of 21 is permitted to wager and wagers only may be received
from a person present on the riverboat. With respect to electronic gaming devices, the payout percentage may not be less than 80% or more than 100%.
 
Illinois imposes a number of taxes on Illinois casinos. Such taxes are subject to change by the Illinois legislature and have been increased in the past. The
Illinois legislature also may impose new taxes on Grand Victoria’s activities. Illinois currently imposes an admission tax of $2.00 per person for an owner licensee
that admitted 1,000,000 persons or fewer in the 2004 calendar year, and $3.00 per person for all other owner licensees (including Grand Victoria).
 
Additionally, Illinois imposes a wagering tax on the adjusted gross receipts, as defined in the Illinois Act, of a riverboat operation. The owner licensee is
required, on a daily basis, to wire the wagering tax payment to the Illinois Board. Currently, the wagering tax is:
 
 
•
15.0% of adjusted gross receipts up to and including $25.0 million;
 
 
•
22.5% of adjusted gross receipts in excess of $25.0 million but not exceeding $50.0 million;
 
 
•
27.5% of adjusted gross receipts in excess of $50.0 million but not exceeding $75.0 million;
 
 
•
32.5% of adjusted gross receipts in excess of $75.0 million but not exceeding $100.0 million;
 
 
•
37.5% of adjusted gross receipts in excess of $100.0 million but not exceeding $150.0 million;
 
 
•
45.0% of adjusted gross receipts in excess of $150.0 million but not exceeding $200.0 million; and
 
 
•
50.0% of adjusted gross receipts in excess of $200.0 million.
 
A holder of any gaming license in Illinois is subject to imposition of fines, suspension or revocation of such license, or other action for any act or failure to
act by the licensee or the licensee’s agents or employees, that is injurious to the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the people of the
State of Illinois, or that would discredit or tend to discredit the Illinois gaming industry or the State of Illinois. The Illinois Board may revoke or suspend licenses,
as the Illinois Board may determine and, in compliance with applicable Illinois law regarding administrative procedures, may suspend an owner’s license, without
notice or hearing, upon a determination that the safety or health of patrons or employees is jeopardized by continuing a riverboat’s operation. The suspension may
remain in effect until the Illinois Board determines that the cause for suspension has been abated and it may revoke the owner’s license upon a determination that
the owner has not made satisfactory progress toward abating the hazard.
 
If  the  Illinois  Board  has  suspended,  revoked  or  refused  to  renew  an  owner’s  license  or  if  a  riverboat  gambling  operation  is  closing  and  the  owner  is
voluntarily surrendering its owner’s license, the Illinois Board may petition the local circuit court in which the riverboat is situated for appointment of a receiver.
The circuit court has sole jurisdiction over any and all issues pertaining to the appointment of a receiver. The Illinois Board specifies the specific powers, duties and
limitations of the receiver.
 
The Illinois Board requires that each “Key Person” of an owner licensee submit a Personal Disclosure or Business Entity Form and be investigated and
approved by the Illinois Board. The Illinois Board determines which positions, individuals or Business Entities are required to be approved by the Board as Key
Persons. Once approved, such Key Person status must be maintained. Key Persons include:
 
 
•
any Business Entity and any individual with an ownership interest or voting rights of more than 5% in the licensee or applicant and the trustee of any
trust holding such ownership interest or voting rights;
 
 
12

 
 
•
the directors of the licensee or applicant and its chief executive officer, president and chief operating officer or their functional equivalents;
 
 
•
a Gaming Operations Manager or any other business entity or individual who has influence and/or control over the conduct of gaming or the Riverboat
Gaming Operation; and
 
 
•
all other individuals or Business Entities that, upon review of the applicant’s or licensees Table of Organization, Ownership and Control the Board
determines hold a position or a level of ownership, control or influence that is material to the regulatory concerns and obligations of the Illinois Board
for the specified licensee or applicant.
 
Each owner licensee must provide a means for the economic disassociation of a Key Person in the event such economic disassociation is required by an
order  of  the  Illinois  Board.  Based  upon  findings  from  an  investigation  into  the  character,  reputation,  experience,  associations,  business  probity  and  financial
integrity of a Key Person, the Illinois Board may enter an order upon the licensee or require the economic disassociation of the Key Person.
 
Applicants for and holders of an owner’s license are required to obtain the Illinois Board’s approval for changes in the following: (i) Key Persons; (ii) type
of entity; (iii) equity and debt capitalization of the entity; (iv) investors and/or debt holders; (v) source of funds; (vi) applicant’s economic development plan;
(vii) riverboat capacity or significant design change; (viii) gaming positions; (ix) anticipated economic impact; or (x) agreements, oral or written, relating to the
acquisition or disposition of property (real or personal) of a value greater than $1 million. Illinois regulations provide that a holder of an owner’s license may make
distributions to its stockholders only to the extent that such distributions do not impair the financial viability of the owner.
 
The  Illinois  Board  requires  each  holder  of  an  owner’s  license  to  obtain  the  Illinois  Board’s  approval  prior  to  issuing  a  guaranty  of  any  indebtedness.
Accordingly, we and our subsidiaries with a direct interest in Grand Victoria intend to petition the Illinois Board to allow those subsidiaries to issue subsidiary
guaranties of any indebtedness that we incur in the future to the extent such guaranties are required by our lenders. Although we and those subsidiaries believe the
Illinois Board will continue to approve our petitions and allow such guaranties of our future indebtedness, there can be no assurance that the Illinois Board will
continue to grant the necessary approvals.
 
The Illinois Board requires that each “institutional investor,” as that term is defined by Illinois Board, that, individually or jointly with others, cumulatively
acquires, directly or indirectly, 5% or more of any class of voting securities of a publicly-traded licensee or a licensee’s publicly-traded parent corporation shall,
within no less than ten days after acquiring such securities, notify the Illinois Board of such ownership and shall, upon request, provide such additional information
as may be required by the Illinois Board. An institutional investor that, individually or jointly with others, cumulatively acquires, directly or indirectly, 10% or
more of any class of voting securities of a publicly-traded licensee or a licensee’s publicly-traded parent corporation shall file an “Institutional Investor Disclosure
Form,” provided by the Illinois Board, within 45 days after cumulatively acquiring such level of ownership interest, unless such requirement is waived by the
Illinois Board. Additionally, we must notify the Illinois Board as soon as possible after we become aware that we are involved in an ownership acquisition by an
institutional investor.
 
The Illinois Board may waive any licensing requirement or procedure provided by rule if it determines that the waiver is in the best interests of the public
and the gaming industry. Also, the Illinois Board may, from time to time, amend or change its rules.
 
On January 1, 2008, Illinois’ statewide public smoking ban became effective. Smoking is now illegal in Illinois’ casinos, bars, restaurants and other public
establishments. This may continue to negatively impact the gaming industry in Illinois.
 
From time to time, various proposals have been introduced in the Illinois legislature that, if enacted, would affect the taxation, regulation, operation or other
aspects of the gaming industry. The Illinois legislature regularly considers proposals that would expand gaming opportunities in Illinois. Some of this legislation, if
enacted, could adversely affect the gaming industry. No assurance can be given whether such or similar legislation will be enacted.
 
The  Illinois  legislature  continues  to  discuss  the  possibility  of  gaming  expansion.  This  expansion  could  include  several  new  casinos  (including  one  in
Chicago), increased gaming positions in existing casinos, as well as gaming positions at Illinois racetracks. If gaming expansion occurs, Grand Victoria’s operating
results could be adversely impacted by the increased competition.
 
 
13

 
On July 13, 2009, Illinois enacted the Video Gaming Act, which legalizes the use of up to five video gaming terminals in most bars, restaurants, fraternal
organizations and veterans’ organizations holding valid Illinois liquor licenses, as well as at qualifying truck stops. The Illinois Board adopted a set of Regulations
and continues to release new or emergency Regulations, as necessary, to implement and regulate the Video Gaming Act. Effective October 9, 2012, video gaming
in Illinois became operational. The video gaming terminals in licensed establishments allow patrons to play games such as video poker, line up and blackjack. In
December  201 7 , over 6,2 00  licensed  establishments  were  operating  nearly 2 8 ,000 video  gaming  terminals.  Grand  Victoria’s  revenues  may  be  adversely
impacted by the availability of video gaming terminals in non-casino establishments proximately located to its customer base.
 
Macau S.A.R. Laws and Regulations
 
MGM Grand Paradise is regulated as a gaming operator under applicable Macau law and our ownership interest in MGM Grand Paradise is subject to
continuing regulatory scrutiny. We are required to be approved by the Macau government (gaming authorities) to own an interest in a gaming operator. Authorized
gaming operators must pay periodic fees and taxes, and gaming rights are not transferable, unless approved by the Macau government. MGM Grand Paradise must
periodically submit detailed financial and operating reports to the Macau gaming authorities and furnish any other information that the Macau gaming authorities
may require. No person may acquire any rights over the shares or assets of MGM Grand Paradise without first obtaining the approval of the Macau gaming
authorities. The transfer or creation of encumbrances over ownership of shares representing the share capital of MGM Grand Paradise or other rights relating to
such shares, and any act involving the granting of voting rights or other stockholders’ rights to persons or entities other than the original owners, would require the
approval of the Macau government and the subsequent report of such acts and transactions to the Macau gaming authorities. The stock of MGM Grand Paradise
and its casinos, assets and equipment shall not be subject to any liens or encumbrances, except under authorization by the Macau government.
 
MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession contract requires approval of the Macau government for transfers of shares, or of any rights over such shares, in any
of the direct or indirect stockholders in MGM Grand Paradise, including us, provided that such shares or rights are directly or indirectly equivalent to an amount
that is equal to or higher than 5% of the share capital in MGM Grand Paradise. Under the subconcession contract, this approval requirement does not apply to
securities  that  are  listed  and  tradable  on  a  stock  market.  Since  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  securities  are  not  listed  and  tradable  on  a  stock  market  this  approval
requirement applies to transfers of MGM Grand Paradise’s shares. In addition, this contract requires that the Macau government be given notice of the creation of
any encumbrance or the grant of voting rights or other stockholders’ rights to persons other than the original owners on shares in any of the direct or indirect
stockholders in MGM Grand Paradise, including us, provided that such shares or rights are indirectly equivalent to an amount that is equal to or higher than 5% of
the share capital in MGM Grand Paradise. This notice requirement will not apply, however, to securities listed and tradable on a stock exchange.
 
MGM Grand Paradise is in no case allowed to delegate the management of gaming operations to a management company, and is in no case allowed to enter
into a management contract by which its managing powers are or might be assumed by a third party. Any act or contract by which MGM Grand Paradise assigns,
transfers, alienates or creates liens or encumbrances on gaming operations to or in favor of a third party is prohibited, unless previously approved by the Macau
government.
 
The Macau gaming authorities may investigate any individual who has a material relationship to, or material involvement with, MGM Grand Paradise to
determine whether MGM Grand Paradise’s suitability and/or financial capacity is affected by that individual. MGM Grand Paradise shareholders with 5% or more
of the share capital and directors must apply for and undergo a finding of suitability process and maintain due qualification during the subconcession term, and
accept the persistent and long-term inspection and supervision exercised by the Macau government. MGM Grand Paradise is required to immediately notify the
Macau government should MGM Grand Paradise become aware of any fact that may be material to the appropriate qualification of any shareholder who owns 5%
or more of the share capital, or any director or key employee. Changes in approved corporate positions must be reported to the Macau gaming authorities. The
Macau gaming authorities have jurisdiction to deny an application for a finding of suitability.
 
Any person who fails or refuses to apply for a finding of suitability after being ordered to do so by the Macau gaming authorities may be found unsuitable.
Any stockholder subject to a suitability process who is found unsuitable must transfer their shares to a third party within a term set by the Macau government. If
such transfer is not consummated, MGM Grand Paradise must acquire those shares. If any officer, director or key employee is found unsuitable, MGM Grand
Paradise must sever all relationships with that person. In case of failure to act in accordance thereof, MGM Grand Paradise would become subject to administrative
sanctions and penalties.
 
The Macau government  must give their  prior approval  to changes in control  of MGM Grand Paradise through  a merger,  consolidation,  stock or asset
acquisition, management or consulting agreement or any act or conduct by any person whereby he or she obtains control. Entities seeking to acquire control of a
registered corporation must satisfy the Macau government concerning a variety of stringent standards prior to assuming control. The Macau gaming authorities may
also require controlling stockholders, officers,
 
14

 
directors and other persons having a material relationship or involvement with the entity proposing to acquire control, to be considered suitable as part of the
approval process of the transaction.
 
The Macau gaming authorities also have the power to supervise gaming operators in order to assure the financial stability of corporate gaming operators and
their affiliates.
 
The subconcession contract requires the Macau gaming authorities’ prior approval of any recapitalization plan, any increase of the capital stock by public
subscription, any issue of preferential shares or any creation, issue or transformation of types or series of shares representative of MGM Grand Paradise capital
stock, as well as any change in the constituent documents (i.e., articles of association) of MGM Grand Paradise. The Chief Executive of Macau could also require
MGM Grand Paradise to increase its share capital if he deemed it necessary.
 
MGM Macau was constructed and is operated under MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession contract. This subconcession excludes the following gaming
activities: mutual bets, gaming activities provided to the public, interactive gaming and games of chance or other gaming, betting or gambling activities on ships or
planes. MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession is exclusively governed by Macau law. MGM Grand Paradise is subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of
Macau in case of any potential dispute or conflict relating to our subconcession.
 
MGM Grand Paradise’s subconcession contract expires on March 31, 2020. Unless the subconcession is extended, on that date, all casino operations and
related equipment in MGM Macau will automatically be transferred to the Macau government without compensation to MGM Grand Paradise and MGM Resorts
International will cease to generate any revenues from these operations. Beginning on April 20, 2017, the Macau government may redeem the subconcession by
giving MGM Grand Paradise at least one year prior notice and by paying fair compensation or indemnity.
 
The amount of such compensation or indemnity will be determined based on the amount of revenue generated during the tax year prior to the redemption.
 
The Macau government also has the right to unilaterally terminate, without compensation to MGM Grand Paradise, the subconcession at any time upon the
occurrence  of  fundamental  non-compliance  by  MGM  Grand  Paradise  with  applicable  Macau  laws  or  MGM  Grand  Paradise’s  basic  obligations  under  the
subconcession contract. If the default is curable, the Macau gaming authorities are required to give MGM Grand Paradise prior notice to cure the default, though no
specific cure period for that purpose is provided.
 
The subconcession contract contains various general covenants and obligations and other provisions, the compliance with which is subjective. MGM Grand
Paradise has the following obligations under the subconcession contract:
 
 
•
ensure the proper operation and conduct of casino games;
 
 
•
employ people with appropriate qualifications;
 
 
•
operate and conduct casino games of chance in a fair and honest manner without the influence of criminal activities; and
 
 
•
safeguard and ensure Macau’s interests in tax revenue from the operation of casinos and other gaming areas.
 
The subconcession contract requires MGM Grand Paradise Limited to maintain a certain minimum level of insurance which are in place.
 
MGM Grand Paradise Limited is also subject to certain reporting requirements to the Macau gaming authorities.
 
Under the subconcession, MGM Grand Paradise Limited is obligated to pay to the Macau S.A.R. an annual premium with a fixed portion and a variable
portion based on the number and type of gaming tables employed and gaming machines operated. The fixed portion of the premium is equal to 30 million patacas
(approximately  $3.73  million,  based  on  exchange  rates  at  December  29,  2017).  The  variable  portion  is  equal  to  300,000  patacas  per  gaming  table  reserved
exclusively for certain kinds of games or players, 150,000 patacas per gaming table not so reserved and 1,000 patacas per electrical or mechanical gaming machine,
including slot machines (approximately $37,280, $18,640 and $124, respectively, based on exchange rates at December 29, 2017), subject to a minimum of forty
five million patacas (approximately $5.6 million, based on exchange rates at December 29, 2017). MGM Grand Paradise Limited also has to pay a special gaming
tax of 35% of gross gaming revenues and applicable withholding taxes. It must also contribute 1.6% and 2.4% (a portion of which must be used for promotion of
tourism in Macau) of its gross gaming revenue to a public foundation designated by the Macau S.A.R. government and to the Macau S.A.R, respectively, as special
levy.
 
 
15

 
Currently, the gaming tax in Macau is calculated as a percentage of gross gaming revenue. However, gross gaming revenue does not include deductions for
credit losses. As a result, if MGM Grand Paradise issues markers to its customers in Macau and is unable to collect on the related receivables from them, it has to
pay taxes on its winnings from these customers even though it was unable to collect the related receivables.
 
MGM Grand Paradise has received a concession from the Macau government to use a 10.67 acre parcel of land for MGM Macau (the “MGM Macau Land
Contract”). The land concession will expire on April 6, 2031 and is renewable.
 
The MGM Macau Land Contract requires MGM Grand Paradise to pay a premium which was paid in full before the opening of MGM Macau. In addition,
MGM Grand Paradise is also obligated to pay rent annually for the term of the MGM Macau Land Contract. The rent amount may be revised every five years by
the Macau government, according to the provisions of the Macau Land law.
 
In addition, MGM Grand Paradise has received a concession from the Macau government to use an approximately 18 acre site in Cotai Macau and develop
a second resort and casino (the “Cotai Land Contract”). The land concession contract became effective on January 9, 2013 and has an initial term of 25 years. The
total land premium payable to the Macau government for the land concession contract is $161 million and is composed of a down payment and eight additional
semi-annual payments. In January 2017, MGM China paid the final semi-annual payment of $15 million under the land concession contract.
 
MGM Grand Paradise received an exemption from Macau’s corporate income tax on profits generated by the operation of casino games of chance for a
period of five-years starting at January 1, 2007. In October 2011, MGM Grand Paradise was granted an extension of this exemption for an additional five years.
The exemption was further extended on September 7, 2016 through March 31, 2020.
 
Maryland Government Regulation
 
The Maryland State Lottery Video Lottery Terminal Law (“Maryland VLT Law”) subjects the owners and operators of video lottery facilities to extensive
state licensing and regulatory requirements. We are subject to the Maryland VLT Law and the regulations promulgated to implement it through our ownership
interest in MGM National Harbor, LLC, which owns and operates the MGM National Harbor video lottery facility in Prince George’s County, Maryland.
 
Under  the  Maryland  VLT Law, the  Maryland  Lottery  and  Gaming  Control  Commission  (“Maryland  Commission”),  in  conjunction  with the  Maryland
Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (“Maryland Agency”), maintains authority to regulate the operation of video lottery terminals and tables games within the
State of Maryland, and to issue video lottery operation licenses to qualified applicants. The Maryland Video Lottery Facility Location Commission (“Maryland
Location  Commission”)  has  the  authority  to  award  up  to  six  video  lottery  operation  licenses  within  the  State  of  Maryland  and  is  responsible  for  evaluating
competing proposals and awarding the video lottery operation licenses to applicants based on business and market, economic development and location siting
factors. The Maryland Location Commission cannot award a video lottery operation license to an applicant until the Maryland Commission determines that the
applicant is qualified. On October 10, 2013, the Maryland Commission determined that MGM National Harbor, LLC and all applicable principals were qualified,
and  on  December  23,  2013,  the  Maryland  Location  Commission  awarded  the  video  lottery  operation  license  in  Prince  George’s  County,  Maryland  to  MGM
National Harbor, LLC. MGM National Harbor, LLC was awarded the sixth and final video lottery operation license in Maryland. On December 7, 2016, the
Maryland Commission issued a video lottery operation license to MGM National Harbor, LLC, which license has an initial term of 15 years.
 
The initial license fee was based on the number of video lottery terminals initially proposed within the video lottery facility. As 3,600 video lottery terminals
were proposed for MGM National Harbor, our initial license fee was $21 million, and the Maryland Location Commission determined that MGM National Harbor
may have up to 3,600 terminals. Within 1 year of the end of the initial 15–year license term, a video lottery operation licensee may reapply for a license that has a
license term of 10 years and a license fee to be established by statute.
 
At the request of the Company, on August 17, 2016, the Maryland Commission temporarily reduced the number of permitted video lottery terminals to
3,321, which temporary reduction was to become permanent if there were not 3,600 terminals in operation at MGM National Harbor by December 8, 2017.
However, at the request of the Company, on June 29, 2017, the Maryland Commission approved a further temporary reduction to not less than 2,700 terminals in
connection with a casino expansion project while preserving the Company’s originally authorized allotment of 3,600 terminals until December 8, 2018. The
Maryland Commission further determined that as of December 8, 2018 the authorized number of terminals shall be not less than 3,321 or more than 3,600, with the
final authorized number of terminals being the actual number of terminals in operation at MGM National Harbor as of December 8, 2018.
 
16

 
Under the Maryland VLT Law, video lottery terminals each must have an average payout percentage of at least 87%.Video lottery facilities are permitted to
operate 24 hours a day, and patrons must be 21 years of age to wager. While alcohol may be offered in the video lottery facility, it may not be offered free of
charge. The Maryland VLT Law and regulations also impose various restrictions on check cashing, debit and credit card usage, ATMs, and other transactions
within the video lottery facility.
 
The Maryland Commission has extensive authority to conduct background investigations and to determine whether applicants for a video lottery operation
license, affiliated holding or intermediary companies, directors, officers, key management employees, principals, partners, and other persons or entities holding a
five percent or greater interest in the applicant, are qualified under the Maryland VLT Law.
 
The Maryland VLT Law provides that institutional investors may be exempt from certain regulatory requirements, and an Institutional Investor Waiver
Application may be submitted for entities holding an interest in an applicant or licensee that are considered institutional investors. The term “institutional investor”
generally  includes  insurance  companies,  banks  and  financial  institutions,  investment  companies,  trusts  and  advisors,  pension  funds,  etc.  The  Maryland
Commission’s decision concerning whether to grant a waiver is discretionary, and based on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, the institutional
investor’s securities, whether the investor is substantially involved in the video lottery operations of the licensee, and the investor’s gaming licensure history in
other jurisdictions.
 
After a video lottery operation license is awarded and/or issued, the Maryland Commission has responsibility for the continuing regulation and licensing of
the licensee and its officers, directors, and other designated persons. The Maryland Commission retains the authority to suspend, revoke or restrict a video lottery
operation  license,  and  may  levy  civil  penalties  for  regulatory  and  other  violations.  The  licensee’s  participation  in  video  lottery  and  table  game  operations  is
expressly deemed a revocable privilege under the Maryland VLT Law, conditioned on the proper and continued qualification of the licensee and the licensee
meeting reporting requirements and continuing to provide any assistance and information necessary to the Maryland regulators. Each licensee has an affirmative
responsibility to provide an annual update of applicable licensing information to the Maryland Commission. Among other things, the Maryland Commission is also
responsible for the collection of application, license and other fees, conducting investigations into the operation of video lottery terminals and table games, and
reviewing and ruling on complaints, and may conduct unannounced inspections of the video lottery facility premises or the licensee’s records and equipment.
 
The  regulations  promulgated  to  implement  the  Maryland  VLT  Law  impose  detailed  substantive  and  procedural  requirements  related  to  video  lottery
licensing and ongoing operations. The regulations include, but are not limited to, provisions concerning: licensing investigations and hearings; marketing controls
and standards; internal control standards related to accounting, finance and statistics, audits, record retention, complimentaries, surveillance, security, cage and
customer transactions, promotions, and other gaming related controls; facility design standards; table games surveillance; gaming floor plans; the transportation and
testing of video lottery terminals and table games equipment; the registration of video lottery terminals and table games; voluntary and mandatory patron exclusion;
responsible gaming; and junket enterprises and representatives. Applicants and licensees must also meet requirements concerning minority business participation,
provide health insurance and retirement benefits for employees, and give preference to hiring employees located within ten miles of the video lottery facility.
 
Generally, a video lottery operation license may not be transferred, assigned or pledged as collateral without approval from the Maryland Commission.
Specifically, a licensee cannot sell or transfer more than 5% of the legal or beneficial interests in the licensee unless the Maryland Commission is notified and
determines that the buyer or transferee meets all applicable qualification and regulatory requirements. If the licensee fails to meet these requirements, the applicable
license will be automatically revoked ninety days after the transfer or sale. Entities and individuals are also prohibited from owning an interest in more than one
video lottery facility, and any application to the Maryland Location Commission to apply for an additional license must include a plan for divesting the applicable
interest in the initial license. Applicants seeking investors in an entity applying for a video lottery operation license must make serious, good-faith efforts to solicit
and interview a reasonable number of minority investors before a license will be awarded by the Maryland Location Commission, and following the award, must
again make serious, good-faith efforts to interview minority investors in any future attempts to raise venture capital or attract new investors to the entity awarded
the license.
 
The Maryland Commission retains the authority to recommend or propose changes to the Maryland VLT Law, and may amend or change regulations
concerning the Maryland VLT Law, which, if enacted, could adversely affect the gaming industry and our ability to operate in Maryland.
 
New Jersey Government Regulation
 
Our  ownership  of  Borgata  in  Atlantic  City,  New  Jersey  subjects  us  to  extensive  state  regulation  under  the  New  Jersey  Casino  Control  Act  and  the
regulations promulgated thereunder (collectively, the “NJ Act”) and various other statutes and regulations. The New Jersey Casino Control Commission (“NJ
Commission”) and the New Jersey Division of Gaming Enforcement (“NJ Division”
 
17

 
and, together with the NJ Commission, the “NJ Gaming Authorities”) are, to varying degrees, empowered to regulate a wide spectrum of gaming and non-gaming
related activities and to approve the form of ownership and financial structure of not only a casino licensee, but also its holding and intermediary companies and
entity qualifiers.
 
The NJ Commission issues casino licenses and casino key employee licenses and the NJ Division issues all other types of licenses, including permits to
conduct intrastate Internet gaming and registrations and licenses to persons who provide goods or services to a casino. The NJ Division also is responsible for
investigating all license applications and for monitoring compliance with and enforcing the requirements of the NJ Act.
 
On June 24, 2010, the NJ Commission renewed Borgata’s casino license effective July 1, 2010 for a term which became indefinite by operation of law.
However, no later than five years after the issuance of a casino license, and approximately every five years thereafter, the casino licensee and its qualifying entities
and individuals must submit information to the NJ Gaming Authorities to demonstrate their continuing qualification. In addition, the NJ Commission may reopen
the license hearing at any time, and the NJ Commission must do so at the request of the NJ Division. In September 2014, we and certain of our subsidiaries were
found qualified as holding companies of Borgata.
 
Pursuant to the NJ Act and applicable precedent, no entity may hold a casino license unless each officer, director, person who directly or indirectly holds
any beneficial interest or ownership of the securities of the licensee, each person who in the opinion of the Director of the NJ Division has the ability to control or
elect a majority of the board of directors of the licensee (other than a banking or other licensed lending institution acting in the ordinary course of business) and
each of its holding, intermediary or subsidiary companies, obtains and maintains qualification approval from the NJ Gaming Authorities.
 
Persons holding 5% or more of the equity securities of a holding or intermediary company are presumed to have the ability to control the company or elect
one or more of its directors and will, unless this presumption is rebutted by clear and convincing evidence or the qualification requirement is waived, be required to
individually qualify. Equity securities are defined in the NJ Act as any voting stock or any other security having a direct or indirect participation in the profits of the
issuer. Notwithstanding either the presumption of control for holding 5% or more of the equity securities of a holding company or the requirement that a casino
licensee establish and maintain the qualification of certain holders of debt securities, the NJ Act provides for a waiver of qualification for passive “institutional
investors,” as defined by the NJ Act under certain circumstances.
 
Casino  licensees  are  also  required  to  establish  and  maintain  the  qualifications  of  any  financial  backer,  investor,  mortgagee,  bondholder,  or  holder  of
indentures, notes or other evidences of indebtedness, either in effect or proposed which bears any relation to the casino operation or casino hotel premises who
holds 25% or more of such financial instruments or other evidences of indebtedness; provided, however, in circumstances of default, persons holding 10% of such
financial instruments or evidences of indebtedness shall be required to establish and maintain their qualifications. Persons who hold less than these thresholds may
be required to establish and maintain their qualifications in the discretion of the Director of the NJ Division. Banks and licensed lending institutions, however, are
exempt from any qualification requirements if they are acting in the ordinary course of business.
 
The  NJ  Act  imposes  certain  restrictions  upon  the  issuance,  ownership  and  transfer  of  securities  of  a  casino  licensee  and  its  holding  and  intermediary
companies and defines the term “security” to include instruments which evidence a direct or indirect beneficial ownership or creditor interest, including stock
(common  and  preferred)  mortgages,  debentures,  security  agreements,  notes,  warrants,  options  and  rights.  If  the  NJ  Commission  finds  that  a  holder  of  such
securities  is  not  qualified  under  the  NJ  Act,  it  has  the  right  to  take  any  remedial  action  deemed  appropriate  including  the  right  to  force  divestiture  by  such
disqualified holder of such securities. In the event that certain disqualified holders fail to divest themselves of such securities, the NJ Commission has the power to
revoke or suspend the casino license or licenses related to the company which issued the securities. It is unlawful for a disqualified holder (i) to exercise, directly or
through any trustee or nominee, any right conferred by such securities or (ii) to receive any dividends or interest upon such securities or any remuneration, in any
form, from its affiliated casino licensee for services rendered or otherwise.
 
The NJ Act requires our certificate of incorporation to provide that our securities are held subject to the condition that if a holder is found to be disqualified
by the NJ Commission pursuant to the NJ Act, such holder shall dispose of his interest in the company. Accordingly, our certificate of incorporation provides that a
holder of our securities must dispose of such securities if the holder is found disqualified under the NJ Act. In addition, our certificate of incorporation provides that
we may redeem the stock of any holder found to be disqualified.
 
The ability of a lender to foreclose on pledged assets, including gaming equipment, is subject to compliance with the NJ Act. Generally, no person is
permitted to hold an ownership interest in or manage a casino or own any gaming assets, including gaming devices, without being licensed. Consequently, any
lender  who  desires  to  enforce  a  security  interest  must  file  the  necessary  applications  for  licensure,  be  investigated,  and  either  be  found  qualified  by  the  NJ
Commission or obtain interim casino authorization (“ICA”) prior to obtaining any ownership interest. Similarly, any prospective purchaser of an ownership interest
in a casino or of
 
18

 
gaming assets must file the necessary applications for licensure, be investigated, and either found qualified by the NJ Commission or obtain ICA prior to obtaining
any ownership interest or gaming assets.
 
Massachusetts Government Regulation
 
The Massachusetts Expanded Gaming Act (“Massachusetts Act”) subjects the owners and operators of gaming establishments to extensive state licensing
and regulatory requirements. We are subject to the Massachusetts Act and the regulations promulgated to implement it through our ownership interest in Blue Tarp
reDevelopment,  LLC  (“Blue  Tarp”),  which  is  expected  to  operate  a  gaming  establishment  in  Springfield,  Massachusetts,  which  establishment  is  currently
scheduled for completion and opening in the third quarter of 2018.
 
Under  the  Massachusetts  Act,  the  Massachusetts  Gaming  Commission  (“Massachusetts  Commission”)  is  responsible  for  issuing  licenses  under  the
Massachusetts Act and assuring that licenses are not issued or held by unqualified, disqualified or unsuitable persons. The Investigations and Enforcement Bureau
(“IEB”), which is a Bureau within the Massachusetts Commission, is responsible for conducting administrative investigations of applicants and licensees, and for
generally enforcing the Massachusetts Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder. In order to enforce the law, the IEB coordinates with the Massachusetts
State Police, Attorney General and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in order to perform its duties. The Massachusetts Act also establishes a Gaming
Enforcement Division within the Massachusetts Attorney General’s Office responsible for investigating and prosecuting criminal violations of the Massachusetts
Act. The Massachusetts Commission has the authority to award up to three Category 1 licenses (table games and slot machines), and one Category 2 license (slot
machines only), within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to qualified applicants.
 
On December 23, 2013, the Massachusetts Commission determined that Blue Tarp and all applicable principal individuals and entities were qualified, and
on November 6, 2014, the Massachusetts Commission awarded the sole Category 1 license in Region B of Massachusetts to Blue Tarp, effective November 7,
2014.
 
While a Category 1 license has been awarded to Blue Tarp, Blue Tarp may not conduct gaming activities until an operations certificate has been issued by
the  Massachusetts  Commission,  which  will  be  issued  upon  compliance  with  applicable  provisions  of  the  Massachusetts  Act  and  regulations  promulgated
thereunder, receipt of all required permits and approvals, compliance with the conditions of Blue Tarp’s Category 1 license, and Blue Tarp continuing to meet
applicable  licensing,  registration,  qualification  and  other  regulatory  requirements.  Under  the  Massachusetts  Act,  a  Category  1  gaming  licensee  who  fails  to
commence operations within one year from the opening date approved by the Massachusetts Commission is subject to the suspension or revocation of its license
and, if the Commission determines that the gaming licensee acted in bad faith in its application, be assessed a fine of $50,000,000 or less.
 
The initial license term is 15 years, which will commence upon the Massachusetts Commission’s approval of the commencement of the operation of the
gaming establishment.  The initial  license  fee for Category 1 licenses  is $85,000,000, as determined  by the Massachusetts  Commission and authorized  by the
Massachusetts  Act,  which  amount  Blue  Tarp  has  paid.  All  Category  1  and  Category  2  gaming  licensees  are  also  subject  to  additional  annual  fees  under  the
Massachusetts Act. Category 1 licensees must generally make on-going annual capital expenditures to their gaming establishments in a minimum aggregate amount
equal to 3.5 percent of the net gaming revenues derived from the establishment.
 
Under the Massachusetts Act, gaming establishments may be open 24 hours a day, and patrons must be 21 years of age to wager. Gaming beverage licenses
may be granted by the Massachusetts Commission for the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages at the gaming establishment except (i) between the hours of 2
a.m.  and 8 a.m. outside of the gaming area and (ii) between the hours of 4 a.m. and 8 a.m. within the gaming area. The Massachusetts Act and regulations also
describe procedures for, and restrictions on, check cashing, debit and credit card usage, ATMs, and other transactions within the gaming establishment.  
 
The Massachusetts Commission, in particular the IEB, has extensive authority to conduct background investigations and to determine whether applicants for
Category  1  and  Category  2  licenses,  affiliated  holding  or  intermediary  companies,  subsidiaries,  directors,  managers,  officers,  financiers  and  debt  holders,
associates, key gaming executives and employees, other gaming related employees, and other persons or entities holding a five percent or greater direct or indirect
interest  in  the  applicant,  are  qualified  under  the  Massachusetts  Act  (with  certain  exemptions  for  institutional  investors  in  the  discretion  of  the  Massachusetts
Commission).
 
After  a  Category  1  license  is  awarded,  the  Massachusetts  Commission  and  IEB  have  responsibility  for  the  continuing  regulation  and  licensing  of  the
licensee and its officers, directors, employees and other designated persons. The Massachusetts Commission retains the authority to suspend, revoke or condition a
Category 1 license, or any other license issued under the Massachusetts Act, and the IEB may levy civil penalties for regulatory and other violations. All licenses
issued under the Massachusetts Act are expressly deemed a revocable privilege, conditioned on the licensee’s fulfillment of all conditions of licensure, compliance
with applicable laws
 
19

 
and  regulations,  and  the  licensee’s  continuing  qualification  and  suitability . Among  other  things,  the  Massachusetts  Commission  is  also  responsible  for  the
collection of application, license and other fees, conducting investigations of and monitoring applicants and licensees, and reviewing and ruling on complaints, and
may conduct inspections of the gaming establishment premises or the licensee’s records and equipment .
 
The regulations promulgated to implement the Massachusetts Act impose detailed substantive and procedural requirements related to licensing and on-going
operations. The regulations include, but are not limited to, provisions concerning: licensing and registration of employees and vendors; accounting procedures and
internal controls; surveillance and security requirements; gaming equipment, devices and systems, and device registration and testing; self-exclusion; on-going
reporting requirements related to construction, approvals and operations; temporary licensure; marketing and affirmative marketing plans; notification requirements
related to new or changes in shareholders, executives, and other qualifiers; notification and/or approval of certain material events and transactions; complimentary
services; on-going capital expenditures; political contributions; credit issuance and customer transactions; auditing and record retention; facility design and gaming
floor plans; slot machine possession and transportation; table game rules and procedures; employee credentials; vendors and junkets; and count room and cage
procedures.
 
Generally, interests in a gaming establishment and Category 1 licenses may not be transferred without notification to and approval of the Massachusetts
Commission. The sale, assignment, transfer, pledge or other disposition of any security issued by a corporation which holds a gaming license is conditional and will
be  ineffective  if  disapproved  by  the  Massachusetts  Commission.  Category  1  licensees  may  also  not  change  their  business  governing  structure  without  the
notification and approval of the Massachusetts Commission, and may not operate, invest in or own, in whole or in part, another gaming licensee’s license or
gaming establishment.
 
The Massachusetts Commission retains the authority to promulgate, amend or repeal regulations concerning the Massachusetts Act, which, if enacted, could
adversely affect the gaming industry and our ability to operate in Massachusetts. Further, certain regulations are currently in draft form, and subject to further
review, revision and final approval.
 
 
20

Exhibit 99.3
 
CITYCENTER HOLDINGS, LLC AND SUBSIDIARIES
 
I N D E X
 
 
  Page
 
Independent Auditors’ Report 
  
i
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 
  
1
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 
  
2
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 
  
3
 
Consolidated Statements of Members’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 
  
4
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
  
5
 
 
 
 

Exhibit 99.3
 
I NDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT
 
To the Board of Directors
CityCenter Holdings, LLC
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated financial statements of CityCenter Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries (the “Company”), which comprise
the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the related consolidated statements of operations, members’ equity, and cash flows for each
of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017, and the related notes to the consolidated financial statements.
 
Management’s Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America; this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and
fair presentation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
 
Auditors’ Responsibility
 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with
auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the consolidated financial statements are free from material misstatement.
 
An  audit  involves  performing  procedures  to  obtain  audit  evidence  about  the  amounts  and  disclosures  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements.  The
procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements,
whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the Company’s preparation and fair presentation
of the consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of
accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the
consolidated financial statements.
 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinion.
 
Opinion
 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of CityCenter Holdings,
LLC and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2017, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
 
Las Vegas, Nevada
February 19, 2018
 
 
 
 
 
i

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
CITYCENTER HOLDINGS, LLC
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(In thousands)
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASSETS
 
Current assets
  
  
  
  
Cash and cash equivalents
 $
208,364 
 $
248,474 
Accounts receivable, net
  
118,264 
  
106,029 
Inventories
  
18,547 
  
16,786 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
  
26,659 
  
22,994 
     Total current assets
  
371,834 
  
394,283 
 
  
    
  
Property and equipment, net
  
6,574,703 
  
6,657,660 
 
  
  
  
  
Other assets
  
  
  
  
Intangible assets, net
  
18,681 
  
19,881 
Deposits and other assets, net
  
24,165 
  
26,944 
     Total other assets
  
42,846 
  
46,825 
 
 $
6,989,383 
 $
7,098,768 
LIABILITIES AND MEMBERS' EQUITY
 
Current liabilities
  
  
  
  
Accounts payable
 $
25,482 
 $
23,973 
Construction payable
  
36,327 
  
6,743 
Accrued interest on long-term debt
  
516 
  
13,662 
Current portion of long-term debt
  
16,000 
  
– 
Due to MGM Resorts International
  
75,275 
  
63,939 
Other accrued liabilities
  
192,904 
  
187,505 
     Total current liabilities
  
346,504 
  
295,822 
 
  
  
  
  
Long-term debt, net
  
1,545,797 
  
1,227,509 
Other long-term obligations
  
11,836 
  
21,407 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 11)
  
  
  
  
Members' equity
  
5,085,246 
  
5,554,030 
 
 $
6,989,383  $
7,098,768
 
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
 
 
1

Exhibit 99.3
 
CITYCENTER HOLDINGS, LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(In thousands)
 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
Revenues
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino
 $
477,719  $
440,832  $
450,166 
Rooms
  
476,852 
  
458,015 
  
429,488 
Food and beverage
  
350,360 
  
327,339 
  
285,883 
Entertainment
  
8,145 
  
19,723 
  
54,273 
Retail
  
21,349 
  
22,160 
  
21,937 
Residential
  
– 
  
2,646 
  
33,358 
Other
  
69,197 
  
58,247 
  
51,948 
 
  
1,403,622 
  
1,328,962 
  
1,327,053 
Less: Promotional allowances
  
(136,069)
  
(128,897)
  
(130,673)
 
  
1,267,553 
  
1,200,065 
  
1,196,380 
Expenses
  
  
  
  
  
  
Casino
  
211,577 
  
212,592 
  
230,227 
Rooms
  
142,662 
  
137,985 
  
133,507 
Food and beverage
  
211,650 
  
205,769 
  
174,624 
Entertainment
  
2,332 
  
14,018 
  
36,904 
Retail
  
13,420 
  
14,525 
  
14,629 
Residential
  
20 
  
1,880 
  
23,994 
Other
  
32,815 
  
32,616 
  
31,197 
General and administrative
  
233,329 
  
230,734 
  
242,576 
Property transactions, net
  
9,541 
  
4,529 
  
(154,788)
NV energy exit expense
  
(8,250)
  
26,089 
  
– 
Depreciation and amortization
  
224,358 
  
313,787 
  
251,847 
 
  
1,073,454 
  
1,194,524 
  
984,717 
Operating income
  
194,099 
  
5,541 
  
211,663 
Non-operating income (expense)
  
  
  
  
  
  
Interest income
  
1,357 
  
885 
  
471 
Interest expense, net
  
(60,094)
  
(61,032)
  
(72,791)
Loss on retirement of debt
  
(4,554)
  
(4,102)
  
– 
Other, net
  
408 
  
(106)
  
(191)
Net income (loss) from continuing operations
  
131,216 
  
(58,814)
  
139,152 
Income from discontinued operations
  
–   
407,187   
22,681 
Net income
 $
131,216 
 $
348,373 
 $
161,833
 
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
 
CITYCENTER HOLDINGS, LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(In thousands)
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
Net income
 
$
131,216 
 $
348,373 
 $
161,833 
   Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Depreciation and amortization
 
 
224,358 
  
318,122 
  
272,330 
Amortization of debt discounts and issuance costs
 
 
4,657 
  
3,960 
  
4,486 
Loss on retirement of long-term debt
 
 
4,554 
  
4,102 
  
– 
Gain on the sale of Crystals
  
– 
  
(400,082)
  
– 
Property transactions, net
 
 
9,541 
  
4,529 
  
(154,733)
Provision for doubtful accounts
 
 
(2,407)
  
12,551 
  
22,420 
Changes in current assets and liabilities:
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Accounts receivable
 
 
(9,828)
  
(11,401)
  
(22,622)
Inventories
 
 
(1,761)
  
2,000 
  
1,751 
Prepaid expenses and other
 
 
(831)
  
8,461 
  
(11,612)
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
 
(6,185)
  
(4,807)
  
(74,248)
Change in residential real estate
  
– 
  
1,771 
  
6,609 
Other
 
 
(12,521)
  
10,100 
  
(7,754)
Net cash provided by operating activities
 
 
340,793 
  
297,679 
  
198,460 
Cash flows from investing activities
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Capital expenditures, net of construction payable
 
 
(107,166)
  
(70,454)
  
(133,966)
Litigation settlements and insurance proceeds
  
– 
  
– 
  
87,617 
Proceeds from the sale of Crystals
  
– 
  
1,078,889 
  
– 
Decrease in restricted cash
  
– 
  
– 
  
143,170 
Proceeds of property and equipment
 
 
2,177 
  
– 
  
– 
Other
  
– 
  
657 
  
(49)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
 
 
(104,989)
  
1,009,092 
  
96,772 
Cash flows from financing activities
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Net borrowings (repayments) under senior credit facilities – maturities of ninety days or less
 
 
350,250 
  
– 
  
(38,000)
Repayments under senior credit facilities - maturities longer than ninety days
  
– 
  
(266,000)
  
– 
Dividends and distributions paid
 
 
(600,000)
  
(1,080,000)
  
(400,000)
Cash contributions from Members
  
– 
  
– 
  
141,390 
Cash distributions to Members
  
– 
  
(2,098)
  
– 
Due to MGM Resorts International
 
 
(441)
  
20,244 
  
4,524 
Debt issuance costs
 
 
(25,723)
  
– 
  
– 
Net cash used in financing activities
 
 
(275,914)
  
(1,327,854)
  
(292,086)
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Cash and cash equivalents
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Net increase (decrease) for the period
 
 
(40,110)
  
(21,083)
  
3,146 
Balance, beginning of period
 
 
248,474 
  
269,557 
  
266,411 
Balance, end of period
 
$
208,364 
 $
248,474 
 $
269,557
 
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
 
 
3

Exhibit 99.3
 
CITYCENTER HOLDINGS, LLC
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS’ EQUITY
(In thousands)
 
Balance as of January 1, 2015
 
$
6,384,532 
 
  
 
 
Cash contributions from Members
 
 
141,390 
Dividends paid
 
 
(400,000)
Income from discontinued operations
 
 
22,681 
 
 
 
  
Net income from continuing operations
 
 
139,152 
 
 
 
  
Balance as of December 31, 2015
 
 
6,287,755 
 
 
 
  
Cash distributions to Members
 
 
(2,098)
Dividends and distributions paid
 
 
(1,080,000)
Income from discontinued operations
 
 
407,187 
 
 
 
  
Net loss from continuing operations
 
 
(58,814)
 
 
 
  
Balance as of December 31, 2016
 
 
5,554,030 
 
 
 
  
Dividends and distributions paid
 
 
(600,000)
 
 
 
  
Net income
 
 
131,216 
 
 
 
  
Balance as of December 31, 2017
 
$
5,085,246 
 
 
  
 
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
 
 
 
4

Exhibit 99.3
 
CITYCENTER HOLDINGS, LLC
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
NOTE 1 — ORGANIZATION AND NATURE OF BUSINESS
 
Organization. CityCenter Holdings, LLC (the “Company”) is a Delaware limited liability company formed on November 2, 2007. The Company was
formed to acquire, own, develop and operate the CityCenter development (“CityCenter”) in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Company is a joint venture which is 50%-
owned by a wholly owned subsidiary of MGM Resorts International (together with its subsidiaries, “MGM Resorts”), a Delaware corporation, and 50%-owned by
Infinity World Development Corp (“Infinity World”), which is wholly owned by Dubai World, a Dubai United Arab Emirates government decree entity (each, a
“Member”). The governing document for the Company is the Third Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement dated December 22, 2015 (the
“LLC Agreement”).
 
Under the LLC Agreement, the Board of Directors of the Company is composed of six representatives (subject to intermittent vacancies) – three selected by
each Member – and has exclusive power and authority for the overall management of the Company. Compensation for Board of Directors’ duties is borne by the
Members. The Company has no employees and has entered into several agreements with MGM Resorts to provide day-to-day management of CityCenter and the
Company. See Note 14 for further discussion of such agreements.
 
Nature of Business. CityCenter is a mixed-use development on the Las Vegas Strip located between the Bellagio and Monte Carlo resorts, both owned by
MGM Resorts. CityCenter consists of the following components:
 
 
•
Aria  Resort  &  Casino,  a  4,004-room  casino  resort  featuring  an  approximately  140,000  square-foot  casino,  approximately  300,000  square  feet  of
conference and convention space, and numerous world-class restaurants, nightclub and bars, and pool and spa amenities;
 
 
•
The Vdara Hotel and Spa, a luxury condominium-style hotel with 1,495 units;
 
 
•
Mandarin Oriental, Las Vegas, a 392-room non-gaming boutique hotel managed by luxury hotelier Mandarin Oriental Hotel Group, as well as 225
luxury residential units (all 225 units were sold and closed as of December 31, 2015); and
 
 
•
The  Veer  Towers,  669 units  in  two towers  consisting  entirely  of  luxury  residential  condominium  units  (all  669 units  were  sold  and  closed  as  of
December 31, 2016).
 
In April 2016, the Company closed the sale of The Shops at Crystals (“Crystals”). See Note 3 for additional information related to the sale.
 
Substantially all of the operations of CityCenter commenced in December 2009. See Note 11 for discussion of the demolition of the Harmon Hotel & Spa
(“Harmon”).
 
 
NOTE 2 — BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 
Basis of presentation. The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries. The Company does not have a
variable interest in any variable interest entities. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. The results of operations are
not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in the future.
 
Management’s use of estimates. The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America. Those principles require the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets
and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during
the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
 
Fair  value  measurements. Fair  value  measurements  affect  the  Company’s  accounting  for  and  impairment  assessments  of  its  long-lived  assets  and
intangible assets. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market
participants at the measurement date and is measured according to a hierarchy consisting of: Level 1 inputs, such as quoted prices in an active market; Level 2
inputs, which are observable inputs for similar assets; or Level 3 inputs, which are unobservable inputs.
 
5

Exhibit 99.3
 
Cash and cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents include investments and interest bearing instruments with maturities of ninety days or less at the
date of acquisition. Such investments are carried at cost, which approximates fair value.
 
Accounts receivable and credit risk. The Company issues  markers  to  approved casino  customers  following  investigations  of  creditworthiness.  As of
December 31, 2017, approximately 65% of the Company’s casino receivables were due from customers from foreign countries. Enforceability issues, business or
economic conditions or other significant events in these countries could affect the collectability of such receivables.
 
Trade receivables, including casino and hotel receivables, are typically non-interest bearing and are initially recorded at cost. Accounts are written off when
management deems the account to be uncollectible. Recoveries of accounts previously written off are recorded when received. An allowance for doubtful accounts
is maintained to reduce the Company’s receivables to their estimated realizable amount, which approximates fair value. The allowance is estimated based on a
specific review of customer accounts as well as historical collection experience and current economic and business conditions. Management believes that as of
December 31, 2017, no significant concentrations of credit risk existed.
 
Inventories. Inventories consist primarily of food and beverage, retail merchandise and operating supplies, and are stated at the lower of cost or market.
Cost is determined primarily by the average cost method for food and beverage and operating supplies. Cost for retail merchandise is determined using the cost
method.
 
Residential real estate. As of December 31, 2017, all residential units were sold. In prior periods, residential real estate represented capitalized costs of
residential inventory, which consisted of completed condominium units available for sale less impairments previously recognized. Costs included land, direct and
indirect construction and development costs, and capitalized property taxes and interest.
 
Property  and  equipment. Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  cost  including  capitalized  interest.  Gains  or  losses  on  dispositions  of  property  and
equipment are included in the determination of income or loss. Maintenance and repairs that neither materially add to the value of the property nor appreciably
prolong its life are charged to expense as incurred. Property and equipment are depreciated over the following estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis:
 
Buildings and improvements
 
20 to 40 years
Land improvements
 
10 to 20 years
Furniture and fixtures
 
3 to 20 years
Equipment
 
3 to 15 years
 
Project costs are stated at cost and recorded as property and equipment (which includes adjustments made upon the initial contribution by MGM Resorts to
the extent such property or equipment is contributed by MGM Resorts) unless determined to be impaired, in which case the carrying value is reduced to estimated
fair value.
 
In December 2015, the Company decided to close the Zarkana show at the Aria Resort & Casino as part of a plan to expand its conference and convention
space. As a result, the Company shortened the useful lives of the assets related to the Zarkana theatre and recognized accelerated depreciation expense of $82
million  and  $20  million  during  the  years  ended  December  31,  2016  and  2015,  respectively.  The  fully  depreciated  assets  related  to  the  Zarkana  theatre  were
disposed in April 2016 and construction of the conference and expansion space began in May 2016, which opened during the first quarter of 2018.
 
Capitalized interest.   The interest costs associated with development and construction projects are capitalized and included in the cost of the project.
Capitalization of interest ceases when the project is substantially complete or development activity is suspended for more than a brief period.
 
Impairment of long-lived assets. The Company evaluates its property and equipment for impairment as held and used. The Company reviews assets to be
held and used for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. It then compares the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to
the carrying amount of the asset. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted cash flows do not
exceed  the  carrying  amount,  then  impairment  is  recorded  based  on  the  fair  value  of  the  asset,  typically  measured  using  a  discounted  cash  flow  model.  Any
recognized impairment losses would be recorded as operating expense.
 
Intangible assets. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment at least annually and between annual test dates in certain circumstances.
The  Company  performs  its  annual  impairment  test  for  indefinite-lived  intangible  assets  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  each  fiscal  year.  See  Note  6  for  further
discussion.  No impairments were indicated or recorded as a result of the annual impairment review.
6

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
Debt  issuance  costs .  The  Company  capitalizes  debt  issuance  costs,  which  include  legal  and  other  direct  costs  related  to  the  issuance  of  debt.  The
capitalized costs are amortized straight-line to interest expense over the contractual term of the debt.
 
Revenue  recognition  and  promotional  allowances. Casino  revenue  is  the  aggregate  net  difference  between  gaming  wins  and  losses,  with  liabilities
recognized for funds deposited by customers before gaming play occurs (“casino front money”) and for chips in the customers’ possession (“casino outstanding
chip liability”). Hotel, food and beverage, entertainment, retail and other operating revenues are recognized as services are performed and goods are provided.
Advance deposits on rooms and advance ticket sales are recorded as accrued liabilities until services are provided to the customer.
 
Gaming  revenues  are  recognized  net  of  certain  sales  incentives,  including  discounts  and  points  earned  in  point-loyalty  programs.  The  retail  value  of
accommodations,  food  and  beverage,  and  other  services  furnished  to  guests  without  charge  is  included  in  gross  revenue  and  then  deducted  as  promotional
allowances. The estimated cost of providing such promotional allowances is primarily included in casino expenses as follows:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Rooms
 $
21,873 
 $
21,711 
 $
22,513 
Food and beverage
  
48,146 
  
45,182 
  
43,446 
All other
  
4,219 
  
5,180 
  
8,153 
 
 $
74,238 
 $
72,073 
 $
74,112
 
 
Real estate sales. Revenue for residential sales is deferred until closing occurs, which is when title, possession and other attributes of ownership have been
transferred to the buyer and the Company is not obligated to perform activities after the sale. Additionally, the buyer’s initial and continuing investment must be
adequate to demonstrate a commitment to pay and the buyer’s receivable cannot be subject to future subordination.
 
Residential operating expenses include cost of real estate sold, holding costs, selling costs, indirect selling costs and valuation allowances for residential
mortgage notes receivable. Costs associated with residential sales were deferred during construction, except for indirect selling costs and general and administrative
expense, which were expensed as incurred.
 
Loyalty programs. Aria participates in the MGM Resorts’ “M life Rewards” loyalty program. Customers may earn points and/or Express Comps for their
gaming play which can be redeemed at restaurants, box offices or the M life Rewards front desk at participating properties. Points may also be redeemed for free
slot play on participating machines. The Company records a liability based on the points earned multiplied by the redemption value, less an estimate for points not
expected to be redeemed, and records a corresponding reduction in casino revenue. Customers also earn Express Comps based on their gaming play which can be
redeemed for complimentary goods and services, including hotel rooms, food and beverage, and entertainment. The Company records a liability for the estimated
costs of providing goods and services for Express Comps based on the Express Comps earned multiplied by a cost margin, less an estimate for Express Comps not
expected to be redeemed and records a corresponding expense in the casino department.
 
Advertising. The Company expenses advertising costs the first time the advertising takes place. Advertising expense is included in preopening and start-up
expenses when related to the preopening and start-up period and in general and administrative expense when related to ongoing operations. Advertising expense
was $14 million, $15 million and $20 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
 
Property transactions, net. The Company classifies transactions related to long-lived assets – such as write-downs and impairments, demolition costs, and
gains and losses on the sale of fixed assets – within “Property transactions, net” in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. See Note 9 for details.
 
Income taxes. The Company is treated  as a partnership  for federal  income  tax purposes. Therefore,  federal  income taxes are the responsibility  of the
Members. As a result, no provision for income taxes is reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
 
Comprehensive income. Net income equals comprehensive income for all periods presented.
 
7

Exhibit 99.3
 
Recently issued accounting standards. In May 2014, Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”)
606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)” which outlines a new, single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising
from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. Under the standard, revenue is
recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration the entity expects to receive in exchange for
those goods and services.
 
The Company adopted ASC 606 on a full retrospective basis effective January 1, 2018, which will be reflected in future financial statements. The most
significant impacts of the adoption of the new accounting pronouncement are as follows:
 
 
•
Promotional Allowances. The Company is no longer permitted to recognize revenues for goods and services provided to customers for free as an
inducement  to  gamble  as  gross  revenue  with  a  corresponding  offset  to  promotional  allowances  to  arrive  at  net  revenues,  and  accordingly  the
promotional allowances line item will be removed in future filings. The majority of such amounts previously included in promotional allowances will
now offset casino revenues. This change will primarily result in a reclassification of revenue between revenue line items;
 
 
•
Loyalty Accounting. Accounting for Express Comps granted under the M life Rewards program will be identified as separate performance obligations
and recorded as a reduction in gaming revenues when earned at the retail value of such benefits owed to the customer (less estimated breakage) and an
increase to the loyalty program liability representing outstanding performance obligations. Such amounts will be recognized as revenue in the line item
of the corresponding good or service provided when the performance obligation is fulfilled. This change will result in an adjustment to beginning
retained earnings of approximately $4 million as a result of the initial application of the standard and will not have a significant impact to earnings;
 
 
•
Gross versus Net Presentation. Mandatory service charges on food and beverage and hotel offerings and wide area progressive operator fees will be
recorded gross, that is, the amount received from the customer will be recorded as revenue with the corresponding amount paid as an expense. These
changes will primarily result in an increase in revenue with a corresponding increase in expense; and
 
 
•
Estimated Cost of Promotional Allowances. The Company will no longer reclassify the estimated cost of complimentaries provided to the gaming
patron from other expense line items to the casino expense line item. This change will result in a reclassification of expense between expense line
items  which  will  reduce  casino  expense  by  $74  million,  $72  million,  and  $74  million  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2017,  2016,  and  2015,
respectively, and increase Rooms, Food and beverage, Retail, Entertainment and Other expenses. Refer to the “Revenue recognition and promotional
allowances”  section  within  this  footnote  for  the  historical  amounts  that  will  be  materially  reclassified  back  to  each  expense  line  item  when  the
retrospective adoption to prior years is reflected in future financial statements.
 
These changes, and other less significant adjustments that were required upon adoption, will not have an aggregate material impact on operating income, net
income, the statements of cash flows, or the statements of members’ equity.
 
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842),” (“ASU 2016-02”), which replaces the
existing guidance in ASC 840, “Leases.” ASU 2016-02 is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2018.
ASU 2016-02 requires a dual approach for lessee accounting under which a lessee would account for leases as finance leases or operating leases. Both finance
leases and operating leases will result in the lessee recognizing a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a corresponding lease liability. For finance leases, the lessee
would recognize interest expense and amortization of the ROU asset and for operating leases the lessee would recognize a straight-line total lease expense. The
Company is currently assessing the impact the adoption of ASU 2016-02 will have on its consolidated financial statements and footnote disclosures.
 
In August 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-15, “Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230): Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments (a
consensus  of  the  Emerging  Issues  Task  Force),”  (“ASU  2016-15”),  effective  for  fiscal  years  beginning  after  December  15,  2017.  ASU  2016-15  amends  the
guidance of ASC 230 on the classification of certain cash receipts and payments in the statement of cash flows. The primary purpose of ASU 2016-15 is to reduce
the diversity in practice that has resulted from the lack of consistent principles, specifically clarifying the guidance on eight cash flow issues. The adoption of ASU
2016-15 did not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
 
Subsequent events. Management has evaluated subsequent events through February 19, 2018, the date these consolidated financial statements were issued.
 
8

Exhibit 99.3
 
NOTE 3 — DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
 
In April 2016, the Company closed the sale of Crystals, a retail, dining and entertainment district, to a venture led by Invesco Real Estate and Simon
Property Group for approximately $1.1 billion. The Company recognized a gain of $400 million on the sale of Crystals, which is included within “Income from
discontinued operations,” for the year ended December 31, 2016. The results of Crystals are classified as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated
statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 as the sale of Crystals was a strategic shift in business. The cash flows of discontinued
operations are included with the cash flows of continuing operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows. The 2015 consolidated statements
of cash flows have not been adjusted to reflect discontinued operations.  
 
The following table summarizes the net revenues, depreciation, amortization and capital expenditures of Crystals.
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net revenues
 $
18,586 
 $
64,079 
Depreciation & amortization
  
4,335 
  
20,483 
Capital expenditures
  
11 
  
1,399
 
 
 
NOTE 4 — ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE, NET
 
Accounts receivable, net consisted of the following:
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Casino
 $
97,356  $
94,885 
Hotel
  
40,168 
  
33,880 
Other
  
7,529 
  
13,962 
 
  
145,053 
  
142,727 
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
  
(26,789)
  
(36,698)
 
 $
118,264  $
106,029
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at
  
Provision for
  
Write-offs,
   
 
 
 
 
Beginning of
  
Doubtful
  
Net of
  
Balance at
 
 
 
Period
  
Accounts
  
Recoveries
  
End of Period
 
Allowance for doubtful accounts:
 
(In thousands)
 
Year Ended December 31, 2017
 $
36,698  $
(2,407)  $
(7,502)  $
26,789 
Year Ended December 31, 2016
  
45,078   
12,551   
(20,931)   
36,698 
Year Ended December 31, 2015
  
49,903   
22,420   
(27,245)   
45,078
 
 
NOTE 5 — PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
 
Property and equipment, net consisted of the following:
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Land
 $
1,599,234  $
1,599,234 
Buildings, building improvements and land improvements
  
5,613,514 
  
5,610,600 
Furniture, fixtures and equipment
  
1,390,896 
  
1,381,557 
Construction in progress
  
135,082 
  
32,850 
 
  
8,738,726 
  
8,624,241 
Less: Accumulated depreciation and amortization
  
(2,164,023)
  
(1,966,581)
 
 $
6,574,703  $
6,657,660
 
 
9

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
NOTE 6— INTANGIBLE ASSETS, NET
 
Intangible assets, net consisted of the following:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Indefinite-lived:
   
    
 
   Intellectual property
 $
4,329  $
4,329 
Finite-lived:
  
  
  
  
   Aircraft time sharing agreement
  
24,000 
  
24,000 
   Other intangible assets
  
578 
  
578 
 
  
24,578 
  
24,578 
Less: Accumulated amortization
  
(10,226)
  
(9,026)
 
 $
18,681  $
19,881
 
 
The majority of the Company’s intangible assets are assets that were contributed by MGM Resorts upon formation of the Company. Intellectual property
represents trademarks, domain names, and other intellectual property including the CityCenter, Aria and Vdara tradenames and Aria.com domain. There is no
contractual or market-based limit to the use of these intangible assets and therefore they have been classified as indefinite-lived.
 
The Company performs an annual review of its indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment in the fourth quarter each year. The asset’s fair value is
compared  to  its  carrying  value,  and  an  impairment  charge  is  recorded  for  any  short-fall.  Fair  value  is  estimated  using  the  relief-from-royalty  method  which
discounts cash flows that would be required to obtain the use of the related intangible asset. Key inputs in the relief-from-royalty analysis include forecasted
revenues related to the intangible asset, market royalty rates, discount rates and terminal year growth rates.
 
The aircraft time sharing agreement intangible asset relates to an agreement between MGM Resorts and the Company whereby MGM Resorts provides the
Company the use of MGM Resorts’ aircraft in its operations. The Company is charged a rate that is based on Federal Aviation Administration regulations, which
provides  for  reimbursement  for  specific  costs  incurred  by  MGM  Resorts  without  any  profit  or  mark-up.  Accordingly,  the  fair  value  of  this  agreement  was
recognized as an intangible asset, and is being amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years, and will be fully amortized in 2029.
 
 
NOTE 7— OTHER ACCRUED LIABILITIES
 
Other accrued liabilities consisted of the following:
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Advance deposits and ticket sales
 $
37,298 
 $
31,254 
Casino outstanding chip liability
  
53,051 
  
57,438 
Casino front money deposits
  
46,063 
  
45,465 
Other gaming related accruals
  
7,555 
  
9,916 
Taxes, other than income taxes
  
15,351 
  
13,352 
Harmon demolition accrual
  
13,246 
  
13,246 
Payroll and related
  
8,536 
  
8,582 
Other
  
11,804 
  
8,252 
 
 $
192,904 
 $
187,505
 
 
See Note 11 for discussion of the Harmon demolition accrual.
 
 
10

Exhibit 99.3
 
NOTE 8 – LONG-TERM DEBT, NET
 
Long-term debt, net consisted of the following:
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
    
2016
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Senior credit facility
 $
1,592,000    $
1,241,750 
Less discounts and unamortized debt issuance cost
  
(30,203)     
(14,241)
 
  
1,561,797     
1,227,509 
Less current portion of long-long term debt
  
(16,000)     
– 
 
 $
1,545,797    $
1,227,509
 
 
Interest expense, net consisted of the following:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Senior credit facility including discount amortization
 $
58,380 
 $
59,254 
 $
70,309 
Amortization of debt issuance costs and other
  
3,383 
  
2,199 
  
2,482 
Capitalized interest
  
(1,669)
  
(421)
  
– 
 
 $
60,094 
 $
61,032 
 $
72,791
 
 
 
Senior credit facility. In April 2017, the Company completed a refinancing of its previous senior credit facility and entered into a $1.725 billion senior
credit facility. The new senior credit facility consists of a $125 million revolving credit facility maturing in April 2022, and a $1.6 billion term loan B facility
maturing in April 2024. The term loan B facility requires the Company to make amortization payments of 0.25% of the original principal balance at each quarter
end. The term loan B facility was issued at 99.5%, and bears interest at LIBOR plus 2.50% with a LIBOR floor of 0.75%, and in the case of base rate loans, at the
base rate plus 1.50%. As of December 31, 2017, the interest rate on the term loan B was 4.07%. Loans under the revolving facility bear interest at LIBOR plus
2.00%, and in the case of base rate loans, the base rate plus 1.00%. As of December 31, 2017 the Company had not drawn on the revolving facility. The Company
pays an applicable fee of 0.375%, for the unused portion of the revolving facility. The Company had $116 million of available borrowing capacity under its senior
credit facility at December 31, 2017. In connection with the closing of the new senior credit facility, the Company refinanced the outstanding amount under its
existing term loan. As a result of the transaction, the Company recorded a loss on retirement of long-term debt of $4.6 million, primarily consisting of the write-off
of a portion of previously unamortized debt issuance costs.
 
The senior credit facility is a general senior obligation of the Company and ranks equally with the Company’s other existing and future senior obligations, is
fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior secured basis by the restricted subsidiaries of the Company, and is secured by a first-priority perfected lien on
substantially all of the Company’s assets and the assets of its subsidiaries.
 
The senior credit facility contains customary positive, negative and financial covenants, including a requirement that the Company maintains a quarterly
minimum interest coverage ratio of 2.5:1.0 and a maximum quarterly leverage ratio for the trailing four quarters of: 5.50:1.00 for September 30, 2017 through
September 30, 2018; and 5.00:1.00 for December 31, 2018 and thereafter.  The Company was in compliance with all applicable covenants as of December 31,
2017.
 
Pursuant to the senior credit facility, the Company is required to make permanent repayments of principal based on an annual calculation of excess cash
flow, as defined in the agreements. The percentage of excess cash flow required to be repaid is based on the Company’s leverage ratio as of the end of the fiscal
year, with 50% required to be repaid if the leverage ratio is greater than 5.0:1.0 as of the measurement date, 25% if the leverage ratio is less than or equal to 5.0:1.0
and greater than 4.0:1.0, and no payment of excess cash flow is required if the leverage ratio is less than or equal to 4.0:1.0. During 2017 and as of December 31,
2017, the Company did not have excess cash flow required to be paid in accordance with the senior credit agreement for 2017.  During 2016 and as of December
31, 2016, the Company did not have excess cash flow required to be paid in accordance with the senior credit agreement for 2016.
 
Fair value of long-term debt. The estimated fair value of the Company’s long-term debt as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 was approximately $1.58
billion and $1.26 billion, respectively, and was determined using estimates based on trading prices of similar liabilities, a Level 2 input.
11

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
Maturities of long-term debt. As of December 31, 2017, maturities of the Company’s long-term debt were as follows:
 
For the year ending December 31,
 
(In thousands)
 
2018
 
$
16,000 
2019
  
16,000 
2020
  
16,000 
2021
  
16,000 
2022
  
16,000 
Thereafter
 
 
1,512,000 
 
 
$
1,592,000
 
 
NOTE 9 — PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS, NET
 
Property transactions, net consisted of the following:
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Construction litigation and Harmon related settlements
 $
107 
 $
(1,211)
 $
(159,980)
Other, net
  
9,434 
  
5,740 
  
5,192 
 
 $
9,541 
 $
4,529 
 $
(154,788)
 
In 2015, the Company recorded a $160 million gain associated with the settlement of the Perini litigation. See Note 11 for details.
 
Other property transactions, net for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 also includes normal recurring disposals, gains and losses on sales
of assets, which may not be comparable period over period.
 
 
NOTE 10 — SEGMENT INFORMATION
 
The Company determines its segments based on the nature of the products and services provided. As of December 31, 2017, the Company has the following
reportable segments: Aria, Vdara and Mandarin Oriental. In prior periods, the Company has aggregated residential operations from Mandarin Oriental and Veer
into  one  reportable  segment  “Residential”  given  the  similar  economic  characteristics  and  business  of  selling  and  leasing  high-rise  condominiums.  All  other
operating segments are reported separately. The Company’s operating segments do not include certain corporate administrative costs. During 2016 the Company
sold Crystals which was previously a reportable segment.
 
The Company analyzes the results of its operating segments’ operations based on Adjusted EBITDA, which it defines as earnings before interest and other
non-operating  income  (expense),  taxes,  depreciation  and  amortization,  preopening  and  start-up  expenses,  NV  Energy  exit  expense,  and  property  transactions,
net. The Company believes Adjusted EBITDA is 1) a widely used measure of operating performance in the gaming industry, and 2) a principal basis for valuation
of gaming companies.
 
While items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA may be recurring in nature and should not be disregarded in evaluating the Company’s or its segments’
earnings  performance,  it  is  useful  to  exclude  such  items  when  analyzing  current  results  and  trends  compared  to  other  periods  because  these  items  can  vary
significantly depending on specific underlying transactions or events that may not be comparable between the periods being presented. Also, the Company believes
excluded items may not relate specifically to current operating trends or be indicative of future results. For example, write-downs and impairments includes normal
recurring disposals and gains and losses on sales of assets related to specific assets within CityCenter, but also includes impairment charges which may not be
comparable period over period.
 
The following tables present the Company’s segment information:
 
12

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net revenues
  
  
  
  
  
  
Aria
 $
1,076,102 
 $
1,012,259 
 $
990,475 
Vdara
  
123,907 
  
119,367 
  
111,006 
Mandarin Oriental
  
67,544 
  
65,763 
  
61,541 
Residential
  
– 
  
2,676 
  
33,358 
Net revenues
 $
1,267,553 
 $
1,200,065 
 $
1,196,380
 
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Net income
 $
131,216 
 $
348,373 
 $
161,833 
Less: Income from discontinued operations
  
– 
  
(407,187)
  
(22,681)
Income (loss) from continuing operations
  
131,216 
  
(58,814)
  
139,152 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Non-operating (income) expense
  
  
  
  
  
  
Interest income
  
(1,357)
  
(885)
  
(471)
Interest expense, net
  
60,094 
  
61,032 
  
72,791 
Loss on retirement of debt
  
4,554 
  
4,102 
  
– 
Other, net
  
(408)
  
106 
  
191 
 
  
62,883 
  
64,355 
  
72,511 
 
  
    
    
  
Operating income
  
194,099 
  
5,541 
  
211,663 
NV Energy exit expense
  
(8,250)
  
26,089 
  
– 
Property transactions, net
  
9,541 
  
4,529 
  
(154,788)
Depreciation and amortization
  
224,358 
  
313,787 
  
251,847 
Adjusted EBITDA
 $
419,748 
 $
349,946 
 $
308,722 
 
  
    
    
  
 
  
    
    
  
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Adjusted EBITDA
  
  
  
  
  
  
Aria
 $
377,252 
 $
310,698 
 $
269,454 
Vdara
  
39,701 
  
35,956 
  
29,666 
Mandarin Oriental
  
6,918 
  
6,460 
  
5,685 
Other
  
(4,123)
  
(3,168)
  
3,917 
Adjusted EBITDA
 $
419,748 
 $
349,946 
 $
308,722
 
 
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Total assets
  
  
  
  
Aria
 $
5,917,619 
 $
5,996,160 
Vdara
  
666,390 
  
689,830 
Mandarin Oriental
  
354,552 
  
359,583 
Other
  
50,822 
  
53,195 
 
 $
6,989,383 
 $
7,098,768
 
 
 
13

Exhibit 99.3
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Capital expenditures
  
  
  
  
  
  
Aria
 $
104,180 
 $
67,262 
 $
47,807 
Vdara
  
2,078 
  
2,116 
  
1,121 
Mandarin Oriental
  
908 
  
1,559 
  
1,050 
Resort operations capital expenditures
  
107,166 
  
70,937 
  
49,978 
Development and corporate administration, net of change in construction payable and due to
MGM Resorts International, and other operations
  
– 
  
(483)
  
83,988 
Capital expenditures, net of change in construction payable
 $
107,166 
 $
70,454 
 $
133,966
 
 
 
Capital expenditures related to the original construction costs are included in “development and corporate administration, net of change in construction
payable and due to MGM Resorts International.” See Note 2 for discussion of project costs and allocation methodologies. Ongoing capital expenditures not related
to the project budget are included within the relevant segments.
 
NOTE 11 — COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
 
NV Energy. In July 2016, MGM Resorts, including the Company filed its notice to exit the fully bundled sales system of NV Energy and will purchase
energy, capacity, and/or ancillary services from a provider other than NV Energy. In September 2016, the Company paid an upfront impact payment of $14 million,
of which $2 million was billed to third party entities and represented a reduction in the overall impact fee expense. Of this $2 million receivable for amounts billed
to third party entities, $1 million is included in Accounts receivable, net as of both December 31, 2017 and December 31, 2016. Additionally, the Company is
required to make ongoing payments to NV Energy for non-bypassable rate charges which primarily relate to its share of NV Energy’s portfolio of renewable energy
contracts which extend through 2040 and each entity’s share of the costs of decommissioning and remediation of coal-fired power plants in Nevada. During 2017,
the terms of the ongoing impact fee obligations were modified. Such modifications included a credit to be applied against future non-bypassable rate charges and
substantially shortened the period over which MGM Resorts, including the Company, is responsible for such charges, with an end date in 2022. As such, the
Company recognized a reduction in its liability for future charges of $8 million with a corresponding credit to “NV Energy exit expense.” As of December 31,
2017, and 2016, the Company recorded an estimate of such liability on a discounted basis of $2 million and $2 million, respectively, in “Due to MGM Resorts
International” and $4 million and $13 million, respectively, in “Other long-term obligations.”
 
Construction litigation. In March 2010, Perini, general contractor for CityCenter, filed a lawsuit in the Eighth Judicial District Court for Clark County,
State of Nevada, against MGM MIRAGE Design Group (a wholly owned subsidiary of MGM Resorts which was the original party to the Perini construction
agreement) and certain direct or indirect subsidiaries of the Company. Perini asserted, among other things, that CityCenter was substantially completed, but the
defendants failed to pay Perini approximately $490 million allegedly due and owing under the construction agreement for labor, equipment and materials expended
on CityCenter.
 
In April 2010, Perini served an amended complaint in this case which joined as defendants many owners of CityCenter residential condominium units (the
“Condo  Owner  Defendants”),  added  a  count  for  foreclosure  of  Perini's  recorded  master  mechanic’s  lien  against  the  CityCenter  property  in  the  amount  of
approximately $491 million, and asserted the priority of this mechanic’s lien over the interests of the Company, the Condo Owner Defendants and the Company’s
lenders in the CityCenter property.  In November 2012, Perini filed a second amended complaint which, among other things, added claims against the CityCenter
defendants of breach of contract (alleging that CityCenter’s Owner Controlled Insurance Program (“OCIP”) failed to provide adequate project insurance for Perini
with broad coverages and high limits), and tortious breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing (alleging improper administration by the Company
of  the  OCIP  and  Builders  Risk  insurance  programs).  Prior  to  the  Final  Settlement,  as  defined  below,  the  Company  settled  the  claims  of  219  first-tier  Perini
subcontractors (including the claims of any lower-tier subcontractors that might have claims through those first-tier subcontractors). As a result of these settlement
agreements and the prior settlement agreements between Perini and the Company, most but not all of the components of Perini’s non-Harmon-related lien claim
against the Company were resolved. On February 24, 2014, Perini filed a revised lien for $174 million as the amount claimed by Perini and the remaining Harmon-
related subcontractors.
 
In December 2014, the Perini matter was  concluded through a global settlement among the Company, MGM Resorts, Perini, the remaining subcontractors,
including those implicated in the Harmon work (and their affiliates), and relevant insurers, which followed the previously disclosed settlement agreements and an
extra-judicial  program  for  settlement  of  certain  project  subcontractor  claims.  This  global  settlement  concluded  all  outstanding  claims  in  the  case  (the  “Final
Settlement”). The effectiveness of the global settlement was made contingent upon the Company’s execution of certain indemnity and release agreements (which
were executed in
14

Exhibit 99.3
 
January  2015)  and  the  Company’s  procurement  of  replacement  general  liability  insurance  covering  construction  of  the  CityCenter  development  (which  was
obtained in January 2015).
 
The  Final  Settlement,  together  with  previous  settlement  agreements  relating  to  the  non-Harmon  related  lien  claims,   resolved  all  of  Perini’s  and  the
remaining  subcontractors’  lien  claims  against  the  Company  and  MGM  Resorts,  certain  direct  and  indirect  subsidiaries,  MGM  Resorts  International  Design
(formerly known as MGM MIRAGE Design Group), and the Condo Owner Defendants. However, the Company expressly reserved any claims for latent or hidden
defects as to any portion of CityCenter’s original construction (other than the Harmon) not known to the Company at the time of the agreement.  The Company and
MGM Resorts entered into the Final Settlement solely as a compromise and settlement and not in any way as an admission of liability or fault.  
 
The key terms of the Final Settlement included:  
 
With respect to its non-Harmon lien claims, Perini waived a specific portion of its lien claim against the Company, which combined with the prior non-
Harmon agreement and accrued interest resulted in a total payment to Perini of $153 million. The total payment to Perini was funded by MGM Resorts under their
completion guarantee and included the application of approximately $58 million of condominium proceeds that were previously held in escrow by the Company to
fund construction lien claims upon final resolution of the Perini litigation.
 
The Company’s recovery for its Harmon construction defect claims, when added to the Harmon-related proceeds from prior insurance settlements of $85
million, resulted in gross cash settlement proceeds to the Company of approximately $191 million (of which approximately $18 million was paid by MGM Resorts
to CityCenter under the completion guarantee in February 2015).
 
In conjunction with the Final Settlement, MGM Resorts and an insurer participating in the OCIP resolved their arbitration dispute concerning such insurers
claim for payments it made under the OCIP general liability coverage for contractor costs incurred in the Harmon litigation, premium adjustments and certain other
costs and expenses. MGM Resorts settled this dispute for $38 million, and funded the majority of such amounts under the completion guarantee in January 2015.
 
Harmon. As discussed above, a global settlement was reached in the Perini litigation in December 2014, which finally resolved all outstanding liens, claims
and counterclaims between the Company and MGM Resorts on one hand, and Perini, the remaining subcontractors and remaining insurers on the other hand.
Among  the  matters  resolved  were  the  Company’s  claims  against  Perini  and  other  contractors  and  subcontractors  with  respect  to  construction  at  the  Harmon.
Pursuant to leave of court in 2014, the Company commenced demolition of the building. The Company has completed a partial demolition of the building and is
currently evaluating options for further demolition and plans for the future use of the remaining structure.
 
Other  litigation. The  Company  is  a  party  to  various  legal  proceedings  that  relate  to  construction  and  operational  matters  incidental  to  its  business.
Management does not believe that the outcome of such proceedings will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The
Company  maintained  an  OCIP  during  the  construction  and  development  process.  Under  the  OCIP,  certain  insurance  coverages  may  cover  a  portion  of  the
Company’s general liability, workers compensation, and other potential liabilities.
 
Other guarantees. The Company is party to various guarantee contracts in the normal course of business, which are generally supported by letters of credit
issued by financial institutions. The Company’s available borrowing capacity under the senior credit facility is reduced by any outstanding letters of credit.  At
December 31, 2017, the Company had $9 million in a letter of credit outstanding.
 
Leases where the Company is a lessee. The Company is party to various leases for real estate and equipment under operating lease arrangements. The
Company’s future minimum obligations under non-cancelable leases are immaterial in each of the next five years, and in total.
 
Leases where the Company is a lessor. The Company enters into operating leases related to retail, dining and entertainment venues. As of December 31,
2017, the Company has 19 such leases in place. Tenants are primarily responsible for tenant improvements, though the Company provides construction allowances
to certain lessees. Leases include base rent, common area maintenance charges and, in some cases, percentage rent based on the sales of the lessee. The Company’s
expected fixed future minimum lease payments are immaterial in each of the next five years, and in total.
 
Several leases contain terms that are based on meeting certain operational criteria. Contingent rentals included in income were $2 million, $5 million and
$14 million for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
 
 
15

Exhibit 99.3
 
NOTE 12 — SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION
 
Supplemental cash flow information consisted of the following:
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
 
 
2017
  
2016
  
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(In thousands)
 
Supplemental cash flow disclosures:
  
  
  
  
  
  
Interest paid
 $
68,585 
 $
43,410 
 $
68,306 
Increase in due to MGM Resorts International payable related to
   capital expenditures
  
11,777 
  
1,533 
  
4,994 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Non-cash investing and financing activities:
  
  
  
  
  
  
Reclassification of property and equipment, net to residential
   real estate
 $
– 
 $
– 
 $
7,293
 
 
 
 
NOTE 13 — MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS, DIVIDENDS AND DISTRIBUTIONS TO MEMBERS
 
In April 2017, the Company paid a $600 million dividend, consisting of a $350 million dividend using proceeds from the new senior credit facilities and a
$250 million dividend from cash on hand, of which $78 million was declared in accordance with the Company’s annual distribution policy. Of these dividends,
$300 million was paid to MGM Resorts and $300 million was paid to Infinity World in April 2017. In March 2016, a $90 million dividend was declared in
accordance with the Company’s annual distribution policy, and in April 2016, the Company declared $990 million special distribution in connection with the
Crystals sale. Of these dividends and distributions totaling $1.1 billion, $540 million was paid to MGM Resorts in May 2016 and $540 million was paid to Infinity
World in July 2016.  In April 2015, the Company declared and paid a special dividend of $400 million. Under the annual distribution policy, the Company intends
to distribute up to 35% of excess cash flow, subject to the approval of the Company’s board of directors.
 
MGM Resorts entered into a restated completion guarantee (as restated, the “completion guarantee”) that supported the remaining construction payables
from the construction of CityCenter. See Note 11 for further discussion of the Perini lawsuit. The completion guarantee was terminated in June 2015 and as of
December 31, 2015, MGM Resorts had funded $888 million under the completion guarantee which the Company recorded as equity contributions.
 
NOTE 14 — MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
 
The Company and MGM Resorts have entered into agreements whereby MGM Resorts is responsible for the ongoing management of CityCenter and the
Company. The LLC Agreement provides for Infinity World’s right to terminate the Operations Management Agreements if MGM Resorts’ ability to perform under
those agreements is impacted by its financial condition. The Company is paying MGM Resorts management fees as stipulated in each of the agreements referenced
below.
 
Operations management agreements. The Company and MGM Resorts entered into the following agreements to provide for the ongoing operations of
CityCenter:
 
 
•
Hotel and Casino Operations and Hotel Assets Management Agreement – Pursuant to this agreement, MGM Resorts manages the operations of Aria
and oversees the Mandarin Oriental component of CityCenter, which is managed by a third party. The Company pays MGM Resorts a fee equal to 2%
of Aria’s revenue plus 5% of Aria’s EBITDA (as defined in the agreement) for services under this agreement.
 
 
•
Vdara  Condo-Hotel  Operations  Management  Agreement –  Pursuant  to  this  agreement,  MGM  Resorts  manages  the  ongoing  operations  of  Vdara
Condo-Hotel. The Company pays MGM Resorts a fee equal to 2% of Vdara’s revenue and 5% of Vdara’s EBITDA (as defined in the agreement) for
services under this agreement.
 
 
•
Retail Management Agreement – Pursuant to this agreement, the Company pays MGM Resorts an annual fee of $3 million related to Crystals.
 
16

Exhibit 99.3
 
During the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the Company incurred $49 million, $43 million and $41 million, respectively, related to the
management  fees  discussed  above.  In  addition,  the  Company  reimburses  MGM  Resorts  for  costs,  primarily  employee  compensation,  associated  with  its
management  activities.  During  the  years  ended  December  31,  2017,  2016  and  2015,  the  Company  incurred  $390  million,  $387  million  and  $393  million,
respectively, for reimbursed costs of management services provided by MGM Resorts. As of December 31, 2017 and 2016, the Company owed MGM Resorts $79
million and $77 million, respectively, for management services and reimbursable costs, and such amounts included $18 million and $7 million, respectively, related
to capitalized construction costs, as well as $4 million and $13 million, respectively, related to NV energy expense, included in “Other long-term obligations.”
 
Aircraft agreement. The Company has an agreement with MGM Resorts whereby MGM Resorts provides the Company the use of its aircraft on a time
sharing basis. The Company is charged a rate that is based on Federal Aviation Administration regulations, which provides for reimbursement for specific costs
incurred by MGM Resorts without any profit or mark-up. The Company reimbursed MGM Resorts $2 million for aircraft related expenses for each of the years
ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
17
