UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
 _____________________________________________________________________
FORM 10-K
 _____________________________________________________________________
(Mark One)
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020
OR
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from              to             
Commission File Number: 001-35727
_____________________________________________________________________
Netflix, Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 _____________________________________________________________________
Delaware
 
77-0467272
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
100 Winchester Circle, Los Gatos, California 95032
(Address and zip code of principal executive offices)
(408) 540-3700
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
 _____________________________________________________________________
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common stock, par value $0.001 per share
NFLX
NASDAQ Global Select Market
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
 _____________________________________________________________________
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this
chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
☒
Accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting
standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management's assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under
Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). Yes ☐ No ☒
As of June 30, 2020 the aggregate market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, based upon the closing sales price for the registrant’s common stock, as reported in the
NASDAQ Global Select Market System, was $196,932,116,552. Shares of common stock beneficially owned by each executive officer and director of the registrant and by each person known
by the registrant to beneficially own 10% or more of the outstanding common stock have been excluded in that such persons may be deemed to be affiliates. This determination of affiliate status
is not necessarily a conclusive determination for any other purpose.
As of December 31, 2020, there were 442,895,261 shares of the registrant’s common stock, par value $0.001, outstanding.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Parts of the registrant’s Proxy Statement for the registrant’s 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
 
Page
PART I
Item 1.
Business
1
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
4
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
16
Item 2.
Properties
17
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
17
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
17
PART II
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
18
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
19
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
22
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
31
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
32
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
32
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
33
Item 9B.
Other Information
35
PART III
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
36
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
36
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
36
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
36
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
36
PART IV
Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
37

Table of Contents
PART I
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These forward-looking statements
include, but are not limited to, statements regarding: our core strategy; our future financial performance, including expectations regarding revenues, deferred
revenue, operating income and margin, net income, expenses, and profitability; liquidity, including the sufficiency of our capital resources, net cash provided by
(used in) operating activities, access to financing sources, and free cash flows; capital allocation strategies, including any future stock repurchase programs;
seasonality; stock price volatility; impact of foreign exchange rate fluctuations, including on net income, revenues and average revenues per paying member;
adequacy of existing facilities; the impact of the discontinuance of the LIBO Rate; future regulatory changes and their impact on our business; intellectual
property; price changes and testing; impact of recently adopted accounting pronouncements; accounting treatment for changes related to content assets; action by
competitors; membership growth, including impact of content and pricing changes on membership growth; partnerships; member viewing patterns; dividends;
future contractual obligations, including unknown content obligations and timing of payments; our global content and marketing investments, including
investments in original programming; content amortization; tax expense; unrecognized tax benefits; deferred tax assets; our ability to effectively manage change
and growth; our company culture; our ability to attract and retain qualified employees and key personnel; and the impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic and our response to it. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ. A
detailed discussion of these and other risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from such forward-looking statements
is included throughout this filing and particularly in Item 1A: "Risk Factors" section set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All forward-looking statements
included in this document are based on information available to us on the date hereof, and we assume no obligation to revise or publicly release any revision to
any such forward-looking statement, except as may otherwise be required by law.
 
Item 1.
Business
ABOUT US
Netflix, Inc. (“Netflix”, “the Company”, “registrant”, “we”, or “us”) is one of the world’s leading entertainment services with approximately 204 million paid
memberships in over 190 countries enjoying TV series, documentaries and feature films across a wide variety of genres and languages. Members can watch as
much as they want, anytime, anywhere, on any internet-connected screen. Members can play, pause and resume watching, all without commercials. Additionally,
we continue to offer our DVD-by-mail service in the United States (“U.S.”).
We are a pioneer in the delivery of streaming entertainment, launching our streaming service in 2007. Since this launch, we have developed an ecosystem for
internet-connected screens and have added increasing amounts of content that enable consumers to enjoy entertainment directly on their internet-connected screens.
As a result of these efforts, we have experienced growing consumer acceptance of, and interest in, the delivery of streaming entertainment.
Our core strategy is to grow our streaming membership business globally within the parameters of our operating margin target. We are continuously
improving our members' experience by expanding our content with a focus on a programming mix of content that delights our members and attracts new members.
In addition, we are continuously enhancing our user interface and extending our streaming service to more internet-connected screens. Our members can download
a selection of titles for offline viewing.
BUSINESS SEGMENTS
We operate as one operating segment. Our revenues are primarily derived from monthly membership fees for services related to streaming content to our
members. See Note 12, Segment and Geographic Information, in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for further detail.
COMPETITION
The market for video entertainment is intensely competitive and subject to rapid change. We compete against other entertainment video providers, such as
multichannel video programming distributors (“MVPDs”), streaming entertainment providers (including those that provide pirated content), video gaming
providers and more broadly against other sources of entertainment that our members could choose in their moments of free time. We also compete against
streaming entertainment providers and content producers in obtaining content for our service, both for licensed content and for original content projects.
While consumers may maintain simultaneous relationships with multiple entertainment sources, we strive for consumers to choose us in their moments of
free time. We have often referred to this choice as our objective of "winning moments of
1

Table of Contents
truth." In attempting to win these moments of truth with our members, we are continually improving our service, including both our technology and our content,
which is increasingly exclusive and curated, and includes our original programming.
SEASONALITY
Our membership growth exhibits a seasonal pattern that reflects variations when consumers buy internet-connected screens and when they tend to increase
their viewing. Historically, the first and fourth quarters (October through March) represent our greatest streaming membership growth. In addition, our membership
growth can be impacted by our content release schedule and changes to pricing.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
We regard our trademarks, service marks, copyrights, patents, domain names, trade dress, trade secrets, proprietary technologies and similar intellectual
property as important to our success. We use a combination of patent, trademark, copyright and trade secret laws and confidentiality agreements to protect our
proprietary intellectual property. Our intellectual property rights extend to our technology, business processes and the content we produce and distribute through
our service. We use the intellectual property of third parties in creating some of our content, merchandising our products and marketing our service. Our ability to
provide our members with content they can watch depends on studios, content providers and other rights holders licensing rights, including distribution rights, to
such content and certain related elements thereof, such as the public performance of music contained within the content we distribute. The license periods and the
terms and conditions of such licenses vary. Our ability to protect and enforce our intellectual property rights is subject to certain risks and from time to time we
encounter disputes over rights and obligations concerning intellectual property. We cannot provide assurance that we will prevail in any intellectual property
disputes.
REGULATION
The media landscape and the internet delivery of content have seen growing regulatory action. Historically, media has been highly regulated in many
countries. We are seeing some of these legacy regulatory frameworks be updated and expanded to address services like ours. In particular, we are seeing some
countries update their cultural support legislation to include services like Netflix. This includes content quotas, levies and investment obligations. Some even
restrict the extent of ownership rights we can have both in our service and in our content. In certain countries, regulators are also looking at restrictions that could
require formal reviews of and/or adjustments to content that appears on our service in their country. In general these regulations impact all services and may make
operating in certain jurisdictions more expensive or restrictive as to the content offering we may provide.
HUMAN CAPITAL
We view our employees and our culture as key to our success. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 9,400 full-time employees located globally
in 59 countries. Of these, 7,600 (81%) were located in the United States and Canada, 1,000 (11%) in Europe, Middle East, and Africa, 200 (2%) in Latin America
and 600 (6%) in Asia-Pacific. We also have a number of employees engaged in content production, some of whom are part-time or temporary, and whose numbers
fluctuate throughout the year.
We believe a critical component of our success is our company culture. This culture, which is detailed in a "Culture Memo" located on our website, is often
described as a high-performance culture of freedom and responsibility. We aim to attract and retain great people - representing a diverse array of perspectives and
skills - to work together as a dream team. We empower all of our employees so that they can have significant impact and input into decision-making; each
employee has the freedom and power to make the decisions and take actions in the best interest of the Company in carrying out their role. In return, our employees
are responsible and accountable for those decisions and actions. With this approach, we believe we are a more flexible, fun, stimulating, creative, collaborative and
successful organization.
As we have expanded our offices globally, our company culture remains an important aspect of our operations. We have also become mindful of cultural
differences across and within regions. Fostering a work environment that is culturally diverse, inclusive and equitable is a major focus for us. We employ a team
reporting to our VP of Inclusion Strategy who works to build diversity, inclusion and equity into all aspects of our operations globally, with the goal of having
diversity and inclusion function as a critical lens through which each Netflix employee carries out their role. We want more people and cultures to see themselves
reflected on screen - so it’s important that our employees are diverse like the communities we serve. Our Inclusion team helps increase representation by training
our recruiters on how to hire more inclusively, and to help the company and senior leaders diversify their networks. We also support numerous employee resource
groups (ERGs), representing employees and allies from a broad array of historically underrepresented and/or marginalized communities. Our ERGs are important
in
2

Table of Contents
creating a more inclusive environment for all employees, allowing space to connect on shared experiences, providing mentoring, career development and
volunteering opportunities, and to provide the Company with insight into the perspectives, needs and lived experiences of the communities. Each ERG is supported
by senior leaders across the Company. We published our first Inclusion report in January 2021 which further highlights our approach to diversity and inclusion.
    
We believe in fostering great leaders. We employ a VP of Leadership Programs, whose team’s mission is to design programs, such as seminars and lectures,
that help our leaders (officers, VPs and director-level employees) examine values that guide them personally, and as leaders, especially when those values come
into tension with the world around us. The goal of these programs is to create great human beings, who become great leaders, who shape a great company. We also
employ a learning and development team that programs workshops to provide skills and coaching to employees on a variety of topics, such as leading and inspiring
teams. We believe this focus helps our employees grow as leaders and well-rounded individuals, and better positions Netflix to operate our global business of
providing compelling content to entertain the world.
    
We aim to pay our employees at the top of their personal market, and they generally are able to choose the form of their compensation between cash and
stock options. This permits employee compensation to be highly personalized and reflective of each employee's individual needs and preferences. In 2020, we
conducted a pay equity analysis and adopted practices to ensure that employees from underrepresented groups are not being underpaid relative to others doing the
same or similar work. We also practice “open compensation,” which means the top leaders (director-level and above) at the company can see how much any
employee is paid. This encourages open discussions about pay disparities throughout the Company. We aim to rectify any pay gaps that we find through these
approaches.
    
We care about the health and well-being of our employees and their families. Each employee receives an annual cash health benefit allowance that they may
allocate to medical, dental and vision premiums in a way that makes sense for them. If any portion of the benefit is unused, the employee is paid the unused benefit
as cash compensation, up to $5,000. Employees have access to a host of other benefits, including mental health, childcare, family planning and a company match
for charitable donations. We enhanced a number of these benefits to support our employees through the challenges arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe that our approach to human capital resources has been instrumental in our growth, and has made Netflix a desirable destination for employees.
OTHER INFORMATION
We maintain a website at www.netflix.com. The contents of our website are not incorporated in, or otherwise to be regarded as part of, this Annual Report on
Form 10-K. We make available, free of charge on our website, access to our Annual Report on Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, our Current
Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the "Exchange Act"), as soon as reasonably practicable after we file or furnish them electronically with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC").
Investors and others should note that we announce material financial information to our investors using our investor relations website (ir.netflix.net), SEC
filings, press releases, public conference calls and webcasts. We use these channels as well as social media and blogs to communicate with our members and the
public about our company, our services and other issues. It is possible that the information we post on social media and blogs could be deemed to be material
information. Therefore, we encourage investors, the media, and others interested in our company to review the information we post on the social media channels
and blogs listed on our investor relations website.
3

Table of Contents
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
If any of the following risks actually occur, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be harmed. In that case, the trading price of our
common stock could decline, and you could lose all or part of your investment.
Risks Related to Our Business
The ongoing coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and the global attempt to contain it may harm our industry, business, results of operations and ability to
raise additional capital.
The global spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) and the various attempts to contain it have created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic
disruption. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments around the world have enacted various measures, some of which have been
subsequently rescinded, modified or reinstated, including orders to close all businesses not deemed “essential,” isolate residents to their homes or places of
residence, and practice social distancing. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by COVID-19, including any resurgences, will
continue to negatively impact business activity across the globe. In response to government mandates, health care advisories and otherwise responding to employee
and vendor concerns, we have altered certain aspects of our operations. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, our workforce has and
continues to spend a significant amount of time working from home. International travel has been severely curtailed and many of our productions continue to
experience disruption, as are productions of our third-party content suppliers. Other partners have similarly had their operations disrupted, including those partners
that we use for our operations as well as development, production and post-production of content. While we and our partners have resumed productions and related
operations in many parts of the world, our ability to produce content remains affected by the pandemic. To the extent the resulting economic disruption is severe,
we could see some vendors go out of business, resulting in supply constraints and increased costs or delays to our productions. Such production pauses may cause
us temporarily to have less new content available on our service in subsequent quarters, which could negatively impact consumer demand for and member
retention to our service and the number of paid memberships. Temporary production pauses or permanent shutdowns in production could result in content asset
impairments or other charges and will change the timing and amount of cash outflows associated with production activity.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the various responses to it impacts our business, operations and financial results will depend on
numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and
individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; the availability and cost to access the capital markets; the effect on our
customers and customer demand for and ability to pay for our services; disruptions or restrictions on our employees’ ability to work and travel; and any stoppages,
disruptions or increased costs associated with our development, production, post-production, marketing and distribution of original programming. During the
COVID-19 crisis, we may not be able to provide the same level of customer service and product features that our members are used to which could negatively
impact their perception of our service resulting in an increase in cancellations. Furthermore, given increased government expenditures associated with their
COVID-19 response, we could see increased government obligations which could negatively impact our results of operations. If we need to access the capital
markets, there can be no assurance that financing may be available on attractive terms, if at all. We will continue to actively monitor the issues raised by the
COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our business operations, including content production, as may be required by federal, state, local or
foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and stockholders. It is not clear what the potential effects
any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our customers, suppliers or vendors, or on our financial results.
The COVID-19 pandemic also led to an increase in our net paid membership additions relative to our quarterly forecast and historic trends in the first half of
2020, and slower net paid membership additions in the second half of 2020 relative to historic trends. These results, as well as those of other metrics such as
revenues, operating margins, net income, net cash provided by operating activities and other financial and operating data, may not be indicative of results for future
periods. In addition to the potential direct impacts to our business, the global economy is likely to be significantly weakened as a result of the actions taken in
response to COVID-19. To the extent that such a weakened global economy impacts consumers’ ability or willingness to pay for our service or vendors’ ability to
provide services to us, especially those related to our content productions, we could see our business and results of operation negatively impacted.
4

Table of Contents
If our efforts to attract and retain members are not successful, our business will be adversely affected.
We have experienced significant membership growth over the past several years. Our ability to continue to attract members will depend in part on our ability
to consistently provide our members with compelling content choices, effectively market our service, as well as provide a quality experience for selecting and
viewing TV series, documentaries and feature films. Furthermore, the relative service levels, content offerings, pricing and related features of competitors to our
service may adversely impact our ability to attract and retain memberships. Competitors include other entertainment video providers, such as MVPDs, and
streaming entertainment providers (including those that provide pirated content), as well as video gaming providers and more broadly other sources of
entertainment that our members could choose in their moments of free time. If consumers do not perceive our service offering to be of value, including if we
introduce new or adjust existing features, adjust pricing or service offerings, or change the mix of content in a manner that is not favorably received by them, we
may not be able to attract and retain members. We may, from time to time, adjust our membership pricing or our pricing model itself, which may not be well-
received by consumers, and which may result in existing members canceling our service or fewer new members joining our service. In addition, many of our
members rejoin our service or originate from word-of-mouth advertising from existing members. If our efforts to satisfy our existing members are not successful,
we may not be able to attract members, and as a result, our ability to maintain and/or grow our business will be adversely affected. Members cancel our service for
many reasons, including a perception that they do not use the service sufficiently, the need to cut household expenses, availability of content is unsatisfactory,
competitive services provide a better value or experience and customer service issues are not satisfactorily resolved. We must continually add new memberships
both to replace canceled memberships and to grow our business beyond our current membership base. While we permit multiple users within the same household
to share a single account for non-commercial purposes, if multi-household usage is abused or if our efforts to restrict multi-household usage are ineffective, our
ability to add new members may be hindered and our results of operations may be adversely impacted. If we do not grow as expected, given, in particular, that our
content costs are largely fixed in nature and contracted over several years, we may not be able to adjust our expenditures or increase our (per membership)
revenues commensurate with the lowered growth rate such that our margins, liquidity and results of operation may be adversely impacted. If we are unable to
successfully compete with current and new competitors in both retaining our existing memberships and attracting new memberships, our business will be adversely
affected. Further, if excessive numbers of members cancel our service, we may be required to incur significantly higher marketing expenditures than we currently
anticipate to replace these members with new members.
Changes in competitive offerings for entertainment video, including the potential rapid adoption of piracy-based video offerings, could adversely impact
our business.
The market for entertainment video is intensely competitive and subject to rapid change. Through new and existing distribution channels, consumers have
increasing options to access entertainment video. The various economic models underlying these channels include subscription, transactional, ad-supported and
piracy-based models. All of these have the potential to capture meaningful segments of the entertainment video market. Piracy, in particular, threatens to damage
our business, as its fundamental proposition to consumers is so compelling and difficult to compete against: virtually all content for free. Furthermore, in light of
the compelling consumer proposition, piracy services are subject to rapid global growth. Traditional providers of entertainment video, including broadcasters and
cable network operators, as well as internet based e-commerce or entertainment video providers are increasing their streaming video offerings. Several of these
competitors have long operating histories, large customer bases, strong brand recognition, exclusive rights to certain content and significant financial, marketing
and other resources. They may secure better terms from suppliers, adopt more aggressive pricing and devote more resources to product development, technology,
infrastructure, content acquisitions and marketing. New entrants may enter the market or existing providers may adjust their services with unique offerings or
approaches to providing entertainment video. Companies also may enter into business combinations or alliances that strengthen their competitive positions. If we
are unable to successfully or profitably compete with current and new competitors, our business will be adversely affected, and we may not be able to increase or
maintain market share, revenues or profitability.
We face risks, such as unforeseen costs and potential liability in connection with content we acquire, produce, license and/or distribute through our
service.
As a producer and distributor of content, we face potential liability for negligence, copyright and trademark infringement, or other claims based on the nature
and content of materials that we acquire, produce, license and/or distribute. We also may face potential liability for content used in promoting our service,
including marketing materials. We are devoting more resources toward the development, production, marketing and distribution of original programming,
including TV series, documentaries and feature films. We believe that original programming can help differentiate our service from other offerings, enhance our
brand and otherwise attract and retain members. To the extent our original programming does not meet our expectations, in particular, in terms of costs, viewing
and popularity, our business, including our brand and results of operations may be adversely impacted. As we expand our original programming, we have become
responsible for production costs and
5

Table of Contents
other expenses, such as ongoing guild payments. We also take on risks associated with production, such as completion and key talent risk. Negotiations or renewals
related to entertainment industry collective bargaining agreements could negatively impact timing and costs associated with our productions. We contract with
third parties related to the development, production, marketing and distribution of our original programming.  We may face potential liability or may suffer losses
in connection with these arrangements, including but not limited to if such third parties violate applicable law, become insolvent or engage in fraudulent behavior.
To the extent we create and sell physical or digital merchandise relating to our original programming, and/or license such rights to third parties, we could become
subject to product liability, intellectual property or other claims related to such merchandise. We may decide to remove content from our service, not to place
licensed or produced content on our service or discontinue or alter production of original content if we believe such content might not be well received by our
members, or could be damaging to our brand or business.
To the extent we do not accurately anticipate costs or mitigate risks, including for content that we obtain but ultimately does not appear on or is removed
from our service, or if we become liable for content we acquire, produce, license and/or distribute, our business may suffer. Litigation to defend these claims could
be costly and the expenses and damages arising from any liability or unforeseen production risks could harm our results of operations. We may not be indemnified
against claims or costs of these types and we may not have insurance coverage for these types of claims.
If we are not able to manage change and growth, our business could be adversely affected.
We are expanding our operations internationally, scaling our streaming service to effectively and reliably handle anticipated growth in both members and
features related to our service, scaling our ability to produce original content, as well as continuing to operate our DVD service within the U.S. As our international
offering evolves, we are managing and adjusting our business to address varied content offerings, consumer customs and practices, in particular those dealing with
e-commerce and streaming video, as well as differing legal and regulatory environments. As we scale our streaming service, we are developing technology and
utilizing third-party “cloud” computing services. As we scale our original content production, we are building out expertise in a number of disciplines, including
creative, marketing, legal, finance, licensing, merchandising and other resources related to the development and physical production of content. Further, we may
expand our content offering in a manner that is not well received by consumers. As we grow our operations, we may face integration and operational challenges as
well as potential unknown liabilities and reputational concerns in connection with partners we work with or companies we may acquire or control. If we are not
able to manage the growing complexity of our business, including improving, refining or revising our systems and operational practices related to our streaming
operations and original content, our business may be adversely affected.
If we fail to maintain or, in newer markets establish, a positive reputation concerning our service, including the content we offer, we may not be able to
attract or retain members, and our operating results may be adversely affected.
We believe that a positive reputation concerning our service is important in attracting and retaining members. To the extent our content, in particular, our
original programming, is perceived as low quality, offensive or otherwise not compelling to consumers, our ability to establish and maintain a positive reputation
may be adversely impacted. To the extent our content is deemed controversial or offensive by government regulators, we may face direct or indirect retaliatory
action or behavior, including being required to remove such content from our service, our entire service could be banned and/or become subject to heightened
regulatory scrutiny across our business and operations. We could also face boycotts which could adversely affect our business. Furthermore, to the extent our
response to government action or our marketing, customer service and public relations efforts are not effective or result in negative reaction, our ability to establish
and maintain a positive reputation may likewise be adversely impacted. With newer markets, we also need to establish our reputation with consumers and to the
extent we are not successful in creating positive impressions, our business in these newer markets may be adversely impacted.
Changes in how we market our service could adversely affect our marketing expenses and membership levels may be adversely affected.
We utilize a broad mix of marketing and public relations programs, including social media sites, to promote our service and content to existing and potential
new members. We may limit or discontinue use or support of certain marketing sources or activities if advertising rates increase or if we become concerned that
members or potential members deem certain marketing platforms or practices intrusive or damaging to our brand. If the available marketing channels are curtailed,
our ability to engage members and attract new members may be adversely affected.
Companies that promote our service may decide that we negatively impact their business or may make business decisions that in turn negatively impact us.
For example, if they decide that they want to compete more directly with us, enter a similar business or exclusively support our competitors, we may no longer
have access to their marketing channels. We also acquire a number of members who rejoin our service having previously canceled their membership. If we are
unable to maintain or
6

Table of Contents
replace our sources of members with similarly effective sources, or if the cost of our existing sources increases, our member levels and marketing expenses may be
adversely affected.
We utilize marketing to promote our content and drive conversation about our content and service. To the extent we promote our content or service
inefficiently or ineffectively, we may not obtain the expected acquisition and retention benefits and our business may be adversely affected.
We rely upon a number of partners to make our service available on their devices.
We currently offer members the ability to receive streaming content through a host of internet-connected devices, including TVs, digital video players,
television set-top boxes and mobile devices. We have agreements with various cable, satellite and telecommunications operators to make our service available
through the television set-top boxes of these service providers, some of whom may have investments in competing streaming content providers. In many instances,
our agreements also include provisions by which the partner bills consumers directly for the Netflix service or otherwise offers services or products in connection
with offering our service. If partners or other providers do a better job of connecting consumers with content they want to watch, for example through multi-service
discovery interfaces, our service may be adversely impacted. We intend to continue to broaden our relationships with existing partners and to increase our
capability to stream TV series, documentaries and feature films to other platforms and partners over time. If we are not successful in maintaining existing and
creating new relationships, or if we encounter technological, content licensing, regulatory, business or other impediments to delivering our streaming content to our
members via these devices, our ability to retain members and grow our business could be adversely impacted.
Our agreements with our partners are typically between one and three years in duration and our business could be adversely affected if, upon expiration, a
number of our partners do not continue to provide access to our service or are unwilling to do so on terms acceptable to us, which terms may include the degree of
accessibility and prominence of our service. Furthermore, devices are manufactured and sold by entities other than Netflix and while these entities should be
responsible for the devices’ performance, the connection between these devices and Netflix may nonetheless result in consumer dissatisfaction toward Netflix and
such dissatisfaction could result in claims against us or otherwise adversely impact our business. In addition, technology changes to our streaming functionality
may require that partners update their devices, or may lead to us to stop supporting the delivery of our service on certain legacy devices. If partners do not update
or otherwise modify their devices, or if we discontinue support for certain devices, our service and our members' use and enjoyment could be negatively impacted.
We are subject to payment processing risk.
Our members pay for our service using a variety of different payment methods, including credit and debit cards, gift cards, prepaid cards, direct debit, online
wallets and direct carrier and partner billing. We rely on internal systems as well as those of third parties to process payment. Acceptance and processing of these
payment methods are subject to certain rules and regulations, including additional authentication requirements for certain payment methods, and require payment
of interchange and other fees. To the extent there are increases in payment processing fees, material changes in the payment ecosystem, such as large re-issuances
of payment cards, delays in receiving payments from payment processors, changes to rules or regulations concerning payments, loss of payment partners and/or
disruptions or failures in our payment processing systems, partner systems or payment products, including products we use to update payment information, our
revenue, operating expenses and results of operation could be adversely impacted. In certain instances, we leverage third parties such as our cable and other
partners to bill subscribers on our behalf. If these third parties become unwilling or unable to continue processing payments on our behalf, we would have to
transition subscribers or otherwise find alternative methods of collecting payments, which could adversely impact member acquisition and retention. In addition,
from time to time, we encounter fraudulent use of payment methods, which could impact our results of operations and if not adequately controlled and managed
could create negative consumer perceptions of our service. If we are unable to maintain our fraud and chargeback rate at acceptable levels, card networks may
impose fines, our card approval rate may be impacted and we may be subject to additional card authentication requirements. The termination of our ability to
process payments on any major payment method would significantly impair our ability to operate our business.
If government regulations relating to the internet or other areas of our business change, we may need to alter the manner in which we conduct our
business, or incur greater operating expenses.
The adoption or modification of laws or regulations relating to the internet or other areas of our business could limit or otherwise adversely affect the manner
in which we currently conduct our business. As our service and others like us gain traction in international markets, governments are increasingly looking to
introduce new or extend legacy regulations to these services, in particular those related to broadcast media and tax. For example, recent changes to European law
enables individual member states to impose levies and other financial obligations on media operators located outside their jurisdiction.
7

Table of Contents
We anticipate that several jurisdictions may, over time, impose greater financial and regulatory obligations on us. In addition, the continued growth and
development of the market for online commerce may lead to more stringent consumer protection laws, which may impose additional burdens on us. If we are
required to comply with new regulations or legislation or new interpretations of existing regulations or legislation, this compliance could cause us to incur
additional expenses or alter our business model.
Changes in laws or regulations that adversely affect the growth, popularity or use of the internet, including laws impacting net neutrality, could decrease the
demand for our service and increase our cost of doing business. Certain laws intended to prevent network operators from discriminating against the legal traffic
that traverse their networks have been implemented in many countries, including across the European Union. In others, the laws may be nascent or non-existent.
Furthermore, favorable laws may change, including for example, in the United States where net neutrality regulations were repealed. Given uncertainty around
these rules, including changing interpretations, amendments or repeal, coupled with potentially significant political and economic power of local network
operators, we could experience discriminatory or anti-competitive practices that could impede our growth, cause us to incur additional expense or otherwise
negatively affect our business.
Risks Related to Intellectual Property
If studios, content providers or other rights holders refuse to license streaming content or other rights upon terms acceptable to us, our business could be
adversely affected.
Our ability to provide our members with content they can watch depends on studios, content providers and other rights holders licensing rights, including
distribution rights, to such content and certain related elements thereof, such as the public performance of music contained within the content we distribute. The
license periods and the terms and conditions of such licenses vary. As content providers develop their own streaming services, they may be unwilling to provide us
with access to certain content, including popular series or movies. If the studios, content providers and other rights holders are not or are no longer willing or able
to license us content upon terms acceptable to us, our ability to stream content to our members may be adversely affected and/or our costs could increase. Certain
licenses for content provide for the studios or other content providers to withdraw content from our service relatively quickly. Because of these provisions as well
as other actions we may take, content available through our service can be withdrawn on short notice. As competition increases, we see the cost of certain
programming increase. As we seek to differentiate our service, we are often focused on securing certain exclusive rights when obtaining content, including original
content. We are also focused on programming an overall mix of content that delights our members in a cost efficient manner. Within this context, we are selective
about the titles we add and renew to our service. If we do not maintain a compelling mix of content, our membership acquisition and retention may be adversely
affected.
Music and certain authors’ performances contained within content we distribute may require us to obtain licenses for such distribution. In this regard, we
engage in negotiations with collection management organizations (“CMOs”) that hold certain rights to music and/or other interests in connection with streaming
content into various territories. If we are unable to reach mutually acceptable terms with these organizations, we could become involved in litigation and/or could
be enjoined from distributing certain content, which could adversely impact our business. Additionally, pending and ongoing litigation as well as negotiations
between certain CMOs and other third parties in various territories could adversely impact our negotiations with CMOs, or result in music publishers represented
by certain CMOs unilaterally withdrawing rights, and thereby adversely impact our ability to reach licensing agreements reasonably acceptable to us. Failure to
reach such licensing agreements could expose us to potential liability for copyright infringement or otherwise increase our costs. Additionally, as the market for the
digital distribution of content grows, a broader role for CMOs in the remuneration of authors, performers and other rights holders could expose us to greater
distribution expenses.
If our trademarks and other proprietary rights are not adequately protected to prevent use or appropriation by our competitors, the value of our brand
and other intangible assets may be diminished, and our business may be adversely affected.
We rely and expect to continue to rely on a combination of confidentiality and license agreements with our employees, consultants and third parties with
whom we have relationships, as well as trademark, copyright, patent and trade secret protection laws, to protect our proprietary rights. We may also seek to enforce
our proprietary rights through court proceedings or other legal actions. We have filed and we expect to file from time to time for trademark and patent applications.
Nevertheless, these applications may not be approved, third parties may challenge any copyrights, patents or trademarks issued to or held by us, third parties may
knowingly or unknowingly infringe our intellectual property rights, and we may not be able to prevent infringement or misappropriation without substantial
expense to us. If the protection of our intellectual property rights is inadequate to prevent use or misappropriation by third parties, the value of our brand, content,
and other intangible assets may be diminished, competitors may be able to more effectively mimic our service and methods of operations, the
8

Table of Contents
perception of our business and service to members and potential members may become confused in the marketplace, and our ability to attract members may be
adversely affected.
We currently hold various domain names relating to our brand, including Netflix.com. Failure to protect our domain names could adversely affect our
reputation and brand and make it more difficult for users to find our website and our service. We may be unable, without significant cost or at all, to prevent third
parties from acquiring domain names that are similar to, infringe upon or otherwise decrease the value of our trademarks and other proprietary rights.
Intellectual property claims against us could be costly and result in the loss of significant rights related to, among other things, our website, streaming
technology, our recommendation and merchandising technology, title selection processes, our content, and marketing activities.
Trademark, copyright, patent and other intellectual property rights are important to us and other companies. Our intellectual property rights extend to our
technology, business processes and the content we produce and distribute through our service. We use the intellectual property of third parties in creating some of
our content, merchandising our products and marketing our service. From time to time, third parties allege that we have violated their intellectual property rights. If
we are unable to obtain sufficient rights, successfully defend our use, or develop non-infringing technology or otherwise alter our business practices on a timely
basis in response to claims against us for infringement, misappropriation, misuse or other violation of third-party intellectual property rights, our business and
competitive position may be adversely affected. Many companies are devoting significant resources to developing patents that could potentially affect many
aspects of our business. There are numerous patents that broadly claim means and methods of conducting business on the internet. We have not searched patents
relative to our technology. Defending ourselves against intellectual property claims, whether they are with or without merit or are determined in our favor, results
in costly litigation and diversion of technical and management personnel. It also may result in our inability to use our current website, streaming technology, our
recommendation and merchandising technology or inability to market our service or merchandise our products. We may also have to remove content from our
service, or remove consumer products or marketing materials from the marketplace. As a result of a dispute, we may have to develop non-infringing technology,
enter into royalty or licensing agreements, adjust our content, merchandising or marketing activities or take other actions to resolve the claims. These actions, if
required, may be costly or unavailable on terms acceptable to us.
Risks Related to Information Technology
Any significant disruption in or unauthorized access to our computer systems or those of third parties that we utilize in our operations, including those
relating to cybersecurity or arising from cyber-attacks, could result in a loss or degradation of service, unauthorized disclosure of data, including member
and corporate information, or theft of intellectual property, including digital content assets, which could adversely impact our business.
Our reputation and ability to attract, retain and serve our members is dependent upon the reliable performance and security of our computer systems and
those of third parties that we utilize in our operations. These systems may be subject to damage or interruption from, among other things, earthquakes, adverse
weather conditions, other natural disasters, terrorist attacks, rogue employees, power loss, telecommunications failures, and cybersecurity risks. Interruptions in
these systems, or with the internet in general, could make our service unavailable or degraded or otherwise hinder our ability to deliver our service. Service
interruptions, errors in our software or the unavailability of computer systems used in our operations could diminish the overall attractiveness of our membership
service to existing and potential members.
Our computer systems and those of third parties we use in our operations are subject to cybersecurity threats, including cyber-attacks such as computer
viruses, denial of service attacks, physical or electronic break-ins and similar disruptions. These systems periodically experience directed attacks intended to lead
to interruptions and delays in our service and operations as well as loss, misuse or theft of personal information and other data, confidential information or
intellectual property. Additionally, outside parties may attempt to induce employees or users to disclose sensitive or confidential information in order to gain
access to data. Any attempt by hackers to obtain our data (including member and corporate information) or intellectual property (including digital content assets),
disrupt our service, or otherwise access our systems, or those of third parties we use, if successful, could harm our business, be expensive to remedy and damage
our reputation. We have implemented certain systems and processes to thwart hackers and protect our data and systems, but the techniques used to gain
unauthorized access to data and software are constantly evolving, and we may be unable to anticipate or prevent unauthorized access. Because of our prominence,
we (and/or third parties we use) may be a particularly attractive target for such attacks, and from time to time, we have experienced an unauthorized release of
certain digital content assets. However, to date these unauthorized releases have not had a material impact on our service, systems or business. There is no
assurance that hackers may not have a material impact on our service or systems in the future. Our insurance does not cover expenses related to such disruptions or
unauthorized access. Efforts to prevent hackers from disrupting our service or otherwise accessing our systems are expensive to develop, implement and maintain.
These efforts require ongoing monitoring and updating as technologies change and efforts
9

Table of Contents
to overcome security measures become more sophisticated, and may limit the functionality of or otherwise negatively impact our service offering and systems. Any
significant disruption to our service or access to our systems could result in a loss of memberships and adversely affect our business and results of operation.
Further, a penetration of our systems or a third-party’s systems or other misappropriation or misuse of personal information could subject us to business,
regulatory, litigation and reputation risk, which could have a negative effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We utilize our own communications and computer hardware systems located either in our facilities or in that of a third-party provider. In addition, we utilize
third-party “cloud” computing services in connection with our business operations. We also utilize our own and third-party content delivery networks to help us
stream TV series, documentaries and feature films in high volume to Netflix members over the internet. Problems faced by us or our third-party “cloud” computing
or other network providers, including technological or business-related disruptions, as well as cybersecurity threats and regulatory interference, could adversely
impact the experience of our members.
We rely upon Amazon Web Services to operate certain aspects of our service and any disruption of or interference with our use of the Amazon Web
Services operation would impact our operations and our business would be adversely impacted.
Amazon Web Services (“AWS”) provides a distributed computing infrastructure platform for business operations, or what is commonly referred to as a
"cloud" computing service. We have architected our software and computer systems so as to utilize data processing, storage capabilities and other services
provided by AWS. Currently, we run the vast majority of our computing on AWS. Given this, along with the fact that we cannot easily switch our AWS operations
to another cloud provider, any disruption of or interference with our use of AWS would impact our operations and our business would be adversely impacted.
While the retail side of Amazon competes with us, we do not believe that Amazon will use the AWS operation in such a manner as to gain competitive advantage
against our service, although if it was to do so it could harm our business.
If the technology we use in operating our business fails, is unavailable, or does not operate to expectations, our business and results of operation could be
adversely impacted.
We utilize a combination of proprietary and third-party technology to operate our business. This includes the technology that we have developed to
recommend and merchandise content to our consumers as well as enable fast and efficient delivery of content to our members and their various consumer
electronic devices. For example, we have built and deployed our own content-delivery network (“CDN”). To the extent Internet Service Providers (“ISPs”) do not
interconnect with our CDN or charge us to access their networks, or if we experience difficulties in our CDN’s operation, our ability to efficiently and effectively
deliver our streaming content to our members could be adversely impacted and our business and results of operation could be adversely affected. Likewise, if our
recommendation and merchandising technology does not enable us to predict and recommend titles that our members will enjoy, our ability to attract and retain
members may be adversely affected. We also utilize third-party technology to help market our service, process payments, and otherwise manage the daily
operations of our business. If our technology or that of third-parties we utilize in our operations fails or otherwise operates improperly, including as a result of
“bugs” in our development and deployment of software, our ability to operate our service, retain existing members and add new members may be impaired. Any
harm to our members’ personal computers or other devices caused by software used in our operations could have an adverse effect on our business, results of
operations and financial condition.
Changes in how network operators handle and charge for access to data that travel across their networks could adversely impact our business.
We rely upon the ability of consumers to access our service through the internet. If network operators block, restrict or otherwise impair access to our service
over their networks, our service and business could be negatively affected. To the extent that network operators implement usage based pricing, including
meaningful bandwidth caps, or otherwise try to monetize access to their networks by data providers, we could incur greater operating expenses and our
membership acquisition and retention could be negatively impacted. Furthermore, to the extent network operators create tiers of internet access service and either
charge us for or prohibit us from being available through these tiers, our business could be negatively impacted.
Most network operators that provide consumers with access to the internet also provide these consumers with multichannel video programming. As such,
many network operators have an incentive to use their network infrastructure in a manner adverse to our continued growth and success. While we believe that
consumer demand, regulatory oversight and competition will help check these incentives, to the extent that network operators are able to provide preferential
treatment to their data as opposed to ours or otherwise implement discriminatory network management practices, our business could be negatively impacted. The
extent to which these incentives limit operator behavior differs across markets.
10

Table of Contents
Risks Related to Privacy
Privacy concerns could limit our ability to collect and leverage member personal information and other data and disclosure of member personal
information and other data could adversely impact our business and reputation.
In the ordinary course of business and in particular in connection with content acquisition and merchandising our service to our members, we collect and
utilize information supplied by our members, which may include personal information and other data. We currently face certain regulatory requirements regarding
the manner in which we treat such information, including but not limited to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (also known as the General Data Protection Regulation or
“GDPR”) and the California Consumer Privacy Act ("CCPA"). Any actual or perceived failure to comply with the GDPR, the CCPA, other data privacy laws or
regulations, or related contractual or other obligations, or any perceived privacy rights violation, could lead to investigations, claims, and proceedings by
governmental entities and private parties, damages for contract breach, and other significant costs, penalties, and other liabilities, as well as harm to our reputation
and market position.
Other businesses have been criticized by privacy groups and governmental bodies for attempts to link personal identities and other information to data
collected on the internet regarding users’ browsing and other habits. Increased regulation of data utilization practices, including self-regulation or findings under
existing laws that limit our ability to collect, transfer and use information and other data, could have an adverse effect on our business. In addition, if we were to
disclose information and other data about our members in a manner that was objectionable to them, our business reputation could be adversely affected, and we
could face potential legal claims that could impact our operating results. Internationally, we may become subject to additional and/or more stringent legal
obligations concerning our treatment of customer and other personal information, such as laws regarding data localization and/or restrictions on data export.
Failure to comply with these obligations could subject us to liability, and to the extent that we need to alter our business model or practices to adapt to these
obligations, we could incur additional expenses.
Our reputation and relationships with members would be harmed if member personal information and other data, particularly billing data, were to be
accessed by unauthorized persons.
We maintain personal information and other data regarding our members, including names and billing information. This information and data is maintained
on our own systems as well as that of third parties we use in our operations. With respect to billing information, such as credit card numbers, we rely on encryption
and authentication technology to secure such information. We take measures to protect against unauthorized intrusion into our members’ information and other
data. Despite these measures we, our payment processing services or other third-party services we use such as AWS, could experience an unauthorized intrusion
into our members’ information and other data. In the event of such a breach, current and potential members may become unwilling to provide the information to us
necessary for them to remain or become members. We also may be required to notify regulators about any actual or perceived data breach (including various state
Attorneys General, one or more EU data protection authorities, or other data protection authorities) as well as the individuals who are affected by the incident
within strict time periods. Additionally, we could face legal claims or regulatory fines or penalties for such a breach. The costs relating to any data breach could be
material, and we currently do not carry insurance against the risk of a data breach. We also maintain personal information and other data concerning our
employees, as well as personal information of others working on our productions. Should an unauthorized intrusion into our members’ or employees’ personal
information and other data and/or production personal information occur, our business could be adversely affected and our larger reputation with respect to data
protection could be negatively impacted.
Risks Related to Liquidity
The long-term and largely fixed cost nature of our content commitments may limit our operating flexibility and could adversely affect our liquidity and
results of operations.
In connection with licensing streaming content, we typically enter into multi-year commitments with studios and other content providers. We also enter into
multi-year commitments for content that we produce, either directly or through third parties, including elements associated with these productions such as non-
cancelable commitments under talent agreements. The payment terms of these agreements are not tied to member usage or the size of our membership base (“fixed
cost”) but may be determined by costs of production or tied to such factors as titles licensed and/or theatrical exhibition receipts. Such commitments, to the extent
estimable under accounting standards, are included in the Contractual Obligations section of Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations" and Note 7, Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in
Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Given the multiple-year duration and largely fixed cost
nature of content commitments, if membership acquisition and retention do not meet our expectations, our margins may be adversely impacted. Payment terms for
certain content commitments, such as content we directly produce, will typically
11

Table of Contents
require more up-front cash payments than other content licenses or arrangements whereby we do not cashflow the production of such content. To the extent
membership and/or revenue growth do not meet our expectations, our liquidity and results of operations could be adversely affected as a result of content
commitments and accelerated payment requirements of certain agreements. In addition, the long-term and fixed cost nature of our content commitments may limit
our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to changes in our business and the market segments in which we operate. If we license and/or produce content that is not
favorably received by consumers in a territory, or is unable to be shown in a territory, acquisition and retention may be adversely impacted and given the long-term
and fixed cost nature of our content commitments, we may not be able to adjust our content offering quickly and our results of operation may be adversely
impacted.
We may seek additional capital that may result in stockholder dilution or that may have rights senior to those of our common stockholders.
From time to time, we may seek to obtain additional capital, either through equity, equity-linked or debt securities. For several years prior to 2020, our cash
flows from operations were negative and to the extent that it becomes negative in the future we may need to seek additional capital. The decision to obtain
additional capital will depend on, among other things, our business plans, operating performance and condition of the capital markets. Any disruption in the capital
markets could make it more difficult and expensive for us to raise additional capital or refinance our existing indebtedness. If we raise additional funds through the
issuance of equity, equity-linked or debt securities, those securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to the rights of our common stock, and our
stockholders may experience dilution. Any large equity or equity-linked offering could also negatively impact our stock price.
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness and other obligations, including streaming content obligations, which could adversely affect our financial
position.
We have a substantial amount of indebtedness and other obligations, including streaming content obligations. Moreover, we may incur additional
indebtedness in the future and incur other obligations, including additional streaming content obligations. If the financial markets become difficult or costly to
access, our ability to raise additional capital may be negatively impacted. As of December 31, 2020, we had the equivalent of $16.4 billion aggregate principal
amount of senior notes outstanding (“Notes”), some of which is denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. In addition, we have entered into a revolving
credit agreement that provides for a $750 million unsecured revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, we have not borrowed any amount under this
revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $7.0 billion of total content liabilities as reflected on our consolidated balance sheet,
some of which is denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Such amount does not include streaming content commitments that do not meet the criteria
for liability recognition, the amounts of which are significant. For more information on our streaming content obligations, including those not on our consolidated
balance sheet, see Note 7, Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8,
"Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our substantial indebtedness and other obligations, including streaming
content obligations, may:
•
make it difficult for us to satisfy our financial obligations, including making scheduled principal and interest payments on our Notes and our other
obligations;
•
limit our ability to borrow additional funds for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or other general business purposes;
•
increase our cost of borrowing;
•
limit our ability to use our cash flow or obtain additional financing for future working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or other general business
purposes;
•
require us to use a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to make debt service payments and pay our other obligations when due;
•
limit our flexibility to plan for, or react to, changes in our business and industry;
•
place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our less leveraged competitors; and
•
increase our vulnerability to the impact of adverse economic and industry conditions, including changes in interest rates and foreign exchange rates.
Our streaming obligations include large multi-year commitments. As a result, we may be unable to react to any downturn in the economy or reduction in our
cash flows from operations by reducing our streaming content obligations in the near-term. This could result in our needing to access the capital markets at an
unfavorable time, which may negatively impact our stock price.
12

Table of Contents
The interest rate of borrowings under our revolving credit agreement makes reference to an adjusted London interbank offered rate ("LIBO Rate"). It is
possible that beginning in 2022, the LIBO Rate will be discontinued as a reference rate. Under our revolving credit agreement, in the event of the discontinuance of
the LIBO Rate, a mutually agreed-upon alternate benchmark rate will be established to replace the LIBO Rate.  In the event that an agreement cannot be reached
on an appropriate benchmark rate, the availability of borrowings under our revolving credit agreement could be adversely impacted.
We may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service our debt and other obligations.
Our ability to make payments on our debt, including our Notes, and our other obligations will depend on our financial and operating performance, which is
subject to prevailing economic and competitive conditions and to certain financial, business and other factors beyond our control. For several years prior to 2020,
our cash flows from operations were negative. We may be unable to attain a level of cash flows from operating activities sufficient to permit us to pay the
principal, premium, if any, and interest on our debt, including the Notes, and other obligations, including amounts due under our streaming content obligations.
If we are unable to service our debt and other obligations from cash flows, we may need to refinance or restructure all or a portion of such obligations prior to
maturity. Our ability to refinance or restructure our debt and other obligations will depend upon the condition of the capital markets and our financial condition at
such time. Any refinancing or restructuring could be at higher interest rates and may require us to comply with more onerous covenants, which could further
restrict our business operations. If our cash flows are insufficient to service our debt and other obligations, we may not be able to refinance or restructure any of
these obligations on commercially reasonable terms or at all and any refinancing or restructuring could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of
operations, or financial condition.
If our cash flows are insufficient to fund our debt and other obligations and we are unable to refinance or restructure these obligations, we could face
substantial liquidity problems and may be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures, or to sell material assets or operations to meet our debt
and other obligations. We cannot assure you that we would be able to implement any of these alternative measures on satisfactory terms or at all or that the
proceeds from such alternatives would be adequate to meet any debt or other obligations when due. If it becomes necessary to implement any of these alternative
measures, our business, results of operations, or financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
Risks Related to International Operations
We could be subject to economic, political, regulatory and other risks arising from our international operations.
Operating in international markets requires significant resources and management attention and will subject us to economic, political, regulatory and other
risks that may be different from or incremental to those in the U.S. In addition to the risks that we face in the U.S., our international operations involve risks that
could adversely affect our business, including:
•
the need to adapt our content and user interfaces for specific cultural and language differences;
•
difficulties and costs associated with staffing and managing foreign operations;
•
political or social unrest and economic instability;
•
compliance with laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, UK Bribery Act and other anti-corruption laws, export controls and economic
sanctions, and local laws prohibiting corrupt payments to government officials;
•
difficulties in understanding and complying with local laws, regulations and customs in foreign jurisdictions, including local ownership requirements for
streaming content providers;
•
regulatory requirements or government action against our service, whether in response to enforcement of actual or purported legal and regulatory
requirements or otherwise, that results in disruption or non-availability of our service or particular content in the applicable jurisdiction;
•
foreign intellectual property laws, such as the EU copyright directive, or changes to such laws, which may be less favorable than U.S. law and, among
other issues, may impact the economics of creating or distributing content, anti-piracy efforts, or our ability to protect or exploit intellectual property
rights;
•
adverse tax consequences such as those related to changes in tax laws or tax rates or their interpretations, and the related application of judgment in
determining our global provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets or liabilities or other tax liabilities given the ultimate tax determination is
uncertain;
•
fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which we do not use foreign exchange contracts or derivatives to hedge against and which will impact revenues
and expenses of our international operations and expose us to foreign currency exchange rate risk;
•
profit repatriation and other restrictions on the transfer of funds;
13

Table of Contents
•
differing payment processing systems as well as consumer use and acceptance of electronic payment methods, such as payment cards;
•
new and different sources of competition;
•
censorship requirements that cause us to remove or edit popular content, leading to consumer disappointment, brand tarnishment or dissatisfaction with
our service;
•
low usage and/or penetration of internet-connected consumer electronic devices;
•
different and more stringent user protection, data protection, privacy and other laws, including data localization and/or restrictions on data export, and
local ownership requirements;
•
availability of reliable broadband connectivity and wide area networks in targeted areas for expansion;
•
differing, and often more lenient, laws and consumer understanding/attitudes regarding the illegality of piracy;
•
negative impacts from trade disputes; and
•
implementation of regulations designed to stimulate the local production of film and TV series in order to promote and preserve local culture and
economic activity, including local content quotas, investment obligations, and levies to support local film funds. For example, the European Union
revised its Audio Visual Media Services Directive in 2018 to require that European works comprise at least thirty (30) percent of media service
providers’ catalogs, and to require prominence of those works.
Our failure to manage any of these risks successfully could harm our international operations and our overall business, and results of our operations.
We are subject to taxation related risks in multiple jurisdictions.
We are a U.S.-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our
global provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets or liabilities and in evaluating our tax positions on a worldwide basis. While we believe our tax positions are
consistent with the tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we conduct our business, it is possible that these positions may be challenged by jurisdictional tax
authorities, which may have a significant impact on our global provision for income taxes.
Tax laws are being re-examined and evaluated globally. New laws and interpretations of the law are taken into account for financial statement purposes in the
quarter or year that they become applicable. Tax authorities are increasingly scrutinizing the tax positions of companies and we have tax audits pending in several
jurisdictions. Many U.S. states, countries in the European Union, as well as a number of other countries and organizations such as the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, are actively considering changes to existing tax laws that, if enacted, could increase our tax obligations in jurisdictions where we do
business. If U.S. or other foreign tax authorities change applicable tax laws, our overall taxes could increase, and our business, financial condition or results of
operations may be adversely impacted.
Risks Related to Human Resources
We may lose key employees or may be unable to hire qualified employees.
We rely on the continued service of our senior management, including our Co-Chief Executive Officers, Reed Hastings and Ted Sarandos, members of our
executive team and other key employees and the hiring of new qualified employees. In our industry, there is substantial and continuous competition for highly-
skilled business, product development, technical, creative and other personnel. If we experience high executive turnover, are not successful in recruiting new
personnel or in retaining and motivating existing personnel, in instilling our culture in new employees, or improving our culture as we grow, our operations may be
disrupted.
Labor disputes may have an adverse effect on the Company’s business.
Our partners, suppliers, vendors and we employ the services of writers, directors, actors and other talent as well as trade employees and others who are
subject to collective bargaining agreements in the motion picture industry, both in the U.S. and internationally. Expiring collective bargaining agreements may be
renewed on terms that are unfavorable to us. If expiring collective bargaining agreements cannot be renewed, then it is possible that the affected unions could take
action in the form of strikes or work stoppages. Such actions, as well as higher costs or operating complexities in connection with these collective bargaining
agreements or a significant labor dispute, could have an adverse effect on our business by causing delays in production, added costs or by reducing profit margins.
14

Table of Contents
Risks Related to Our Stock Ownership
Provisions in our charter documents and under Delaware law could discourage a takeover that stockholders may consider favorable.
Our charter documents may discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition that a stockholder may consider favorable because they:
•
authorize our board of directors, without stockholder approval, to issue up to 10,000,000 shares of undesignated preferred stock;
•
provide for a classified board of directors;
•
prohibit our stockholders from acting by written consent;
•
establish advance notice requirements for proposing matters to be approved by stockholders at stockholder meetings; and
•
prohibit stockholders from calling a special meeting of stockholders.
As a Delaware corporation, we are also subject to certain Delaware anti-takeover provisions. Under Delaware law, a corporation may not engage in a
business combination with any holder of 15% or more of its capital stock unless the holder has held the stock for three years or, among other things, the board of
directors has approved the transaction. Our board of directors could rely on Delaware law to prevent or delay an acquisition of us.
In addition, a merger or acquisition may trigger retention payments to certain executive employees under the terms of our Amended and Restated Executive
Severance and Retention Incentive Plan, thereby increasing the cost of such a transaction.
Our stock price is volatile.
The price at which our common stock has traded has fluctuated significantly. The price may continue to be volatile due to a number of factors including the
following, some of which are beyond our control:
•
variations in our operating results, including our membership acquisition and retention, revenues, operating income, net income, net cash provided by
operating activities and free cash flow;
•
variations between our actual operating results and the expectations of securities analysts, investors and the financial community;
•
announcements of developments affecting our business, systems or expansion plans by us or others;
•
competition, including the introduction of new competitors, their pricing strategies and services;
•
market volatility in general;
•
the level of demand for our stock, including the amount of short interest in our stock;
•
the impact of any future stock repurchase program we may adopt;
•
the operating results of our competitors; and
•
other risks and uncertainties described in these risk factors.
As a result of these and other factors, investors in our common stock may not be able to resell their shares at or above their original purchase price.
Following certain periods of volatility in the market price of our securities, we became the subject of securities litigation. We may experience more such
litigation following future periods of volatility. This type of litigation may result in substantial costs and a diversion of management’s attention and resources.
Preparing and forecasting our financial results requires us to make judgments and estimates which may differ materially from actual results.
 Given the dynamic nature of our business, and the inherent limitations in predicting the future, forecasts of our revenues, operating margins, net income and
number of paid membership additions and other financial and operating data may differ materially from actual results. Such discrepancies could cause a decline in
the trading price of our common stock. In addition, the preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America also requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities,
disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported
periods. We base such estimates on historical experience and on various other
15

Table of Contents
assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, but actual results may differ from these estimates. For example, we estimate the content
amortization pattern, beginning with the month of first availability, of any particular licensed or produced television series, documentary or feature film based upon
various factors including historical and estimated viewing patterns. If actual viewing patterns differ from these estimates, the pattern and/or period of amortization
would be changed and could affect the timing or recognition of content amortization. If we revise such estimates it could result in greater in-period expenses,
which could cause us to miss our earnings guidance or negatively impact the results we report which could negatively impact our stock price.
General Risk Factors
We are engaged in legal proceedings that could cause us to incur unforeseen expenses and could occupy a significant amount of our management's time
and attention.
From time to time, we are subject to litigation or claims that could negatively affect our business operations and financial position. As we have grown, we
have seen a rise in the number of litigation matters against us. These matters have included copyright and other claims related to our content, patent infringement
claims, tax litigation, employment related litigation, as well as consumer and securities class actions, each of which are typically expensive to defend. Litigation
disputes could cause us to incur unforeseen expenses, result in content unavailability, service disruptions, and otherwise occupy a significant amount of our
management's time and attention, any of which could negatively affect our business operations and financial position. We also from time to time receive inquiries
and subpoenas and other types of information requests from government authorities and we may become subject to related claims and other actions related to our
business activities. While the ultimate outcome of investigations, inquiries, information requests and related legal proceedings is difficult to predict, such matters
can be expensive, time-consuming and distracting, and adverse resolutions or settlements of those matters may result in, among other things, modification of our
business practices, reputational harm or costs and significant payments, any of which could negatively affect our business operations and financial position.
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
16

Table of Contents
Item 2.
Properties
We have leased principal properties in both Los Gatos, California, which is the location of our corporate headquarters, and in Los Angeles, California. In
addition, we lease various office and production space throughout the world.
We believe that our existing facilities are adequate to meet current requirements, and that suitable additional or substitute space will be available as needed
to accommodate any further physical expansion of operations and for any additional offices.
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
Information with respect to this item may be found in Note 7 Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial
statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, under the caption "Legal Proceedings"
which information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
17

Table of Contents
PART II
 
Item 5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Market Information
Our common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “NFLX”.
Holders
As of December 31, 2020, there were approximately 1,977 stockholders of record of our common stock, although there is a significantly larger number of
beneficial owners of our common stock.
Dividend Policy
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our capital stock, and we do not currently anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable
future.
18

Table of Contents
Stock Performance Graph
Notwithstanding any statement to the contrary in any of our previous or future filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the following
information relating to the price performance of our common stock shall not be deemed “filed” with the Commission or “soliciting material” under the Exchange
Act and shall not be incorporated by reference into any such filings.
The following graph compares, for the five year period ended December 31, 2020, the total cumulative stockholder return on the Company’s common stock
with the total cumulative return of the NASDAQ Composite Index, the S&P 500 Index and the RDG Internet Composite Index. Measurement points are the last
trading day of each of the Company’s fiscal years ended December 31, 2015, December 31, 2016, December 31, 2017, December 31, 2018, December 31, 2019
and December 31, 2020. Total cumulative stockholder return assumes $100 invested at the beginning of the period in the Company’s common stock, the stocks
represented in the NASDAQ Composite Index, the stocks represented in the S&P 500 Index and the stocks represented in the RDG Internet Composite Index,
respectively, and reinvestment of any dividends. Historical stock price performance should not be relied upon as an indication of future stock price performance.
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
The following selected consolidated financial data is not necessarily indicative of results of future operations and should be read in conjunction with Item 7,
"Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
19

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Operations:
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
 
(in thousands, except per share data)
Revenues
$
24,996,056
$
20,156,447
$
15,794,341
$
11,692,713
$
8,830,669
Operating income
4,585,289
2,604,254
1,605,226
838,679
379,793
Operating margin
18 
%
13 
%
10 
%
7 
%
4 
%
Net income
2,761,395
1,866,916
1,211,242
558,929
186,678
Earnings per share:
Basic
$
6.26
$
4.26
$
2.78
$
1.29
$
0.44
Diluted
$
6.08
$
4.13
$
2.68
$
1.25
$
0.43
Weighted-average common
shares outstanding:
Basic
440,922 
437,799 
435,374 
431,885 
428,822 
Diluted
454,208 
451,765 
451,244 
446,814 
438,652 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
 
(in thousands)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
$
2,427,077 
$
(2,887,322)
$
(2,680,479)
$
(1,785,948)
$
(1,473,984)
Free cash flow (1)
1,921,723 
(3,274,386)
(3,019,599)
(2,019,659)
(1,659,755)
(1)
Free cash flow is defined as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment and change in other assets. See
Liquidity and Capital Resources in Item 7, "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" for a reconciliation of
"free cash flow" to "net cash provided by (used in) operating activities."
Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 
As of December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
 
(in thousands)
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments
$
8,205,550 
$
5,018,437 
$
3,794,483 
$
2,822,795 
$
1,733,782 
Total content assets, net
25,383,950 
24,504,567 
20,102,327 
14,668,688 
10,975,393 
Total assets
39,280,359 
33,975,712 
25,974,400 
19,012,742 
13,586,610 
Short-term and long-term debt
16,308,973 
14,759,260 
10,360,058 
6,499,432 
3,364,311 
Non-current content liabilities
2,618,084 
3,334,323 
3,759,026 
3,329,796 
2,894,654 
Total content liabilities
7,047,620 
7,747,884 
8,440,588 
7,497,520 
6,515,920 
Total stockholders’ equity
11,065,240 
7,582,157 
5,238,765 
3,581,956 
2,679,800 
20

Table of Contents
Other Data:
 
As of / Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
 
(in thousands)
Global streaming paid memberships at end of period
203,663 
167,090 
139,259 
110,644 
89,090 
Global streaming paid net membership additions
36,573 
27,831 
28,615 
21,554 
18,251 
A paid membership (also referred to as a paid subscription) is defined as a membership that has the right to receive Netflix service following sign-up and a method
of payment being provided, and that is not part of a free trial or certain other promotions that may be offered by the Company to new or rejoining members. A
membership is canceled and ceases to be reflected in the above metrics as of the effective cancellation date. Voluntary cancellations generally become effective at
the end of the prepaid membership period. Involuntary cancellations, as a result of a failed method of payment, become effective immediately. Memberships are
assigned to territories based on the geographic location used at time of sign-up as determined by the Company’s internal systems, which utilize industry standard
geo-location technology.
21

Table of Contents
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items
and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
The following represents our consolidated performance highlights:
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except revenue per membership and percentages)
Financial Results:
Streaming revenues
$
24,756,675 
$
19,859,230 
$
15,428,752 
25 %
DVD revenues
239,381 
297,217 
365,589 
(19) %
Total revenues
$
24,996,056 
$
20,156,447 
$
15,794,341 
24 %
Global Streaming Memberships:
Paid net membership additions
36,573 
27,831 
28,615 
31 %
Paid memberships at end of period
203,663 
167,090 
139,259 
22 %
Average paying memberships
189,083 
152,984 
124,658 
24 %
Average monthly revenue per paying membership
$
10.91 
$
10.82 
$
10.31 
1 %
Operating income
$
4,585,289 
$
2,604,254 
$
1,605,226 
76 %
Operating margin
18 %
13 %
10 %
38 %
Consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 24% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in our
consolidated revenues was due to the 24% growth in average paying memberships and a 1% increase in average monthly revenue per paying membership. The
increase in average monthly revenue per paying membership resulted from our price changes and plan mix, partially offset by unfavorable fluctuations in foreign
exchange rates. Paid net membership additions for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 31% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result
of the long term trend toward streaming on demand entertainment and due to the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting social restrictions and local government
mandates of home confinement in certain jurisdictions.
The increase in operating margin is due primarily to increased revenues and decreased marketing costs, coupled with cost of revenues, technology and
development, and general and administrative costs growing at a slower rate as compared to the 24% increase in revenues.
The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we
may not be able to accurately predict. See Item 1A: "Risk Factors" section set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details. In an effort to
protect the health and safety of our employees, our workforce has had and continues in most instances to spend a significant amount of time working from home,
international travel has been severely curtailed and many of our productions continue to experience disruption, as are the productions of our third-party content
suppliers. Our other partners have similarly had their operations disrupted, including those partners that we use for our operations as well as development,
production, and post-production of content. While we and our partners have resumed productions and related operations in many parts of the world, our ability to
produce content remains affected by the pandemic. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments around the world have also enacted various
measures, some of which have been subsequently rescinded, modified or reinstated, including orders to close all businesses not deemed “essential,” isolate
residents to their homes or places of residence, and practice social distancing. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by COVID-19,
including any resurgences, will continue to negatively impact business activity across the globe. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take
further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of
our employees, customers,
22

Table of Contents
partners and stockholders. It is not clear what the potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our
customers, suppliers or vendors, or on our financial results.
Streaming Revenues
    
We derive revenues from monthly membership fees for services related to streaming content to our members. We offer a variety of streaming membership
plans, the price of which varies by country and the features of the plan. As of December 31, 2020, pricing on our plans ranged from the U.S. dollar equivalent of $2
to $24 per month. We expect that from time to time the prices of our membership plans in each country may change and we may test other plan and price
variations.
The following tables summarize streaming revenue and other streaming membership information by region for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018.
United States and Canada (UCAN)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except revenue per membership and percentages)
Revenues
$
11,455,396 
$
10,051,208 
$
8,281,532 
$
1,404,188 
14 %
Paid net membership additions
6,274 
2,905 
6,335 
3,369 
116 %
Paid memberships at end of period (1)
73,936 
67,662 
64,757 
6,274 
9 %
Average paying memberships
71,689 
66,615 
61,845 
5,074 
8 %
Average monthly revenue per paying membership
$
13.32 
$
12.57 
$
11.16 
$
0.75 
6 %
Constant currency change (2)
6 %
Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except revenue per membership and percentages)
Revenues
$
7,772,252 
$
5,543,067 
$
3,963,707 
$
2,229,185 
40 %
Paid net membership additions
14,920 
13,960 
11,814 
960 
7 %
Paid memberships at end of period (1)
66,698 
51,778 
37,818 
14,920 
29 %
Average paying memberships
60,425 
44,731 
31,601 
15,694 
35 %
Average monthly revenue per paying membership
$
10.72 
$
10.33 
$
10.45 
$
0.39 
4 %
Constant currency change (2)
3 %
Latin America (LATAM)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except revenue per membership and percentages)
Revenues
$
3,156,727 
$
2,795,434 
$
2,237,697 
$
361,293 
13 %
Paid net membership additions
6,120 
5,340 
6,360 
780 
15 %
Paid memberships at end of period (1)
37,537 
31,417 
26,077 
6,120 
19 %
Average paying memberships
35,297 
28,391 
22,767 
6,906 
24 %
Average monthly revenue per paying membership
$
7.45 
$
8.21 
$
8.19 
$
(0.76)
(9)%
Constant currency change (2)
8 %
23

Table of Contents
Asia-Pacific (APAC)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except revenue per membership and percentages)
Revenues
$
2,372,300 
$
1,469,521 
$
945,816 
$
902,779 
61 %
Paid net membership additions
9,259 
5,626 
4,106 
3,633 
65 %
Paid memberships at end of period (1)
25,492 
16,233 
10,607 
9,259 
57 %
Average paying memberships
21,674 
13,247 
8,446 
8,427 
64 %
Average monthly revenue per paying membership
$
9.12 
$
9.24 
$
9.33 
$
(0.12)
(1)%
Constant currency change (2)
(1)%
(1) A paid membership (also referred to as a paid subscription) is defined as a membership that has the right to receive Netflix service following sign-up and a
method of payment being provided, and that is not part of a free trial or certain other promotions that may be offered by the Company to new or rejoining
members. A membership is canceled and ceases to be reflected in the above metrics as of the effective cancellation date. Voluntary cancellations generally become
effective at the end of the prepaid membership period. Involuntary cancellations, as a result of a failed method of payment, become effective immediately.
Memberships are assigned to territories based on the geographic location used at time of sign-up as determined by the Company’s internal systems, which utilize
industry standard geo-location technology.
(2) We believe constant currency information is useful in analyzing the underlying trends in average monthly revenue per paying membership. In order to exclude
the effect of foreign currency rate fluctuations on average monthly revenue per paying membership, we estimate current period revenue assuming foreign exchange
rates had remained constant with foreign exchange rates from each of the corresponding months of the prior-year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020,
our revenues would have been approximately $596 million higher had foreign currency exchange rates remained constant with those for the year ended
December 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenues
Amortization of content assets makes up the majority of cost of revenues. Expenses associated with the acquisition, licensing and production of content (such
as payroll and related personnel expenses, costs associated with obtaining rights to music included in our content, overall deals with talent, miscellaneous
production related costs and participations and residuals), streaming delivery costs and other operations costs make up the remainder of cost of revenues. We have
built our own global content delivery network (“Open Connect”) to help us efficiently stream a high volume of content to our members over the internet. Delivery
expenses, therefore, include equipment costs related to Open Connect, payroll and related personnel expenses and all third-party costs, such as cloud computing
costs, associated with delivering content over the internet. Other operations costs include customer service and payment processing fees, including those we pay to
our integrated payment partners, as well as other costs incurred in making our content available to members.
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
Cost of revenues
$
15,276,319 
$
12,440,213 
$
9,967,538 
$
2,836,106 
23 %
As a percentage of revenues
61 %
62 %
63 %
The increase in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $1,591
million increase in content amortization relating to our existing and new content, including more exclusive and original programming. Expenses associated with
the acquisition, licensing and production of content increased $1,101 million, primarily due to expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic and continued growth
in our content production activities. Streaming delivery costs and other operations costs increased driven by our growing member base.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising expenses and certain payments made to our marketing partners, including consumer electronics ("CE")
manufacturers, MVPDs, mobile operators and ISPs. Advertising expenses include
24

Table of Contents
promotional activities such as digital and television advertising. Marketing expenses also include payroll and related expenses for personnel that support marketing
activities.
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
Marketing
$
2,228,362 
$
2,652,462 
$
2,369,469 
$
(424,100)
(16)%
As a percentage of revenues
9 %
13 %
15 %
The decrease in marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $432
million decrease in advertising expenses, partially offset by increased payments to our marketing partners.
Technology and Development
Technology and development expenses consist of payroll and related expenses for all technology personnel, as well as other costs incurred in making
improvements to our service offerings, including testing, maintaining and modifying our user interface, our recommendations, merchandising and streaming
delivery technology and infrastructure. Technology and development expenses also include costs associated with computer hardware and software.
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
Technology and development
$
1,829,600 
$
1,545,149 
$
1,221,814 
$
284,451 
18 %
As a percentage of revenues
7 %
8 %
8 %
The increase in technology and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was
primarily due to a $254 million increase in personnel-related costs, including increases in compensation for existing employees and growth in average headcount to
support the increase in our production activity and continued improvements in our streaming service.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of payroll and related expenses for corporate personnel. General and administrative expenses also include
professional fees and other general corporate expenses.
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
General and administrative
$
1,076,486 
$
914,369 
$
630,294 
$
162,117 
18 %
As a percentage of revenues
4 %
5 %
4 %
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily
due to a $128 million increase in personnel-related costs, including increases in compensation for existing employees and growth in average headcount to support
the increase in our production activity and continued improvements in our streaming service.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of the interest associated with our outstanding debt obligations, including the amortization of debt issuance costs. See
Note 6 Debt in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail on our debt obligations.
25

Table of Contents
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
Interest expense
$
767,499 
$
626,023 
$
420,493 
$
141,476 
23 %
As a percentage of revenues
3 %
3 %
3 %
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $749 million of interest on our Notes. The increase in interest expense for the
year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is due to the increase in debt.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Interest and other income (expense) consists primarily of foreign exchange gains and losses on foreign currency denominated balances and interest earned on
cash and cash equivalents.
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
Interest and other income (expense)
$
(618,441)
$
84,000 
$
41,725 
$
(702,441)
(836)%
As a percentage of revenues
(2)%
— %
— %
Interest and other income (expense) decreased primarily due to foreign exchange losses of $660 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared
to a gain of $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The foreign exchange loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the non-
cash $533 million loss from the remeasurement of our Senior Notes denominated in euros, coupled with the remeasurement of cash and content liability positions
in currencies other than the functional currencies.
Provision for Income Taxes 
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
 
(in thousands, except percentages)
Provision for income taxes
$
(437,954)
$
(195,315)
$
(15,216)
$
(242,639)
(124)%
Effective tax rate
14 %
9 %
1 %
As of December 31, 2020, we had a California research and development ("R&D") credit carryforward of $250 million, which can be carried forward
indefinitely. On June 29, 2020, California enacted legislative changes that impose an annual cap of $5 million on the amount of business incentive tax credits we
can utilize in California effective for tax years 2020 through 2022. As a result, we evaluated our ability to realize the California R&D credit, and considered all
available positive and negative evidence, including operating results, ongoing tax planning, and forecasts of future taxable income and determined it is more likely
than not that the pre-2020 credits and a portion of the current year R&D credit would not be realized. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 we recorded
a valuation allowance of $250 million. We will monitor our business strategies, weighing positive and negative evidence in assessing the realization of this asset in
the future and in the event there is a need to release the valuation allowance, a tax benefit will be recorded.
The increase in our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the
establishment of a valuation allowance on the California R&D credit, partially offset by the recognition of excess tax benefits of stock-based compensation.
In 2020, the difference between our 14% effective tax rate and the Federal statutory rate of 21% was primarily due to the recognition of excess tax benefits of
stock-based compensation and Federal and California R&D credits, partially offset by the establishment of a valuation allowance on the California R&D credit.
26

Table of Contents
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Year Ended December 31,
Change
2020
2019
2020 vs. 2019
(in thousands)
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
$
8,238,870 
$
5,043,786 
$
3,195,084 
63 %
Short-term and long-term debt
16,308,973 
14,759,260 
1,549,713 
10 %
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash increased $3,195 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to cash provided by operations
coupled with the issuance of debt.
Debt, net of debt issuance costs, increased $1,550 million primarily due to the issuance of debt in April 2020 coupled with the remeasurement of our euro-
denominated notes. The amount of principal and interest due in the next twelve months is $1,264 million. As of December 31, 2020, no amounts had been
borrowed under our $750 million Revolving Credit Agreement. See Note 6 Debt in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
As our cash provided by operating activities improved in 2020, we anticipate that our future capital needs from the debt market will be more limited
compared to prior years. Our ability to obtain this or any additional financing that we may choose to, or need to, obtain will depend on, among other things, our
development efforts, business plans, operating performance and the condition of the capital markets at the time we seek financing. We may not be able to obtain
such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or debt securities, those securities may have rights,
preferences or privileges senior to the rights of our common stock, and our stockholders may experience dilution.
As our cash provided by operating activities grows and exceeds our minimum cash needs, our future capital allocation may include stock repurchase
programs. The timing and magnitude of such programs will depend on, among other things, our development efforts, business plans and operating performance.
Our primary uses of cash include the acquisition, licensing and production of content, streaming delivery, marketing programs and personnel-related costs.
Cash payment terms for non-original content have historically been in line with the amortization period. Investments in original content, and in particular content
that we produce and own, require more cash upfront relative to licensed content. For example, production costs are paid as the content is created, well in advance
of when the content is available on the service and amortized. We expect to continue to significantly increase our investments in global content, particularly in
original content, which will impact our liquidity. We currently anticipate that cash flows from operations, available funds and access to financing sources,
including our revolving credit facility, will continue to be sufficient to meet our cash needs for at least the next twelve months.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment and change in other assets. We believe
free cash flow is an important liquidity metric because it measures, during a given period, the amount of cash generated that is available to repay debt obligations,
make strategic acquisitions and investments and for certain other activities like share repurchases. Free cash flow is considered a non-GAAP financial measure and
should not be considered in isolation of, or as a substitute for, net income, operating income, cash flow provided by (used in) operating activities, or any other
measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP.
In assessing liquidity in relation to our results of operations, we compare free cash flow to net income, noting that the major recurring differences are excess
content payments over amortization, non-cash stock-based compensation expense, non-cash remeasurement gain/loss on our euro-denominated debt, and other
working capital differences. Working capital differences include deferred revenue, excess property and equipment purchases over depreciation, taxes and semi-
annual interest payments on our outstanding debt. Our receivables from members generally settle quickly.
27

Table of Contents
 
Year Ended December 31,
Change
 
2020
2019
2018
2020 vs. 2019
(in thousands)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
$
2,427,077 
$
(2,887,322)
$
(2,680,479)
$
5,314,399 
184 %
Net cash used in investing activities
(505,354)
(387,064)
(339,120)
(118,290)
(31)%
Net cash provided by financing activities
1,237,311 
4,505,662 
4,048,527 
(3,268,351)
(73)%
Non-GAAP reconciliation of free cash flow:
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
2,427,077 
(2,887,322)
(2,680,479)
5,314,399 
184 %
Purchases of property and equipment
(497,923)
(253,035)
(173,946)
(244,888)
(97)%
Change in other assets
(7,431)
(134,029)
(165,174)
126,598 
94 %
Free cash flow
$
1,921,723 
$
(3,274,386)
$
(3,019,599)
$
5,196,109 
159 %
While we and our partners have resumed productions and related operations in many parts of the world, our ability to produce content remains affected by the
pandemic. As a result, the timing of certain production payments has been and will continue to be delayed until productions can resume and may be shifted to
future years. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $5,314 million from the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2,427 million for the year ended
December 31, 2020 primarily driven by a $4,840 million or 24% increase in revenues coupled with a decrease in cash payments for content assets. The payments
for content assets decreased $2,074 million, from $14,611 million to $12,537 million, or 14%, as compared to the increase in the amortization of content assets of
$1,591 million, from $9,216 million to $10,807 million, or 17%. In addition, we had increased payments associated with higher operating expenses, primarily
related to increased headcount to support our continued improvements in our streaming service and our international expansion.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $118 million, primarily due to an increase in purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased $3,268 million primarily due to a decrease in the proceeds from the issuance of debt of $3,431 million
from $4,433 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1,002 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by an increase in the proceeds
from the issuance of common stock of $163 million.
Free cash flow was $840 million lower than net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to $1,730 million of cash payments for content
assets over amortization expense and $308 million in other non-favorable working capital differences, partially offset by $533 million of non-cash remeasurement
loss on our euro-denominated debt, $415 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expenses, and a $250 million non-cash valuation allowance for deferred
taxes due to recent legislation which imposed an annual cap on research and development credits.
Free cash flow was $5,141 million lower than net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to $5,394 million of cash payments for
streaming content assets over streaming amortization expense, $46 million non-cash remeasurement gain on our euro-denominated debt, and $106 million in other
non-favorable working capital differences, partially offset by $405 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense.
Contractual Obligations
For the purpose of this table, contractual obligations for purchases of goods or services are defined as agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and
that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing
of the transaction. The expected timing of the payment of the obligations discussed below is estimated based on information available to us as of December 31,
2020. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for
some obligations. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
 
28

Table of Contents
 
Payments due by Period
Contractual obligations (in thousands):
Total
Less than 
1 year
1-3 years
3-5 years
More than 
5 years
Content obligations (1)
$
19,218,830 
$
8,980,868 
$
7,819,563 
$
1,973,091 
$
445,308 
Debt (2)
21,857,087 
1,264,020 
2,136,997 
3,614,906 
14,841,164 
Operating lease obligations (3)
2,838,985 
345,442 
651,801 
577,253 
1,264,489 
Other purchase obligations (4)
809,383 
562,970 
241,194 
5,219 
— 
Total
$
44,724,285 
$
11,153,300 
$
10,849,555 
$
6,170,469 
$
16,550,961 
 
(1)
As of December 31, 2020, content obligations were comprised of $4.4 billion included in "Current content liabilities" and $2.6 billion of "Non-current
content liabilities" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and $12.2 billion of obligations that are not reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as they did
not then meet the criteria for recognition.
Content obligations include amounts related to the acquisition, licensing and production of content. An obligation for the production of content includes
non-cancelable commitments under creative talent and employment agreements and other production related commitments. An obligation for the acquisition
and licensing of content is incurred at the time we enter into an agreement to obtain future titles. Once a title becomes available, a content liability is
recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Certain agreements include the obligation to license rights for unknown future titles, the ultimate quantity
and/or fees for which are not yet determinable as of the reporting date. Traditional film output deals, or certain TV series license agreements where the
number of seasons to be aired is unknown, are examples of these types of agreements. The contractual obligations table above does not include any
estimated obligation for the unknown future titles, payment for which could range from less than one year to more than five years. However, these unknown
obligations are expected to be significant and we believe could include approximately $1 billion to $4 billion over the next three years, with the payments
for the vast majority of such amounts expected to occur after the next twelve months. The foregoing range is based on considerable management judgments
and the actual amounts may differ. Once we know the title that we will receive and the license fees, we include the amount in the contractual obligations
table above.
(2)
Debt obligations include our Notes consisting of principal and interest payments. See Note 6 Debt in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial
statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
(3)
See Note 5 Balance Sheet Components in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding leases. As of
December 31, 2020, the Company has additional operating leases for real estate that have not yet commenced of $256 million which has been included
above. Total lease obligations as of December 31, 2020 increased $82 million from $2,757 million as of December 31, 2019 to $2,839 million as of
December 31, 2020 due to growth in facilities to support our growing headcount and growing number of original productions.
(4)
Other purchase obligations include all other non-cancelable contractual obligations. These contracts are primarily related to streaming delivery and cloud
computing costs, as well as other miscellaneous open purchase orders for which we have not received the related services or goods.
As of December 31, 2020, we had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $140 million, of which $38 million was classified in “Other non-current liabilities” and
$54 million as a reduction to deferred tax assets which was classified as "Other non-current assets" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. At this time, an estimate of
the range of reasonably possible adjustments to the balance of unrecognized tax benefits cannot be made.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have transactions with unconsolidated entities, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, whereby we have
financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose us to material continuing risks,
contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk
support to us.
29

Table of Contents
Indemnifications
The information set forth under Note 8 Guarantees - Indemnification Obligations in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements
included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. The Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") has
defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations,
and which require a company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and
judgments addressed below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the
circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Content
We acquire, license and produce content, including original programming, in order to offer our members unlimited viewing of video entertainment. The
content licenses are for a fixed fee and specific windows of availability. Payment terms for certain content licenses and the production of content require more
upfront cash payments relative to the amortization expense. Payments for content, including additions to content assets and the changes in related liabilities, are
classified within "Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities" on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
We recognize content assets (licensed and produced) as "Content assets, net" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. For licensed content, we capitalize the fee
per title and record a corresponding liability at the gross amount of the liability when the license period begins, the cost of the title is known and the title is
accepted and available for streaming. For produced content, we capitalize costs associated with the production, including development cost, direct costs and
production overhead. Participations and residuals are expensed in line with the amortization of production costs.
Based on factors including historical and estimated viewing patterns, we amortize the content assets (licensed and produced) in “Cost of revenues” on the
Consolidated Statements of Operations over the shorter of each title's contractual window of availability or estimated period of use or ten years, beginning with the
month of first availability. The amortization is on an accelerated basis, as we typically expect more upfront viewing, for instance due to additional merchandising
and marketing efforts, and film amortization is more accelerated than TV series amortization. On average, over 90% of a licensed or produced content asset is
expected to be amortized within four years after its month of first availability. We review factors that impact the amortization of the content assets on a regular
basis. Our estimates related to these factors require considerable management judgment.
Our business model is subscription based as opposed to a model generating revenues at a specific title level. Content assets (licensed and produced) are
predominantly monetized as a group and therefore are reviewed at a group level when an event or change in circumstances indicates a change in the expected
usefulness of the content or that the fair value may be less than unamortized cost. To date, we have not identified any such event or changes in circumstances. If
such changes are identified in the future, these aggregated content assets will be stated at the lower of unamortized cost or fair value. In addition, unamortized costs
for assets that have been, or are expected to be, abandoned are written off.
Income Taxes
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations using the asset and liability method.
Deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the financial statement carrying
amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred tax assets
and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if
necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits for which future realization is uncertain.
Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of any
tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, in full or in part, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past
operating results, and our forecast of future earnings, future taxable income and prudent
30

Table of Contents
and feasible tax planning strategies. The assumptions utilized in determining future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans
and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Actual operating results in future years could differ from our current assumptions, judgments and
estimates. However, we believe that it is more likely than not that most of the deferred tax assets recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets will ultimately be
realized. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. As of
December 31, 2020 the valuation allowance of $250 million was related to the California research and development credits that we do not expect to realize.
We did not recognize certain tax benefits from uncertain tax positions within the provision for income taxes. We may recognize a tax benefit only if it is
more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits
recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized
upon settlement. At December 31, 2020, our estimated gross unrecognized tax benefits were $140 million of which $86 million, if recognized, would favorably
impact our future earnings. Due to uncertainties in any tax audit outcome, our estimates of the ultimate settlement of our unrecognized tax positions may change
and the actual tax benefits may differ significantly from the estimates.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth under Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements under the caption “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant
Accounting Policies” is incorporated herein by reference.
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
We are exposed to market risks related to interest rate changes and the corresponding changes in the market values of our debt and foreign currency
fluctuations.
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2020, our cash equivalents were generally invested in money market funds. Interest paid on such funds fluctuates with the prevailing
interest rate.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $16.4 billion of debt, consisting of fixed rate unsecured debt in sixteen tranches due between 2021 and 2030. Refer to Note
6 to the consolidated financial statements for details about all issuances. The fair value of our debt will fluctuate with movements of interest rates, increasing in
periods of declining rates of interest and declining in periods of increasing rates of interest. The fair value of our debt will also fluctuate based on changes in
foreign currency rates, as discussed below.
Foreign Currency Risk
Revenues denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar account for 54% of the consolidated amount for the year ended December 31, 2020. We
therefore have foreign currency risk related to these currencies, which are primarily the euro, the British pound, the Brazilian real, the Canadian dollar, the
Mexican peso, the Australian dollar, and the Japanese yen.
Accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in particular a weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar may negatively affect our revenue and
operating income as expressed in U.S. dollars. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenues would have been approximately $596 million higher had
foreign currency exchange rates remained constant with those for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We have also experienced and will continue to experience fluctuations in our net income as a result of gains (losses) on the settlement and the remeasurement
of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies that are not the functional currency. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a
$660 million foreign exchange loss primarily due to the non-cash remeasurement of our Senior Notes denominated in euros, coupled with the remeasurement of
cash and content liability positions denominated in currencies other than functional currencies.
In addition, the effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents in the year ended December 31, 2020 was an increase of $36 million.
We do not use foreign exchange contracts or derivatives to hedge any foreign currency exposures. The volatility of exchange rates depends on many factors
that we cannot forecast with reliable accuracy. Our continued international expansion increases our exposure to exchange rate fluctuations and as a result such
fluctuations could have a significant impact on our future results of operations.
31

Table of Contents
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes listed in Part IV, Item 15(a)(1) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K are included immediately
following Part IV hereof and incorporated by reference herein.
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
32

Table of Contents
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
(a)
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our co-Chief Executive Officers and Chief Financial Officer, evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form
10-K. Based on that evaluation, our co-Chief Executive Officers and Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of
the period covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K were effective in providing reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by us in reports
that we file or submit under the Exchange Act, is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the Securities and Exchange
Commission’s rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our co-Chief Executive Officers and
Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures.
Our management, including our co-Chief Executive Officers and Chief Financial Officer, does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our
internal controls will prevent all error and all fraud. A control system, no matter how well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute,
assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the
benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide
absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within Netflix have been detected.
 
(b)
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the
Exchange Act. Our management assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020. In making this assessment, our
management used the criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (“COSO”) in Internal Control—Integrated
Framework (2013 framework). Based on our assessment under the framework in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013 framework), our management
concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2020. The effectiveness of our internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2020 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report that is
included herein.
 
(c)
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
There was no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the quarter ended December 31, 2020 that has materially affected,
or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
 
33

Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Netflix, Inc.
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Netflix, Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, Netflix,
Inc. (the Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance
sheets of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, stockholders’ equity and cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, and the related notes and our report dated January 28, 2021 expressed an unqualified
opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and
are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
San Jose, California
January 28, 2021
34

Table of Contents
Item 9B.
Other Information
None.
35

Table of Contents
PART III
 
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Information regarding our directors and executive officers is incorporated by reference from the information contained under the sections “Proposal One:
Election of Directors,” “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” and “Code of Ethics” in our Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders.
 
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference from information contained under the section “Compensation of Executive Officers and Other
Matters” in our Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders.
 
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference from information contained under the sections “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial
Owners and Management” and “Equity Compensation Plan Information” in our Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders.
 
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference from information contained under the section “Certain Relationships and Related
Transactions” and “Director Independence” in our Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders.
 
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
Information with respect to principal independent registered public accounting firm fees and services is incorporated by reference from the information
under the caption “Proposal Two: Ratification of Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” in our Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting
of Stockholders.
36

Table of Contents
PART IV
 
Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a)
The following documents are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
(1)
Financial Statements:
The financial statements are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
(2)
Financial Statement Schedules:
The financial statement schedules are omitted as they are either not applicable or the information required is presented in the financial statements and
notes thereto under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
(3)
Exhibits:
See Exhibit Index immediately following the signature page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
37

Table of Contents
Item 16.
Form 10-K Summary
None.
38

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
 
Page
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
40
Consolidated Statements of Operations
42
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
43
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
44
Consolidated Balance Sheets
45
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
46
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
47
39

Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Netflix, Inc.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Netflix, Inc. (the Company) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the related consolidated
statements of operations, comprehensive income, stockholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, and the
related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements"). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the
period ended December 31, 2020, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated January 28, 2021 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Adoption of ASU No. 2016-02
As discussed in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed its method of accounting for leases in 2019 due to the adoption of
Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), and the related amendments.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance
with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matter
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that was communicated or required to be
communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially
challenging, subjective or complex judgments. The communication of the critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the
accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
40

Table of Contents
Content Amortization
Description of the Matter
As disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements “Organization and Summary of Significant
Accounting Policies”, the Company acquires, licenses and produces content, including original programming
(“Content”). The Company amortizes Content based on factors including historical and estimated viewing patterns. 
Auditing the amortization of the Company’s Content is complex and subjective due to the judgmental nature of
amortization which is based on an estimate of future viewing patterns. Estimated viewing patterns are based on
historical and forecasted viewing. If actual viewing patterns differ from these estimates, the pattern and/or period of
amortization would be changed and could affect the timing of recognition of content amortization.
How We Addressed the 
Matter in Our Audit
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design and tested the operating effectiveness of controls over the
content amortization process. For example, we tested controls over management’s review of the content amortization
method and the significant assumptions, including the historical and forecasted viewing hour consumption, used to
develop estimated viewing patterns. We also tested management’s controls to determine that the data used in the
model was complete and accurate. 
To test content amortization, our audit procedures included, among others, evaluating the content amortization
method, testing the significant assumptions used to develop the estimated viewing patterns and testing the
completeness and accuracy of the underlying data. For example, we assessed management’s assumptions by
comparing them to current viewing trends and current operating information including comparing previous estimates
of viewing patterns to actual results. We also performed sensitivity analyses to evaluate the potential changes in the
content amortization recorded that could result from changes in the assumptions.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2012.
San Jose, California
January 28, 2021
41

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(in thousands, except per share data)
 
  
Year ended December 31,
  
2020
2019
2018
Revenues
$
24,996,056 
$
20,156,447 
$
15,794,341 
Cost of revenues
15,276,319 
12,440,213 
9,967,538 
Marketing
2,228,362 
2,652,462 
2,369,469 
Technology and development
1,829,600 
1,545,149 
1,221,814 
General and administrative
1,076,486 
914,369 
630,294 
Operating income
4,585,289 
2,604,254 
1,605,226 
Other income (expense):
Interest expense
(767,499)
(626,023)
(420,493)
Interest and other income (expense)
(618,441)
84,000 
41,725 
Income before income taxes
3,199,349 
2,062,231 
1,226,458 
Provision for income taxes
(437,954)
(195,315)
(15,216)
Net income
$
2,761,395 
$
1,866,916 
$
1,211,242 
Earnings per share:
Basic
$
6.26 
$
4.26 
$
2.78 
Diluted
$
6.08 
$
4.13 
$
2.68 
Weighted-average common shares outstanding:
Basic
440,922 
437,799 
435,374 
Diluted
454,208 
451,765 
451,244 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
42

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(in thousands)
Year ended December 31,
2020
2019
2018
Net income
$
2,761,395 
$
1,866,916 
$
1,211,242 
Other comprehensive income (loss):
Foreign currency translation adjustments
67,919 
(3,939)
975 
Comprehensive income
$
2,829,314 
$
1,862,977 
$
1,212,217 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
43

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in thousands)
  
Year Ended December 31,
  
2020
2019
2018
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net income
$
2,761,395 
$
1,866,916 
$
1,211,242 
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Additions to content assets
(11,779,284)
(13,916,683)
(13,043,437)
Change in content liabilities
(757,433)
(694,011)
999,880 
Amortization of content assets
10,806,912 
9,216,247 
7,532,088 
Depreciation and amortization of property, equipment and intangibles
115,710 
103,579 
83,157 
Stock-based compensation expense
415,180 
405,376 
320,657 
Foreign currency remeasurement loss (gain) on debt
533,278 
(45,576)
(73,953)
Other non-cash items
293,126 
228,230 
81,640 
Deferred income taxes
70,066 
(94,443)
(85,520)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Other current assets
(187,623)
(252,113)
(200,192)
Accounts payable
(41,605)
96,063 
199,198 
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
198,183 
157,778 
150,422 
Deferred revenue
193,247 
163,846 
142,277 
Other non-current assets and liabilities
(194,075)
(122,531)
2,062 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
2,427,077 
(2,887,322)
(2,680,479)
Cash flows from investing activities:
Purchases of property and equipment
(497,923)
(253,035)
(173,946)
Change in other assets
(7,431)
(134,029)
(165,174)
Net cash used in investing activities
(505,354)
(387,064)
(339,120)
Cash flows from financing activities:
Proceeds from issuance of debt
1,009,464 
4,469,306 
3,961,852 
Debt issuance costs
(7,559)
(36,134)
(35,871)
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
235,406 
72,490 
124,502 
Other financing activities
— 
— 
(1,956)
Net cash provided by financing activities
1,237,311 
4,505,662 
4,048,527 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
36,050 
469 
(39,682)
Net increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
3,195,084 
1,231,745 
989,246 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, beginning of year
5,043,786 
3,812,041 
2,822,795 
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, end of year
$
8,238,870 
$
5,043,786 
$
3,812,041 
Supplemental disclosure:
Income taxes paid
$
291,582 
$
400,658 
$
131,069 
Interest paid
762,904 
599,132 
375,831 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
44

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in thousands, except share and per share data)
 
 
As of December 31,
  
2020
2019
Assets
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
$
8,205,550 
$
5,018,437 
Other current assets
1,556,030 
1,160,067 
Total current assets
9,761,580 
6,178,504 
Content assets, net
25,383,950 
24,504,567 
Property and equipment, net
960,183 
565,221 
Other non-current assets
3,174,646 
2,727,420 
Total assets
$
39,280,359 
$
33,975,712 
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
Current content liabilities
$
4,429,536 
$
4,413,561 
Accounts payable
656,183 
674,347 
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
1,102,196 
843,043 
Deferred revenue
1,117,992 
924,745 
Short-term debt
499,878 
— 
Total current liabilities
7,805,785 
6,855,696 
Non-current content liabilities
2,618,084 
3,334,323 
Long-term debt
15,809,095 
14,759,260 
Other non-current liabilities
1,982,155 
1,444,276 
Total liabilities
28,215,119 
26,393,555 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 7)
Stockholders’ equity:
Preferred stock, $0.001 par value; 10,000,000 shares authorized at December 31, 2020 and 2019; no shares
issued and outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019
— 
— 
Common stock, 0.001 par value; 4,990,000,000 shares authorized at December 31, 2020 and December 31,
2019, respectively; 442,895,261 and 438,806,649 issued and outstanding at December 31, 2020 and
December 31, 2019, respectively
3,447,698 
2,793,929 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
44,398 
(23,521)
Retained earnings
7,573,144 
4,811,749 
Total stockholders’ equity
11,065,240 
7,582,157 
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$
39,280,359 
$
33,975,712 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
45

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(in thousands, except share data)
 
 
Common Stock and Additional 
Paid-in Capital
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
Retained 
Earnings
Total 
Stockholders’ 
Equity
 
Shares
Amount
 
 
Balances as of December 31, 2017
433,392,686 $
1,871,396 $
(20,557) $
1,731,117 $
3,581,956 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
1,211,242 
1,211,242 
Other comprehensive income
— 
— 
975 
— 
975 
Issuance of common stock upon exercise of options
3,205,911 
123,935 
— 
— 
123,935 
Stock-based compensation expense
— 
320,657 
— 
— 
320,657 
Balances as of December 31, 2018
436,598,597 $
2,315,988 $
(19,582) $
2,942,359 $
5,238,765 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
1,866,916 
1,866,916 
Other comprehensive loss
— 
— 
(3,939)
— 
(3,939)
Issuance of common stock upon exercise of options
2,208,052 
72,565 
— 
— 
72,565 
Stock-based compensation expense
— 
405,376 
— 
— 
405,376 
Adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842)
— 
— 
— 
2,474 
2,474 
Balances as of December 31, 2019
438,806,649 $
2,793,929 $
(23,521) $
4,811,749 $
7,582,157 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
2,761,395 
2,761,395 
Other comprehensive income
— 
— 
67,919 
— 
67,919 
Issuance of common stock upon exercise of options
4,088,612 
238,589 
— 
— 
238,589 
Stock-based compensation expense
— 
415,180 
— 
— 
415,180 
Balances as of December 31, 2020
442,895,261 $
3,447,698 $
44,398 $
7,573,144 $ 11,065,240 
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
46

Table of Contents
NETFLIX, INC.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
1.
Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Description of Business
Netflix, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated on August 29, 1997 and began operations on April 14, 1998. The Company is one of the world’s leading
entertainment services with approximately 204 million paid memberships in over 190 countries enjoying TV series, documentaries and feature films across a wide
variety of genres and languages. Members can watch as much as they want, anytime, anywhere, on any internet-connected screen. Members can play, pause and
resume watching, all without commercials. Additionally, the Company continues to offer its DVD-by-mail service in the United States ("U.S.").
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. Intercompany balances and transactions have
been eliminated.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") in the United States of America
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at
the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Significant items subject to such estimates
and assumptions include the content asset amortization policy and the recognition and measurement of income tax assets and liabilities. The Company bases its
estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that the Company believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, the
Company evaluates these assumptions, judgments and estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit
Losses (Topic 326), in order to improve financial reporting of expected credit losses on financial instruments and other commitments to extend credit. ASU 2016-
13 requires that an entity measure and recognize expected credit losses for financial assets held at amortized cost and replaces the incurred loss impairment
methodology in prior GAAP with a methodology that requires consideration of a broader range of information to estimate credit losses. The Company adopted
ASU 2016-13 in the first quarter of 2020 and the impact of the adoption was not material to the Company's consolidated financial statements as credit losses are
not expected to be significant based on historical collection trends, the financial condition of payment partners, and external market factors.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740). ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions for
performing intraperiod tax allocations, recognizing deferred taxes for investments, and calculating income taxes in interim periods. The guidance also simplifies
the accounting for franchise taxes, transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill, and the effect of enacted changes in tax laws or rates in interim
periods. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and early adoption is permitted. While the Company is continuing to assess
the potential impacts of ASU 2019-12, it does not expect ASU 2019-12 to have a material effect, if any, on its financial statements.
Cash Equivalents
The Company considers investments in instruments purchased with an original maturity of 90 days or less to be cash equivalents. The Company also
classifies amounts in transit from payment processors for customer credit card and debit card transactions as cash equivalents.
Content
The Company acquires, licenses and produces content, including original programming, in order to offer members unlimited viewing of video entertainment.
The content licenses are for a fixed fee and specific windows of availability.
47

Table of Contents
Payment terms for certain content licenses and the production of content require more upfront cash payments relative to the amortization expense. Payments for
content, including additions to content assets and the changes in related liabilities, are classified within "Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities" on the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
The Company recognizes content assets (licensed and produced) as “Content assets, net” on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. For licensed content, the
Company capitalizes the fee per title and records a corresponding liability at the gross amount of the liability when the license period begins, the cost of the title is
known and the title is accepted and available for streaming. For produced content, the Company capitalizes costs associated with the production, including
development costs, direct costs and production overhead. Participations and residuals are expensed in line with the amortization of production costs.
Based on factors including historical and estimated viewing patterns, the Company amortizes the content assets (licensed and produced) in “Cost of
revenues” on the Consolidated Statements of Operations over the shorter of each title's contractual window of availability or estimated period of use or ten years,
beginning with the month of first availability. The amortization is on an accelerated basis, as the Company typically expects more upfront viewing, for instance due
to additional merchandising and marketing efforts and film amortization is more accelerated than TV series amortization. On average, over 90% of a licensed or
produced content asset is expected to be amortized within four years after its month of first availability. The Company reviews factors impacting the amortization
of the content assets on an ongoing basis. The Company's estimates related to these factors require considerable management judgment.
The Company's business model is subscription based as opposed to a model generating revenues at a specific title level. Content assets (licensed and
produced) are predominantly monetized as a group and therefore are reviewed in aggregate at a group level when an event or change in circumstances indicates a
change in the expected usefulness of the content or that the fair value may be less than unamortized cost. To date, the Company has not identified any such event or
changes in circumstances. If such changes are identified in the future, these aggregated content assets will be stated at the lower of unamortized cost or fair value.
In addition, unamortized costs for assets that have been, or are expected to be, abandoned are written off.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method over the shorter of the
estimated useful lives of the respective assets, generally up to 30 years, or the expected lease term for leasehold improvements, if applicable.
Trade Receivables
Trade receivables consist primarily of amounts related to members and payment partners that collect membership fees on the Company's behalf. The
Company evaluates the need for an allowance for doubtful accounts based on historical collection trends, the financial condition of its payment partners, and
external market factors.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising expenses and certain payments made to the Company’s partners, including consumer electronics ("CE")
manufacturers, multichannel video programming distributors ("MVPDs"), mobile operators and internet service providers ("ISPs"). Advertising expenses include
promotional activities such as digital and television advertising. Advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Advertising expenses were $1,447 million, $1,879
million and $1,808 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Marketing expenses also include payroll and related expenses for
personnel that support the Company's marketing activities.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of payroll and related costs incurred in making improvements to our service offerings. Research and
development expenses were $1,984 million, $1,673 million and $1,218 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
48

Table of Contents
Income Taxes
The Company records a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability
method. Deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the financial statement
carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred
tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. The measurement of deferred tax assets is
reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits for which future realization is uncertain.
The Company did not recognize certain tax benefits from uncertain tax positions within the provision for income taxes. The Company may recognize a tax
benefit only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position.
The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of
being realized upon settlement. The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. See Note 10 to the
consolidated financial statements for further information regarding income taxes.
Foreign Currency
The functional currency for the Company's subsidiaries is determined based on the primary economic environment in which the subsidiary operates. The
Company translates the assets and liabilities of its non-U.S. dollar functional currency subsidiaries into U.S. dollars using exchange rates in effect at the end of
each period. Revenues and expenses for these subsidiaries are translated using rates that approximate those in effect during the period. Gains and losses from these
translations are recognized in cumulative translation adjustment included in "Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)" in Stockholders’ equity on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The Company remeasures monetary assets and liabilities that are not denominated in the functional currency at exchange rates in effect at the end of each
period. Gains and losses from these remeasurements are recognized in interest and other income (expense). Foreign currency transactions resulted in a loss of $660
million, a gain of $7 million, and a loss of $1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These gains and losses were primarily
due to the non-cash remeasurement of our Senior Notes denominated in euros and the remeasurement of cash and content liability positions denominated in
currencies other than functional currencies.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company grants fully vested non-qualified stock options to its employees on a monthly basis. As a result of immediate vesting, stock-based
compensation expense is fully recognized on the grant date, and no estimate is required for post-vesting option forfeitures. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial
statements for further information regarding stock-based compensation.
2.
Revenue Recognition
The Company's primary source of revenues is from monthly membership fees. Members are billed in advance of the start of their monthly membership and
revenues are recognized ratably over each monthly membership period. Revenues are presented net of the taxes that are collected from members and remitted to
governmental authorities. The Company is the principal in all its relationships where partners, including CE manufacturers, MVPDs, mobile operators and ISPs,
provide access to the service as the Company retains control over service delivery to its members. Typically, payments made to the partners, such as for marketing,
are expensed. However, if there is no distinct service provided in exchange for the payments made to the partners or if the price that the member pays is established
by the partners and there is no standalone price for the Netflix service (for instance, in a bundle), these payments are recognized as a reduction of revenues.
The following tables summarize streaming revenues, paid net membership additions, and ending paid memberships by region for the years December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively:
49

Table of Contents
United States and Canada (UCAN)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Revenues
$
11,455,396 
$
10,051,208 
$
8,281,532 
Paid net membership additions
6,274 
2,905 
6,335 
Paid memberships at end of period
73,936 
67,662 
64,757 
Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Revenues
$
7,772,252 
$
5,543,067 
$
3,963,707 
Paid net membership additions
14,920 
13,960 
11,814 
Paid memberships at end of period
66,698 
51,778 
37,818 
Latin America (LATAM)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Revenues
$
3,156,727 
$
2,795,434 
$
2,237,697 
Paid net membership additions
6,120 
5,340 
6,360 
Paid memberships at end of period
37,537 
31,417 
26,077 
Asia-Pacific (APAC)
As of/ Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Revenues
$
2,372,300 
$
1,469,521 
$
945,816 
Paid net membership additions
9,259 
5,626 
4,106 
Paid memberships at end of period
25,492 
16,233 
10,607 
A paid membership (also referred to as a paid subscription) is defined as a membership that has the right to receive Netflix service following sign-up and a method
of payment being provided, and that is not part of a free trial or certain other promotions that may be offered by the Company to new or rejoining members. A
membership is canceled and ceases to be reflected in the above metrics as of the effective cancellation date. Voluntary cancellations generally become effective at
the end of the prepaid membership period. Involuntary cancellations, as a result of a failed method of payment, become effective immediately. Memberships are
assigned to territories based on the geographic location used at time of sign-up as determined by the Company’s internal systems, which utilize industry standard
geo-location technology.
Total U.S. revenues, inclusive of DVD revenues not reported in the tables above, were $10.8 billion, $9.5 billion and $8.0 billion for the years ended
December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. DVD revenues were $0.2 billion, $0.3 billion, and $0.4 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, respectively.
50

Table of Contents
Deferred revenue consists of membership fees billed that have not been recognized, as well as gift and other prepaid memberships that have not been fully
redeemed. As of December 31, 2020, total deferred revenue was $1,118 million, the vast majority of which was related to membership fees billed that are expected
to be recognized as revenue within the next month. The remaining deferred revenue balance, which is related to gift cards and other prepaid memberships, will be
recognized as revenue over the period of service after redemption, which is expected to occur over the next 12 months. The $193 million increase in deferred
revenue as compared to the balance of $925 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, is a result of the increase in membership fees billed due to increased
memberships.
3.
Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed using the weighted-average number of outstanding shares of common stock during the period. Diluted earnings per
share is computed using the weighted-average number of outstanding shares of common stock and, when dilutive, potential common shares outstanding during the
period. Potential common shares consist of incremental shares issuable upon the assumed exercise of stock options. The computation of earnings per share is as
follows:
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands, except per share data)
Basic earnings per share:
Net income
$
2,761,395 
$
1,866,916 
$
1,211,242 
Shares used in computation:
Weighted-average common shares outstanding
440,922 
437,799 
435,374 
Basic earnings per share
$
6.26 
$
4.26 
$
2.78 
Diluted earnings per share:
Net income
$
2,761,395 
$
1,866,916 
$
1,211,242 
Shares used in computation:
Weighted-average common shares outstanding
440,922 
437,799 
435,374 
Employee stock options
13,286 
13,966 
15,870 
Weighted-average number of shares
454,208 
451,765 
451,244 
Diluted earnings per share
$
6.08 
$
4.13 
$
2.68 
Employee stock options with exercise prices greater than the average market price of the common stock were excluded from the diluted calculation as their
inclusion would have been anti-dilutive. The following table summarizes the potential common shares excluded from the diluted calculation:
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Employee stock options
484 
1,588 
330 
51

Table of Contents
4.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
The following tables summarize the Company's cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
 
As of December 31, 2020
 
Cash and cash
equivalents
Other Current
Assets
Non-current
Assets
Total
 
(in thousands)
Cash
$
3,331,860 
$
1,783 
$
31,284 
$
3,364,927 
Level 1 securities:
Money market funds
4,573,690 
— 
253 
4,573,943 
Level 2 securities:
Foreign Time Deposits
300,000 
— 
300,000 
$
8,205,550 
$
1,783 
$
31,537 
$
8,238,870 
 
As of December 31, 2019
 
Cash and cash
equivalents
Other Current
Assets
Non-current
Assets
Total
 
(in thousands)
Cash
$
3,103,525 
$
1,863 $
22,161 
$
3,127,549 
Level 1 securities:
Money market funds
1,614,912 
— 
1,325 
1,616,237 
Level 2 securities:
Foreign Time Deposits
300,000 
— 
— 
300,000 
$
5,018,437 
$
1,863 $
23,486 
$
5,043,786 
Other current assets include restricted cash for deposits related to self insurance. Non-current assets include restricted cash related to letter of credit
agreements. Foreign time deposits of $300 million, classified as Level 2 securities, were included in Cash and cash equivalents on the Company's Balance Sheet as
of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The fair value of cash equivalents included in the Level 2 category is based on observable inputs, such as quoted
prices for similar assets at the measurement date; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable, either directly or indirectly.
See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding the fair value of the Company’s senior notes.
52

Table of Contents
5.
Balance Sheet Components
Content Assets, Net
Content assets consisted of the following:
As of December 31,
2020
2019
(in thousands)
Licensed content, net
$
13,747,607 
$
14,703,352 
Produced content, net
Released, less amortization
5,809,681 
4,382,685 
In production
4,827,455 
4,750,664 
In development and pre-production
999,207 
667,866 
11,636,343 
9,801,215 
Content assets, net
$
25,383,950 
$
24,504,567 
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $5,637 million, $3,494 million, and $2,134 million of the $13,748 million unamortized cost of the licensed content
is expected to be amortized in each of the next three years. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $2,183 million, $1,629 million, and $1,092 million of the
$5,810 million unamortized cost of the produced content that has been released is expected to be amortized in each of the next three years.
As of December 31, 2020, the amount of accrued participations and residuals was not material.
The following table represents the amortization of content assets:
Year ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
(in thousands)
Licensed content
$
7,544,631 
$
7,242,799 
$
6,511,689 
Produced content
3,262,281 
1,973,448 
1,020,399 
Total
$
10,806,912 
$
9,216,247 
$
7,532,088 
Property and Equipment, Net
Property and equipment and accumulated depreciation consisted of the following:
As of December 31,
Estimated Useful Lives (in Years)
2020
2019
(in thousands)
Land
$
50,700 
$
6,125 
Buildings
42,717 
33,141 
30 years
Leasehold improvements
524,537 
354,999 
Over life of lease
Furniture and fixtures
110,185 
87,465 
3-15 years
Information technology
283,014 
243,565 
3 years
Corporate aircraft
110,629 
108,995 
8 years
Machinery and equipment
34,633 
46,415 
3-5 years
Capital work-in-progress
298,558 
100,521 
Property and equipment, gross
1,454,973 
981,226 
Less: Accumulated depreciation
(494,790)
(416,005)
Property and equipment, net
$
960,183 
$
565,221 
    
53

Table of Contents
Leases
The Company has entered into operating leases primarily for real estate. These leases generally have terms which range from 1 year to 15 years, and often
include one or more options to renew. These renewal terms can extend the lease term from 1 year to 20 years, and are included in the lease term when it is
reasonably certain that the Company will exercise the option. These operating leases are included in "Other non-current assets" on the Company's Consolidated
Balance Sheets, and represent the Company’s right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. The Company’s obligations to make lease payments are included
in "Accrued expenses and other liabilities" and "Other non-current liabilities" on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets.  Operating lease right-of-use assets
and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. The Company has entered into various
short-term operating leases, primarily for marketing billboards, with an initial term of twelve months or less. These leases are not recorded on the Company's
Consolidated Balance Sheets. All operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the
Company recognized approximately $441 million in total lease costs, which was comprised of $324 million in operating lease costs for right-of-use assets and
$117 million in short-term lease costs related to short-term operating leases. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized approximately
$448 million in total lease costs, which was comprised of $218 million in operating lease costs for right-of-use assets and $230 million in short-term lease costs
related to short-term operating leases.
Prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-02 in the first quarter of 2019, the Company recognized minimum rental expense on a straight-line basis over the lease
term.  The  Company  used  the  date  of  initial  possession  to  begin  amortization,  which  is  generally  when  the  Company  entered  the  space  and  began  to  make
improvements in preparation for intended use. For scheduled rent escalation clauses during the lease terms or for rental payments commencing at a date other than
the date of initial occupancy, the Company recorded minimum rental expenses on a straight-line basis over the terms of the leases in the Consolidated Statements
of Operations. Rent expense associated with operating leases was $107 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Because the rate implicit in each lease is not readily determinable, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate to determine the present value of the
lease payments. The Company has certain contracts for real estate and marketing which may contain lease and non-lease components which it has elected to treat
as a single lease component.
Information related to the Company's operating right-of-use assets and related operating lease liabilities were as follows:
Year ended December 31,
2020
2019
(in thousands)
Cash paid for operating lease liabilities
$
259,559 
$
192,084 
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for new operating lease obligations (1)
729,942 
1,672,462 
(1) Balance as of December 31, 2019 includes $743 million for operating leases existing on January 1, 2019.
As of December 31,
2020
2019
(in thousands, except lease term and discount rate)
Operating lease right-of-use assets, net
$
2,037,726 
$
1,532,285 
Current operating lease liabilities
$
256,222 
$
190,622 
Non-current operating lease liabilities
1,945,631 
1,422,612 
Total operating lease liabilities
$
2,201,853 
$
1,613,234 
Weighted-average remaining lease term
8.9 years
8.8 years
Weighted-average discount rate
3.6 %
5.0 %
54

Table of Contents
Maturities of operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Due in 12 month period ended December 31,
2021
$
320,245 
2022
312,154 
2023
300,014 
2024
279,037 
2025
258,348 
Thereafter
1,100,115 
2,569,913 
Less imputed interest
(368,060)
Total operating lease liabilities
2,201,853 
Current operating lease liabilities
256,222 
Non-current operating lease liabilities
1,945,631 
Total operating lease liabilities
$
2,201,853 
The Company has additional operating leases for real estate of $256 million which have not commenced as of December 31, 2020, and as such, have not been
recognized on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. These operating leases are expected to commence in 2021 with lease terms between 1 year and 15
years.
Other Current Assets
Other current assets consisted of the following:
As of
December 31, 
2020
December 31, 
2019
(in thousands)
Trade receivables
$
610,819 
$
454,399 
Prepaid expenses
203,042 
180,999 
Other
742,169 
524,669 
Total other current assets
$
1,556,030 
$
1,160,067 
55

Table of Contents
6.
Debt
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had aggregate outstanding notes of $16,309 million, net of $107 million of issuance costs, with varying maturities
(the "Notes"). Of the outstanding balance, $500 million, net of issuance costs, is classified as short-term debt on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of
December 31, 2019, the Company had aggregate outstanding long-term notes of $14,759 million, net of $114 million of issuance costs. Each of the Notes were
issued at par and are senior unsecured obligations of the Company. Interest is payable semi-annually at fixed rates. A portion of the outstanding Notes is
denominated in foreign currency (comprised of €5,170 million) and is remeasured into U.S. dollars at each balance sheet date (with remeasurement loss totaling
$533 million for the year ended December 31, 2020).
The following table provides a summary of the Company's outstanding debt and the fair values based on quoted market prices in less active markets as of
December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Principal Amount at Par
Level 2 Fair Value as of
December 31, 
2020
December 31, 
2019
Issuance Date
Maturity
December 31, 
2020
December 31, 
2019
(in millions)
(in millions)
5.375% Senior Notes
$
500 
$
500 
February 2013
February 2021
$
502 
$
518 
5.500% Senior Notes
700 
700 
February 2015
February 2022
735 
744 
5.750% Senior Notes
400 
400 
February 2014
March 2024
449 
444 
5.875% Senior Notes
800 
800 
February 2015
February 2025
921 
896 
3.000% Senior Notes (1)
574 
— 
April 2020
June 2025
616 
— 
3.625% Senior Notes
500 
— 
April 2020
June 2025
535 
— 
4.375% Senior Notes
1,000 
1,000 
October 2016
November 2026
1,110 
1,026 
3.625% Senior Notes (1)
1,588 
1,459 
May 2017
May 2027
1,776 
1,565 
4.875% Senior Notes
1,600 
1,600 
October 2017
April 2028
1,807 
1,670 
5.875% Senior Notes
1,900 
1,900 
April 2018
November 2028
2,280 
2,111 
4.625% Senior Notes (1)
1,344 
1,234 
October 2018
May 2029
1,630 
1,378 
6.375% Senior Notes
800 
800 
October 2018
May 2029
995 
916 
3.875% Senior Notes (1)
1,466 
1,346 
April 2019
November 2029
1,700 
1,429 
5.375% Senior Notes
900 
900 
April 2019
November 2029
1,061 
960 
3.625% Senior Notes (1)
1,344 
1,234 
October 2019
June 2030
1,533 
1,273 
4.875% Senior Notes
1,000 
1,000 
October 2019
June 2030
1,155 
1,019 
$
16,416 
$
14,873 
$
18,805 
$
15,949 
(1) The following Senior Notes have a principal amount denominated in euro: 3.000% Senior Notes for €470 million, 3.625% Senior Notes for €1,300 million,
4.625% Senior Notes for €1,100 million, 3.875% Senior Notes for €1,200 million, and 3.625% Senior Notes for €1,100 million.
The expected timing of principal and interest payments for these Notes are as follows:
As of 
December 31, 
2020
December 31, 2019
(in thousands)
Less than one year
$
1,264,020 
$
736,969 
Due after one year and through three years
2,136,997 
2,581,471 
Due after three years and through five years
3,614,906 
1,705,201 
Due after five years
14,841,164 
15,699,800 
Total debt obligations
$
21,857,087 
$
20,723,441 
56

Table of Contents
Each of the Notes are repayable in whole or in part upon the occurrence of a change of control, at the option of the holders, at a purchase price in cash equal
to 101% of the principal plus accrued interest. The Company may redeem the Notes prior to maturity in whole or in part at an amount equal to the principal amount
thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest and an applicable premium. The Notes include, among other terms and conditions, limitations on the Company's ability to
create, incur or allow certain liens; enter into sale and lease-back transactions; create, assume, incur or guarantee additional indebtedness of certain of the
Company's subsidiaries; and consolidate or merge with, or convey, transfer or lease all or substantially all of the Company's and its subsidiaries assets, to another
person. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company was in compliance with all related covenants.
Revolving Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a $750 million unsecured revolving credit facility (“Revolving Credit Agreement”), which matures on March 29,
2024. Revolving loans may be borrowed, repaid and reborrowed until March 29, 2024, at which time all amounts borrowed must be repaid. The Company may use
the proceeds of future borrowings under the Revolving Credit Agreement for working capital and general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, no
amounts have been borrowed under the Revolving Credit Agreement.
The borrowings under the Revolving Credit Agreement bear interest, at the Company’s option, of either (i) a floating rate equal to a base rate (the “Alternate
Base Rate”) or (ii) a rate equal to an adjusted London interbank offered rate (the “Adjusted LIBO Rate”), plus a margin of 0.75%. The Alternate Base Rate is
defined as the greatest of (A) the rate of interest published by the Wall Street Journal, from time to time, as the prime rate, (B) the federal funds rate,
plus 0.500% and (C) the Adjusted LIBO Rate for a one-month interest period, plus 1.00%. The Adjusted LIBO Rate is defined as the London interbank offered rate
for deposits in U.S. dollars, for the relevant interest period, adjusted for statutory reserve requirements, but in no event shall the Adjusted LIBO Rate be less
than 0.00% per annum. Regulatory authorities that oversee financial markets have announced that after the end of 2021, they would no longer compel banks
currently reporting information used to set the LIBO Rate to continue to make rate submissions. As a result, it is possible that beginning in 2022, the LIBO Rate
will no longer be available as a reference rate. Under the terms of the Company's Revolving Credit Agreement, in the event of the discontinuance of the LIBO
Rate, a mutually agreed-upon alternate benchmark rate will be established to replace the LIBO Rate. The Company and Lenders shall in good faith establish an
alternate benchmark rate which places the Lenders and the Company in the same economic position that existed immediately prior to the discontinuation of the
LIBO Rate. The Company does not anticipate that the discontinuance of the LIBO Rate will materially impact its liquidity or financial position.
The Company is also obligated to pay a commitment fee on the undrawn amounts of the Revolving Credit Agreement at an annual rate of 0.10%. The
Revolving Credit Agreement requires the Company to comply with certain covenants, including covenants that limit or restrict the ability of the Company’s
subsidiaries to incur debt and limit or restrict the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to grant liens and enter into sale and leaseback transactions; and, in the
case of the Company or a guarantor, merge, consolidate, liquidate, dissolve or sell, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the assets of the
Company and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company was in compliance with all related covenants.
7.
Commitments and Contingencies
Content
At December 31, 2020, the Company had $19.2 billion of obligations comprised of $4.4 billion included in "Current content liabilities" and $2.6 billion of
"Non-current content liabilities" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and $12.2 billion of obligations that are not reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as
they did not yet meet the criteria for asset recognition.
At December 31, 2019, the Company had $19.5 billion of obligations comprised of $4.4 billion included in "Current content liabilities" and $3.3 billion of
"Non-current content liabilities" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and $11.8 billion of obligations that are not reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as
they did not yet meet the criteria for asset recognition.
The expected timing of payments for these content obligations is as follows:
57

Table of Contents
As of December 31,
2020
2019
 
(in thousands)
Less than one year
$
8,980,868 
$
8,477,367 
Due after one year and through 3 years
7,819,563 
8,352,731 
Due after 3 years and through 5 years
1,973,091 
2,041,340 
Due after 5 years
445,308 
618,644 
Total content obligations
$
19,218,830 
$
19,490,082 
    
Content obligations include amounts related to the acquisition, licensing and production of content. Obligations that are in non-U.S. dollar currencies are
translated to the U.S. dollar at period end rates. An obligation for the production of content includes non-cancelable commitments under creative talent and
employment agreements as well as other production related commitments. An obligation for the acquisition and licensing of content is incurred at the time the
Company enters into an agreement to obtain future titles. Once a title becomes available, a content liability is recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Certain
agreements include the obligation to license rights for unknown future titles, the ultimate quantity and/or fees for which are not yet determinable as of the reporting
date. Traditional film output deals, or certain TV series license agreements where the number of seasons to be aired is unknown, are examples of such license
agreements. The Company does not include any estimated obligation for these future titles beyond the known minimum amount. However, the unknown
obligations are expected to be significant.
Legal Proceedings
From time to time, in the normal course of its operations, the Company is subject to litigation matters and claims, including claims relating to employee
relations, business practices and patent infringement. Litigation can be expensive and disruptive to normal business operations. Moreover, the results of complex
legal proceedings are difficult to predict and the Company's view of these matters may change in the future as the litigation and events related thereto unfold. The
Company expenses legal fees as incurred. The Company records a provision for contingent losses when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the
amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. An unfavorable outcome to any legal matter, if material, could have an adverse effect on the Company's operations
or its financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
The Company is involved in litigation matters not listed herein but does not consider the matters to be material either individually or in the aggregate at this
time. The Company's view of the matters not listed may change in the future as the litigation and events related thereto unfold.
8.
Guarantees—Indemnification Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, the Company has entered into contractual arrangements under which it has agreed to provide indemnification of varying
scope and terms to business partners and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the Company’s breach of
such agreements and out of intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In these circumstances, payment may be conditional on the other party
making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract.
The Company’s obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of time or amount, and in some instances, the Company may have recourse
against third parties for certain payments. In addition, the Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and certain of its officers that
will require it, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers. The terms
of such obligations vary.
It is not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential amount of future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
conditional nature of the Company’s obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. No amount has been accrued in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements with respect to these indemnification guarantees.
58

Table of Contents
9.
 Stockholders’ Equity
Voting Rights
The holders of each share of common stock shall be entitled to one vote per share on all matters to be voted upon by the Company’s stockholders.
Stock Option Plan
On June 4, 2020, the Company's stockholders approved the 2020 Stock Plan, which was adopted by the Company's Board of Directors on March 4, 2020
subject to stockholder approval. The 2020 Stock Plan is the successor to the 2011 Stock Plan. The 2020 Stock Plan provides for the grant of incentive stock options
to employees and for the grant of non-statutory stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock and restricted stock units to employees, directors and
consultants. The 2020 Stock Plan authorized 17,500,000 new shares to be available for award grants. As of the date the 2020 Stock Plan was adopted by the
Company's Board of Directors, 5,530,106 shares were available to be granted under the 2011 Stock Plan. These shares are available for award grants under the
2020 Stock Plan.
A summary of the activities related to the Company’s stock option plans is as follows:
 
 
Shares Available 
for Grant
Options Outstanding
 
Number of 
Shares
Weighted- Average
Exercise Price 
(per Share)
Balances as of December 31, 2017
10,739,915 
21,647,350 
$
61.13 
Granted
(2,039,974)
2,039,974 
311.66 
Exercised
— 
(3,205,911)
38.66 
Expired
— 
(2,135)
4.60 
Balances as of December 31, 2018
8,699,941 
20,479,278 
$
89.61 
Granted
(2,588,380)
2,588,380 
320.66 
Exercised
— 
(2,208,052)
32.88 
Expired
— 
(280)
6.74 
Balances as of December 31, 2019
6,111,561 
20,859,326 
$
124.28 
New Shares Authorized
17,500,000 
— 
— 
Granted
(1,909,476)
1,909,476 
432.34 
Exercised
— 
(4,088,612)
58.35 
Expired
— 
(3,380)
27.54 
Balances as of December 31, 2020
21,702,085 
18,676,810 
$
170.23 
Vested and exercisable at December 31, 2020
18,676,810 
$
170.23 
The aggregate intrinsic value of the Company's outstanding stock options as of December 31, 2020 was $6,922 million and represents the total pretax
intrinsic value (the difference between the Company’s closing stock price on the last trading day of 2020 and the exercise price, multiplied by the number of in-the-
money options) that would have been received by the option holders had all option holders exercised their options on the last trading day of 2020. This amount
changes based on the fair market value of the Company’s common stock. Total intrinsic value of options exercised for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019
and 2018 was $1,596 million, $666 million and $863 million, respectively. The weighted-average remaining contractual term of the Company's outstanding stock
options as of December 31, 2020 included in the table above was 5.55 years.
Cash received from option exercises for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $235 million, $72 million and $125 million, respectively.
59

Table of Contents
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock options granted are exercisable for the full ten year contractual term regardless of employment status. The following table summarizes the assumptions
used to value option grants using the lattice-binomial model and the valuation data:
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
Dividend yield
— %
— %
— %
Expected volatility
37% - 45%
37% - 41%
40% - 42%
Risk-free interest rate
0.67% - 1.71%
1.74% - 2.74%
2.61% - 3.09%
Suboptimal exercise factor
3.34 - 3.67
3.07 - 3.23
2.80 - 3.01
Valuation data:
Weighted-average fair value (per share)
$
217.42 
$
156.60 
$
157.19 
Total stock-based compensation expense (in thousands)
415,180 
405,376 
320,657 
Total income tax impact on provision (in thousands)
91,718 
90,856 
67,575 
The Company considers several factors in determining the suboptimal exercise factor, including the historical and estimated option exercise behavior.
The Company calculates expected volatility based solely on implied volatility. The Company believes that implied volatility of publicly traded options in its
common stock is more reflective of market conditions, and given consistently high trade volumes of the options, can reasonably be expected to be a better indicator
of expected volatility than historical volatility of its common stock.
In valuing shares issued under the Company’s employee stock option plans, the Company bases the risk-free interest rate on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon
issues with terms similar to the contractual term of the options. The Company does not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and therefore
uses an expected dividend yield of zero in the option valuation model. The Company does not use a post-vesting termination rate as options are fully vested upon
grant date.
10.    Income Taxes
Income before provision for income taxes was as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
United States
$
2,789,064 
$
1,719,326 
$
845,402 
Foreign
410,285 
342,905 
381,056 
Income before income taxes
$
3,199,349 
$
2,062,231 
$
1,226,458 
60

Table of Contents
The components of provision for income taxes for all periods presented were as follows:
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Current tax provision:
Federal
$
24,221 
$
21,498 
$
(22,176)
State
65,821 
45,228 
(10,234)
Foreign
277,846 
223,328 
133,146 
Total current
367,888 
290,054 
100,736 
Deferred tax provision:
Federal
(57,765)
(28,003)
(37,396)
State
164,685 
(54,507)
(52,391)
Foreign
(36,854)
(12,229)
4,267 
Total deferred
70,066 
(94,739)
(85,520)
Provision for income taxes
$
437,954 
$
195,315 
$
15,216 
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a California research and development ("R&D") credit carryforward of $250 million which can be carried
forward indefinitely. On June 29, 2020, California enacted legislative changes that impose an annual cap of $5 million on the amount of business incentive tax
credits we can utilize in California effective for tax years 2020 through 2022. As a result, we evaluated the Company's ability to realize the California R&D credit,
the Company considered all available positive and negative evidence, including operating results, ongoing tax planning, and forecasts of future taxable income and
determined it is more likely than not that the pre-2020 credits and a portion of the current year R&D credit would not be realized. In the twelve months ended
December 31, 2020, the Company has recorded a valuation allowance of $250 million. The Company will monitor its business strategies, weighing positive and
negative evidence in assessing its realization of this asset in the future and in the event there is a need to release the valuation allowance, a tax benefit will be
recorded.
A reconciliation of the provision for income taxes, with the amount computed by applying the statutory Federal income tax rate to income before income
taxes is as follows:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Expected tax expense at U.S. Federal statutory rates
$
671,864 
$
433,059 
$
257,556 
State income taxes, net of Federal income tax effect
65,808 
47,909 
33,611 
Foreign earnings at other than U.S. rates
12,212 
56,969 
63,519 
Federal and California R&D tax credits
(113,882)
(134,523)
(140,749)
Valuation allowance on California R&D tax credits
183,283 
— 
— 
Excess tax benefits on stock-based compensation
(339,436)
(148,693)
(191,323)
Impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
Rate Change / Transition Tax
— 
— 
(71,516)
Tax effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
(87,194)
(127,534)
43,099 
Global corporate structure simplification
— 
35,939 
— 
Nondeductible Officers Compensation
30,351 
24,111 
14,377 
Other
14,948 
8,078 
6,642 
Provision for income taxes
$
437,954 
$
195,315 
$
15,216 
Effective Tax Rate
14 %
9 %
1 %
61

Table of Contents
The components of deferred tax assets and liabilities were as follows:
 
 
As of December 31,
 
2020
2019
 
(in thousands)
Deferred tax assets:
Stock-based compensation
$
296,646 
$
258,376 
Federal and California tax R&D credits
513,413 
408,715 
Foreign tax credits
— 
137,818 
Accruals and reserves
74,239 
42,450 
Operating leases
436,838 
349,208 
Foreign Net Operating Losses
29,894 
411 
Unrealized Gain/Loss
114,884 
5,477 
Other
2,543 
622 
Gross deferred tax assets
1,468,457 
1,203,077 
Depreciation & amortization
(229,142)
(80,921)
Operating leases
(400,380)
(329,168)
Gross deferred tax liabilities
(629,522)
(410,089)
Valuation allowance
(249,844)
(134,782)
Net deferred tax assets
$
589,091 
$
658,206 
All deferred tax assets are classified as “Other non-current assets” on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. In
evaluating its ability to realize the net deferred tax assets, the Company considered all available positive and negative evidence, including its past operating results
and the forecast of future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. As of December 31, 2020,
the valuation allowance of $250 million was related to the California R&D credits that the Company does not expect to realize.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's Federal R&D tax credit and state tax credit carryforwards for tax return purposes were $317 million, and $365
million, respectively. The Federal R&D tax credit carryforwards expire through 2040. State tax credit carryforwards can be carried forward indefinitely.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company determined that the likelihood of utilizing its non-U.S. foreign tax credits of $135 million for which there was a
valuation allowance of $135 million was remote given its recent global corporate simplification. As such, the Company has written off the deferred tax asset
against the valuation allowance and will no longer disclose these amounts.
The unrecognized tax benefits that are not expected to result in payment or receipt of cash within one year are classified as “Other non-current liabilities”
and a reduction of deferred tax assets which is classified as "Other non-current assets" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2020, the total
amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was $140 million, of which $86 million, if recognized, would favorably impact the Company’s effective tax rate. As
of December 31, 2019, the total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was $67 million, of which $57 million, if recognized, would favorably impact the
Company’s effective tax rate. The aggregate changes in the Company’s total gross amount of unrecognized tax benefits are summarized as follows (in thousands):
62

Table of Contents
 
Balances as of December 31, 2018
$
47,534 
Increases related to tax positions taken during prior periods
925 
Decreases related to tax positions taken during prior periods
(417)
Increases related to tax positions taken during the current period
18,826 
Decreases related to expiration of statute of limitations
(100)
Balances as of December 31, 2019
66,768 
Increases related to tax positions taken during prior periods
11,943 
Decreases related to tax positions taken during prior periods
(3,697)
Increases related to tax positions taken during the current period
65,110 
Decreases related to expiration of statute of limitations
— 
Balances as of December 31, 2020
$
140,124 
The Company includes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes and in “Other non-current liabilities”
in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Interest and penalties included in the Company's provision for income taxes were not material in all the periods presented.
The Company files U.S. Federal, state and foreign tax returns. The Company is currently under examination by the IRS for 2016 through 2018 and is subject
to examination for 2019. The 2015 through 2019 state tax returns are subject to examination by various state tax authorities. The Company is also currently under
examination in the UK for 2018 and 2019. The company has no other significant foreign jurisdiction audits underway. The years 2014 through 2019 generally
remain subject to examination by foreign tax authorities.
Given the potential outcome of the current examinations as well as the impact of the current examinations on the potential expiration of the statute of
limitations, it is reasonably possible that the balance of unrecognized tax benefits could significantly change within the next twelve months. However, an estimate
of the range of reasonably possible adjustments cannot be made at this time.
11.    Employee Benefit Plan
The Company maintains a 401(k) savings plan covering substantially all of its employees. Eligible employees may contribute up to 80% of their annual
salary through payroll deductions, but not more than the statutory limits set by the Internal Revenue Service. The Company matches employee contributions at the
discretion of the Board. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s matching contributions totaled $69 million, $47 million and $27 million, respectively.
Multiemployer Benefit Plans
The Company contributes to various multiemployer defined pension plans under the terms of collective bargaining agreements that cover our union-
represented employees. The risks of participating in multiemployer pension plans are different from single-employer plans such that (i) contributions made by the
Company to the multiemployer pension plans may be used to provide benefits to employees of other participating employers; (ii) if the Company chooses to stop
participating in the multiemployer pension plans, it may be required to pay those plans an amount based on the underfunded status of the plan; and (iii) if the
Company stops contributing to the multiemployer pension plan, the unfunded obligations of the plan may become the obligation of the remaining participating
employers. The Company also contributes to various other multiemployer benefit plans that provide health and welfare benefits to both active and retired
participants. The Company does not participate in any multiemployer benefit plans that are individually significant to the Company.
The following table summarizes the Company's contributions to multiemployer pension and health plans for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and
2018, respectively:
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2020
2019
2018
 
(in thousands)
Pension benefits
$
78,060 
$
89,703 
$
32,389 
Health benefits
52,322 
44,351 
26,898 
Total contributions
$
130,382 
$
134,054 
$
59,287 
63

Table of Contents
12.    Segment and Geographic Information
The Company operates as one operating segment. The Company's chief operating decision maker ("CODM") is its co-chief executive officers, who review
financial information presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of making operating decisions, assessing financial performance and allocating resources.
On July 13, 2020, Ted Sarandos was appointed as co-Chief Executive Officer of the Company and serves as Chief Content Officer with Reed Hastings, the
Company’s President, co-Chief Executive Officer, and Chairman of the Board. The Company determined that both Mr. Sarandos and Mr. Hastings are its CODM
and that there have been no changes to the Company's one operating segment as the Company's financial results continue to be evaluated on a consolidated basis
by its CODM.
    Total U.S. revenues were $10.8 billion, $9.5 billion and $8.0 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. See Note 2 Revenue
Recognition for additional information about streaming revenue by region.
    The Company's long-lived tangible assets, as well as the Company's operating lease right-of-use assets recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets were
located as follows:
As of December 31,
2020
2019
(in thousands)
United States
$
2,224,891 
$
1,503,459 
International
773,018 
594,047 
13.    Selected Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
  
December 31,
September 30,
June 30,
March 31,
 
(in thousands, except for per share data)
2020
Total revenues
$
6,644,442 
$
6,435,637 
$
6,148,286 
$
5,767,691 
Gross profit
2,479,282 
2,567,886 
2,504,579 
2,167,990 
Net income
542,156 
789,976 
720,196 
709,067 
Earnings per share:
Basic
$
1.23 
$
1.79 
$
1.63 
$
1.61 
Diluted
1.19 
1.74 
1.59 
1.57 
2019
Total revenues
$
5,467,434 
$
5,244,905 
$
4,923,116 
$
4,520,992 
Gross profit
2,001,411 
2,146,986 
1,917,459 
1,650,378 
Net income
586,970 
665,244 
270,650 
344,052 
Earnings per share:
Basic
$
1.34 
$
1.52 
$
0.62 
$
0.79 
Diluted
1.30 
1.47 
0.60 
0.76 
64

Table of Contents
EXHIBIT INDEX
 
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Description
Incorporated by Reference
Filed 
Herewith
Form
File No.
Exhibit
Filing Date
3.1
Restated Certificate of Incorporation
10-Q
001-35727
3.1
July 17, 2015
3.2
Amended and Restated Bylaws
8-K
001-35727
3.1
December 18, 2020
4.1
Form of Common Stock Certificate
S-1/A
333-83878
4.1
April 16, 2002
4.2
Indenture, dated as of February 1, 2013, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as Trustee.
8-K
001-35727
4.1
February 1, 2013
4.3
Indenture, dated as of February 19, 2014, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as Trustee.
8-K
001-35727
4.1
February 19, 2014
4.4
Indenture, dated as of February 5, 2015, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as Trustee.
8-K
001-35727
4.1
February 5, 2015
4.5
Indenture, dated as of February 5, 2015, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as Trustee.
8-K
001-35727
4.2
February 5, 2015
4.6
Indenture, dated as of October 27, 2016, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as Trustee.
8-K
001-35727
4.1
October 27, 2016
4.7
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 24,
2014, by and between the Company and Wells Fargo
Bank, National Association, as Trustee.
10-Q
001-35727
4.7
April 20, 2017
4.8
Indenture, dated as of May 2, 2017, by and between the
Company and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association,
as Trustee.
8-K
001-35727
4.1
May 3, 2017
4.9
Indenture, dated as of October 26, 2017, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee
8-K
001-35727
4.1
October 26, 2017
4.10
Indenture, dated as of April 26, 2018, by and between the
Company and Wells Fargo Bank National Association,
as Trustee
8-K
001-35727
4.1
April 26, 2018
4.11
Indenture, dated as of October 26, 2018, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee (6.375% Senior Notes due 2029)
8-K
001-35727
4.1
October 26, 2018
4.12
Indenture, dated as of October 26, 2018, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee (4.625% Senior Notes due 2029)
8-K
001-35727
4.3
October 26, 2018
4.13
Indenture, dated as of April 29, 2019, by and between the
Company and Wells Fargo Bank National Association,
as Trustee (5.375% Senior Notes due 2029)
8-K
001-35727
4.1
April 29, 2019
4.14
Indenture, dated as of April 29, 2019, by and between the
Company and Wells Fargo Bank National Association,
as Trustee (3.875% Senior Notes due 2029)
8-K
001-35727
4.3
April 29, 2019
4.15
Indenture, dated as of October 25, 2019, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee (4.875% Senior Notes due 2030)
8-K
001-35727
4.1
October 25, 2019
4.16
Indenture, dated as of October 25, 2019, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee (3.625% Senior Notes due 2030)
8-K
001-35727
4.3
October 25, 2019
65

Table of Contents
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Description
Incorporated by Reference
Filed 
Herewith
Form
File No.
Exhibit
Filing Date
4.17
Indenture, dated as of April 28, 2020, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee (3.625% Senior Notes due
2025)
8-K
001-35727
4.1
April 28, 2020
4.18
Indenture, dated as of April 28, 2020, by and between
the Company and Wells Fargo Bank National
Association, as Trustee (3.000% Senior Notes due
2025)
8-K
001-35727
4.3
April 28, 2020
4.19
Description of Registrant's Securities Registered
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934
10-K
001-35727
4.17
January 29, 2020
10.1†
Form of Indemnification Agreement entered into by the
registrant with each of its executive officers and
directors
S-1/A
333-83878
10.1
March 20, 2002
10.2†
Amended and Restated 2002 Stock Plan
Def 14A
000-49802
A
March 31, 2006
10.3†
2011 Stock Plan
Def 14A
000-49802
A
April 20, 2011
10.4†
2020 Stock Plan
Def 14A
001-35727
A
April 22, 2020
10.5†
Description of Director Equity Compensation Plan
8-K
001-35727
Item 5.02
January 24, 2018
10.6†
Amended and Restated Executive Severance and
Retention Incentive Plan
10-K
000-49802
10.7
February 1, 2013
10.7†
Performance Bonus Plan
Def 14A
001-35727
A
April 28, 2014
10.8†
Executive Severance and Retention Incentive Plan, as
amended and restated as of July 12, 2017
10-Q
001-35727
10.14
July 19, 2017
10.9
Revolving Credit Agreement among the Company,
Deutsche bank AG New York Branch, Goldman Sachs
Bank USA, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Morgan
Stanley Senior Funding, Inc. and Wells Fargo Bank,
N.A. and the administrative agent, dated as of July 27,
2017
10-Q
001-35727
10.15
October 18, 2017
10.10
First Amendment Agreement, dated as of March 29,
2019, among Netflix, Inc., the Lenders party thereto and
Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative
agent.
8-K
001-35727
10.1
April 1, 2019
10.11†
Form of Stock Option Agreement under the 2011 Stock
Plan
X
10.12†
Form of Stock Option Agreement under the 2020 Stock
Plan
X
21.1
List of Significant Subsidiaries
X
23.1
Consent of Ernst & Young LLP
X
24
Power of Attorney (see signature page)
31.1
Certification of Co-Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
X
31.2
Certification of Co-Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
X
31.3
Certification of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
X
32.1*
Certifications of Co-Chief Executive Officers and Chief
Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
X
66

Table of Contents
Exhibit 
Number
Exhibit Description
Incorporated by Reference
Filed 
Herewith
Form
File No.
Exhibit
Filing Date
101
The following financial statements from the Company's
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2020, formatted in Inline XBRL: (i)
Consolidated Statements of Operations, (ii) Consolidated
Statements of Comprehensive Income, (iii) Consolidated
Statements of Cash Flows, (iv) Consolidated Balance
Sheets, (v) Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Equity
and (vi) Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, tagged
as blocks of text and including detailed tags
X
104
The cover page from the Company's Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020,
formatted in Inline XBRL
X
* These certifications are not deemed filed by the SEC and are not to be incorporated by reference in any filing we make under the Securities Act of 1933 or the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, irrespective of any general incorporation language in any filings.
† Indicates a management contract or compensatory plan
67

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
 
Netflix, Inc.
Dated:
January 28, 2021
 
By:
  
/S/    REED HASTINGS
 
  
Reed Hastings
Co-Chief Executive Officer
(principal executive officer)
Dated:
January 28, 2021
 
By:
  
/S/    SPENCER NEUMANN
 
  
Spencer Neumann
Chief Financial Officer
(principal financial and accounting officer)
68

Table of Contents
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOWN ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Reed Hastings and Spencer
Neumann, and each of them, as his true and lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place,
and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments to this Report, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and other documents in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each of them, full power and authority to do and
perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully to all intents and purposes as he might or could do in
person, hereby ratifying and confirming that all said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them or their or his substitute or substituted, may lawfully do or cause
to be done by virtue thereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
Signature
Title
Date
/S/    REED HASTINGS
President, Co-Chief Executive Officer and Director (principal
executive officer)
January 28, 2021
Reed Hastings
/S/    TED SARANDOS
Co-Chief Executive Officer, Chief Content Officer and Director
(principal executive officer)
January 28, 2021
Ted Sarandos
/S/    SPENCER NEUMANN
Chief Financial Officer (principal financial and accounting officer)
January 28, 2021
Spencer Neumann
/S/    RICHARD BARTON
Director
January 28, 2021
Richard Barton
/S/  RODOLPHE BELMER
Director
January 28, 2021
Rodolphe Belmer
/S/    MATHIAS DÖPFNER
Director
January 28, 2021
Mathias Döpfner
/S/    TIMOTHY M. HALEY
Director
January 28, 2021
Timothy M. Haley
/S/    JAY C. HOAG
Director
January 28, 2021
Jay C. Hoag
/S/    LESLIE J. KILGORE
Director
January 28, 2021
Leslie J. Kilgore
/S/    STRIVE MASIYIWA
Director
January 28, 2021
Strive Masiyiwa
/S/    ANN MATHER
Director
January 28, 2021
Ann Mather
/S/   BRAD SMITH
Director
January 28, 2021
Brad Smith
69

Table of Contents
/S/   ANNE SWEENEY
Director
January 28, 2021
Anne Sweeney
70

EXHIBIT 10.11
NETFLIX, INC. 2011 STOCK PLAN
GLOBAL MONTHLY-GRANT STOCK OPTION AGREEMENT
Unless specifically indicated in this Global Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement, including any addendum
attached hereto (“Addendum”) containing country-specific terms and conditions (collectively, this “Agreement”), the terms
defined in the 2011 Stock Plan (the “Plan”) will have the same defined meanings in this Agreement.
I.
NOTICE OF STOCK OPTION GRANT
From time to time during your employment with the Company or one of its Subsidiaries, you (also known as the
“Optionee”) may be granted Options to purchase Common Stock of the Company, subject to the terms and conditions of the
Plan and this Agreement. Upon each grant, the number of Shares granted, the date of grant, and the exercise price per share (the
“Exercise Price”) shall be communicated to you by the Company. All Options granted to you pursuant to this Agreement shall
be vested upon grant and treated as Nonstatutory Stock Options (“NSOs”). At present, the Company grants options on the first
trading day of each month in accordance with the Company’s disclosed stock option formulae. Notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, the Company retains the right to change the terms of this Agreement for any grants that are made to you after
announcement of the changed terms, including the timing of grants, the disclosed stock option formulae or any inputs thereto.
You acknowledge and agree that nothing in this Agreement constitutes an express or implied promise of continued grants, or
benefits in lieu of grants, even if grants have been made in the past; it being expressly understood that grants to employees are,
at all times, made in the sole and absolute discretion of the Administrator.
Vesting Schedule:
Options granted under this Agreement shall be vested immediately upon grant.
Termination Period:
In no event may Options granted hereunder be exercised later than the ten-year anniversary of the date of grant (the
Option’s “Term”).
II.
AGREEMENT
A.
Grant of Option.
All Options granted to you hereunder by the Administrator are subject to all of the terms and conditions of the Plan,
which is incorporated herein by reference. For example, but not by way of limitation, the Plan contains important provisions
regarding termination and expiration of Options in the event of a Change in Control of the Company. Notwithstanding any
contrary provision of this Agreement, in the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions of the Plan and the terms and
conditions of this Agreement, the terms and conditions of the Plan shall prevail.

EXHIBIT 10.11
B.
Nature of Grant.
In accepting the Options, you acknowledge, understand and agree that:
1.
the  Plan  is  established  voluntarily  by  the  Company,  is  discretionary  in  nature,  and  may  be  amended,
suspended or terminated by the Company at any time, to the extent permitted by the Plan;
2.
you are voluntarily participating in the Plan;
3.
unless you do allocate a portion of your salary towards the acquisition of the Options (to the extent
permitted by the Company and by applicable laws), the Options and any Shares acquired thereunder, and the income from
and value of same, are not intended to replace any compensation owed to you by the Company or, if different, your
employer (the "Employer");
4.
regardless of whether you allocate salary toward the acquisition of Options, the Options and any Shares
acquired thereunder, and the income from and value of same, are not part of normal or expected compensation for purposes of
calculating any severance, resignation, termination, redundancy, dismissal, end-of-service payments, bonuses, long-service
awards, pension or retirement or welfare benefits or similar payments;
5.
the future value of the Shares underlying the Options is unknown, indeterminable, and cannot
be predicted with certainty;
6.
if the underlying Shares do not increase in value, the Options will have no value;
7.
if you exercise the Options and acquire Shares, the value of such Shares may increase or decrease in
value, even below the Exercise Price;
8.
no claim or entitlement to compensation or damages shall arise from forfeiture of the Options;
9.
unless otherwise provided in the Plan or by the Company in its discretion, the Options and the benefits
evidenced by this Agreement do not create any entitlement to have the Options or any such benefits transferred to, or assumed
by, another company nor to be exchanged, cashed out or substituted for, in connection with any corporate transaction affecting
the Shares;
10.
unless otherwise agreed with the Company, the Options and any Shares acquired thereunder, and the
income from and value of same, are not granted as consideration for, or in connection with, the service you may provide as a
director of a Subsidiary; and
11.
if you provide services outside the U.S.,
i.
where applicable, neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries shall be liable for any foreign
exchange rate fluctuation between your local currency and the United States

EXHIBIT 10.11
Dollar that may affect the number and value of the Options or of any amounts due to you pursuant to the exercise of the Options
or the subsequent sale of any Shares acquired upon exercise; and
ii.
regardless of whether you allocate salary toward the acquisition of Options, the Options and any
Shares acquired thereunder, and the income from and value of same, are not part of normal or expected compensation for any
purpose.
C.
Exercise of Option.
1.
Right to Exercise. An Option granted hereunder is exercisable during the applicable Option’s Term in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Plan and this Agreement.
2.
Method of Exercise. An Option granted hereunder is exercisable by delivery of an exercise notice, in the
form of exercise notice found on the Company’s intranet site or as otherwise available from the Company (the “Exercise
Notice”), which shall state the election to exercise an Option, the number of Shares in respect of which such Option is being
exercised (the “Exercised Shares”), the date of grant of such Option, and such other representations and agreements as may be
required by the Company pursuant to the provisions of the Plan. The Exercise Notice shall be properly completed by Optionee
and delivered to the Stock Plan Administrator of the Company (or his or her designee). The Exercise Notice shall be
accompanied by payment of the aggregate Exercise Price as to all Exercised Shares. An Option shall be deemed to be exercised
upon receipt by the Company of such fully executed Exercise Notice accompanied by such aggregate Exercise Price.
The Company will not be required to issue any certificate or certificates for Shares hereunder prior to fulfillment of all
the following conditions: (a) the admission of such Shares to listing on all stock exchanges on which such class of stock is then
listed; (b) the completion of any registration or other qualification of such Shares under any U.S. or non-U.S. state or federal law
or under the rulings or regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) or any other regulatory body,
which the Administrator, in its absolute discretion, deems necessary or advisable (c) the obtaining of any approval or other
clearance from any U.S. or non-U.S. governmental agency, which the Administrator, in its absolute discretion, determines to be
necessary or advisable; and (d) the lapse of such reasonable period of time following the date of exercise as the Administrator
may establish from time to time for reasons of administrative convenience. Optionee understands that the Company is under no
obligation to register or qualify the Common Stock with the SEC or any other U.S. or non-U.S. state or federal securities
commission or to seek approval or clearance from any governmental authority for the issuance or sale of the Shares. Further,
Optionee agrees that the Company shall have unilateral authority to amend the Plan and the Agreement without Optionee’s
consent to the extent necessary to comply with securities or other laws applicable to the issuance of Shares.
Assuming such compliance, for tax purposes the Exercised Shares shall be considered transferred to Optionee on the
date the applicable Option is exercised with respect to such Exercised Shares.
D.
Method of Payment.

EXHIBIT 10.11
Payment of the aggregate Exercise Price shall be by any of the following, or a combination thereof, at the election of
Optionee, unless otherwise provided in the Addendum:
1.
cash;
2.
check;
3.
consideration received by the Company under a cashless exercise program implemented by the
Company in connection with the Plan; or
4.
for U.S. taxpayers only, surrender of other Shares which (i) in the case of Shares acquired from the
Company, have been owned by Optionee for more than six (6) months on the date of surrender, and (ii) have a Fair Market
Value on the date of surrender equal to the aggregate Exercise Price of the Exercised Shares.
E.
Non-Transferability of Option.
Unless determined otherwise by the Administrator, an Option granted hereunder may not be sold, pledged, assigned,
hypothecated, transferred, or disposed of in any manner other than by will or by the laws of descent or distribution and may be
exercised, during the lifetime of the Optionee, only by the Optionee. If the Administrator makes an Option transferable, such Option
will contain such additional terms and conditions as the Administrator deems appropriate. Unless otherwise determined by the
Administrator, the Optionee may, subject to such terms and conditions as the Administrator deems advisable, assign or transfer all or
part of vested Options during an Optionee’s lifetime to (a) Optionee’s spouse, former spouse or dependent pursuant to a court-
approved domestic relations order that relates to the provision of child support, alimony payments or marital property rights, or (b)
trust or other similar estate planning entity that is solely for the benefit of the Optionee and/or the Optionee’s immediate family. In
such case, the transferee shall receive and hold the Options subject to the provisions of this section, and there shall be no further
assignation or transfer of the Options. The terms of the Plan and this Agreement shall be binding upon the executors, administrators,
heirs, successors and assigns of Optionee.
F.
Tax Consequences and Responsibilities.
Optionee acknowledges that, regardless of any action taken by the Company or the Employer, the ultimate liability for
all income tax, social insurance, payroll tax, fringe benefits tax, payment on account or other tax-related items related to
Optionee’s participation in the Plan and legally applicable to Optionee (“Tax-Related Items”) is and remains Optionee’s
responsibility and may exceed the amount actually withheld by the Company or the Employer. Optionee further acknowledges
that the Company and/or the Employer (i) make no representations or undertakings regarding the treatment of any Tax-Related
Items in connection with any aspect of the Option, including, but not limited to, the grant, vesting or exercise of the Option,
the subsequent sale of Shares acquired pursuant to such exercise and the receipt of any dividends; and (ii) do not commit to
and are under no obligation to structure the terms of the grant or any aspect of the Option to reduce or eliminate Optionee’s
liability for Tax-Related Items or achieve any particular tax result. Further, if Optionee is subject to Tax-Related Items in more
than one jurisdiction, Optionee acknowledges that the Company and/or the Employer (or former employer, as applicable) may
be required to withhold or account for Tax-Related Items in more than one jurisdiction.

EXHIBIT 10.11
Prior to the relevant taxable or tax withholding event, as applicable, Optionee agrees to make adequate arrangements
satisfactory to the Company and/or the Employer to satisfy all Tax-Related Items. In this regard, Optionee authorizes the
Company and/or the Employer, or their respective agents, at their discretion, to satisfy their withholding obligations with regard
to all Tax-Related Items by withholding from proceeds of the sale of Shares acquired at exercise of the Options either through a
voluntary sale or through a mandatory sale arranged by the Company (on Optionee’s behalf pursuant to this authorization
without further consent).
The Company may withhold or account for Tax-Related Items by considering maximum applicable rates, in which case
Optionee may receive a cash refund of any over-withheld amount not remitted to tax authorities on Optionee’s behalf and will
have no entitlement to the Shares equivalent.
Finally, Optionee agrees to pay to the Company or the Employer, including through withholding from Optionee’s wages
or other cash compensation paid to Optionee by the Company and/or the Employer, any amount of Tax-Related Items that the
Company or the Employer may be required to withhold or account for as a result of Optionee’s participation in the Plan that
cannot be satisfied by the means previously described. The Company may refuse to issue or deliver the Shares or the proceeds
of the sale of Shares, if Optionee fails to comply with his or her obligations in connection with the Tax-Related Items.
G.
Rights as a Stockholder.
Neither you nor any person claiming under or through you shall have any of the rights or privileges of a stockholder of
the Company in respect of any Shares deliverable hereunder unless and until certificates representing such Shares shall have
been issued (which may occur electronically), recorded on the records of the Company or its transfer agents or registrars, and
delivered to Optionee. After such issuance, recordation and delivery, you will have all the rights of a stockholder of the
Company with respect to voting such Shares and receipt of dividends and distributions on such Shares.
H.
Address for Notices.
Any notice to be given to the Company under the terms of this Agreement shall be addressed to the Company at Netflix,
Inc., Attention: Employee Services, 100 Winchester Circle, Los Gatos, CA 95032 (streamingemployeeservices@netflix.com),
or at such other address as the Company may hereafter designate in writing.
I.
Administrator Authority.
The Administrator shall have the power to interpret the Plan and this Agreement and to adopt such rules for the
administration, interpretation and application of the Plan as are consistent therewith and to interpret or revoke any such rules.
All actions taken and all interpretations and determinations made by the Administrator in good faith shall be final and binding
upon you, the Company and all other interested persons. The Administrator shall not be personally liable for any action,
determination or interpretation made in good faith with respect to the Plan or this Agreement.
J.
Electronic Delivery and Acceptance.

EXHIBIT 10.11
The Company may, in its sole discretion, decide to deliver any documents related to Options awarded under the Plan or
future Options that may be awarded under the Plan by electronic means or request Optionee’s consent to participate in the Plan
by electronic means. You hereby consent to receive such documents by electronic delivery and agree to participate in the Plan
through any online or electronic system established and maintained by the Company or a third party designated by the Company.
K.
Entire Agreement.
The Plan is incorporated herein by reference. The Plan, this Agreement and any incidental grant or enrollment
documents, including any addendum and appendix attached thereto, constitute the entire agreement of the parties with respect
to the subject matter hereof and supersede in their entirety all other prior undertakings and agreements of the Company and
Optionee with respect to the subject matter hereof.
L.
Venue.
For purposes of any action, lawsuit or other proceedings brought to enforce this Agreement, relating to it, or arising
from it, the parties hereby submit to and consent to the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Santa Clara County,
California, or the federal courts for the United States for the Northern District of California, and no other courts, where this
grant is made and/or to be performed.
M.
No Guarantee of Continued Service.
The transactions contemplated hereunder do not constitute an express or implied promise of continued engagement as a
Service Provider for the term of the Option, or any period at all, and shall not interfere with your right or the right of the
Employer to terminate your relationship as a Service Provider at any time, with or without cause.
N.
No Advice Regarding Grant.
The Company is not providing any tax, legal or financial advice, nor is the Company making any recommendations
regarding Optionee’s participation in the Plan, or Optionee’s acquisition or sale of the Shares. Optionee should consult with his
or her own personal tax, legal and financial advisors regarding his or her participation in the Plan before taking any action
related to the Plan.
O.
Language.
Optionee acknowledges that he or she is proficient in the English language and understands the content of this
Agreement and other Plan-related materials. If Optionee has received this Agreement, or any other document related to the
Options and/or the Plan translated into a language other than English and if the meaning of the translated version is different
than the English version, the English version will control.
P.
Severability.

EXHIBIT 10.11
The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any one or more provisions are determined to be illegal or
otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions shall nevertheless be binding and enforceable.
Q.
Addendum.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this Global Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement, the Option grant shall be subject
to any special terms and conditions set forth in any Addendum to this Global Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement for
Optionee’s country. Moreover, if Optionee transfers employment or relocates to one of the countries included in any
Addendum, the special
terms and conditions for such country will apply to Optionee, to the extent the Company determines that the application of such
terms and conditions is necessary or advisable for legal or administrative reasons. The Addendum constitutes part of this Global
Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement.
R.
Imposition of Other Requirements.
The Company reserves the right to impose other requirements on Optionee’s participation in the Plan, on the Options
and on any Shares purchased upon exercise of the Options, to the extent the Company determines it is necessary or advisable for
legal or administrative reasons, and to require Optionee to sign any additional agreements or undertakings that may be necessary
to accomplish the foregoing.
S.
Waiver.
Optionee acknowledges that a waiver by the Company of breach of any provision of this Agreement shall not operate or
be construed as a waiver of any other provision of this Agreement, or of any subsequent breach by Optionee or any other
optionees.
T.
Insider Trading Restrictions/Market Abuse Laws.
Optionee acknowledges that he or she is subject to the Netflix, Inc. Insider Trading Policy and that Optionee has
reviewed and agreed to this policy. Further, Optionee acknowledges that, depending on his or her country, broker’s country, or
the country in which the Shares are listed, he or she may be subject to insider trading restrictions and/or market abuse laws in
applicable jurisdictions, which may affect his or her ability to accept, acquire, sell or attempt to sell, or other dispose of the
Shares, rights to Shares, or rights linked to the value of Shares, during such times as Optionee is considered to have “inside
information” regarding the Company (as defined by the laws or regulations in applicable jurisdictions, including the U.S. and
Optionee’s country). Local insider trading laws and regulations may prohibit the cancellation or amendment of orders Optionee
placed before possessing inside information. Furthermore, Optionee may be prohibited from (i) disclosing insider information
to any third party, including fellow employees (other than on a “need to know” basis) and (ii) “tipping” third parties or causing
them to otherwise buy or sell securities. Any restrictions under these laws or regulations are separate from and in addition to
any restrictions that may be imposed under the Netflix, Inc. Insider Trading Policy. Optionee acknowledges that it is Optionee’s
responsibility to comply with any applicable restrictions, and Optionee should speak to his or her personal advisor on this
matter.

EXHIBIT 10.11
U.
Foreign Asset and Account Reporting.
Optionee’s country may have certain exchange control and/or foreign asset/account reporting requirements which may
affect Optionee’s ability to acquire or hold Shares under the Plan or cash received from participating in the Plan (including from
any dividends received or sale proceeds resulting from the sale of Shares) in a brokerage or bank account outside of Optionee’s
country. Optionee may be required to report such accounts, assets or transactions to the tax or other authorities in Optionee’s
country. Optionee also may be required to repatriate sale proceeds or other funds received as a result of Optionee’s participation
in the Plan to his or her country through a designated bank or broker and/or within a certain time after receipt. Optionee
acknowledges that it is Optionee’s responsibility to comply with any applicable regulations, and that Optionee should speak to
Optionee’s personal advisor on this matter.
***
The Options granted hereunder are granted under and governed by the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement. By
accepting this Option, (1) you confirm that you have reviewed the Plan and this Agreement in their entirety, have had an
opportunity to obtain the advice of counsel prior to executing this Agreement and fully understand all provisions of the Plan and
Agreement, and (2) you agree to accept as binding, conclusive and final all decisions or interpretations of the Administrator upon
any questions relating to the Plan and Agreement. You must promptly notify the Company in writing (including electronically)
of any change in your residence address.

EXHIBIT 10.12
NETFLIX, INC.
2020 STOCK PLAN
GLOBAL MONTHLY-GRANT STOCK OPTION AGREEMENT
Unless specifically indicated in this Global Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement, including any addendum attached
hereto (“Addendum”) containing country-specific terms and conditions (collectively, this “Agreement”), the terms defined in
the 2020 Stock Plan (the “Plan”) will have the same defined meanings in this Agreement.
I.
NOTICE OF STOCK OPTION GRANT
From time to time during your employment with the Company or one of its Subsidiaries, you (also known as the
“Optionee”) may be granted Options to purchase Common Stock of the Company, subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan
and this Agreement. Upon each grant, the number of Shares granted, the date of grant, and the exercise price per share (the
“Exercise Price”) shall be communicated to you by the Company. All Options granted to you pursuant to this Agreement shall be
vested upon grant and treated as Non-statutory Stock Options (“NSOs”). At present, the Company grants options on the first
trading day of each month in accordance with the Company’s disclosed stock option formulae. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, the Company retains the right to change the terms of this Agreement for any grants that are made to you after
announcement of the changed terms, including the timing of grants, the disclosed stock option formulae or any inputs thereto. You
acknowledge and agree that nothing in this Agreement constitutes an express or implied promise of continued grants, or benefits
in lieu of grants, even if grants have been made in the past; it being expressly understood that grants to employees are, at all times,
made in the sole and absolute discretion of the Administrator.
Vesting Schedule:
Options granted under this Agreement shall be vested immediately upon grant.
Termination Period:
In no event may Options granted hereunder be exercised later than the ten-year anniversary of the date of grant
(the Option’s “Term”).
II.
AGREEMENT
A.
Grant of Option.
All Options granted to Optionee hereunder by the Administrator are subject to all of the terms and conditions of the Plan,
which is incorporated herein by reference. For example, but not by way of limitation, the Plan contains important provisions
regarding termination and expiration of Options in the event of a Change in Control of the Company. Notwithstanding any
1

EXHIBIT 10.12
contrary provision of this Agreement, in the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions of the Plan and the terms and
conditions of this Agreement, the terms and conditions of the Plan shall prevail.
B.
Nature of Grant.
In accepting the Options, Optionee acknowledges, understands and agrees that:
1.
the Plan is established voluntarily by the Company, is discretionary in nature, and may be amended,
suspended or terminated by the Company at any time, to the extent permitted by the Plan;
2.
Optionee is voluntarily participating in the Plan;
3.
unless Optionee allocates a portion of his or her salary towards the acquisition of the Options (to the extent
permitted by the Company and by applicable laws), the Options and any Shares acquired thereunder, and the income from and
value of same, are not intended to replace any compensation owed to Optionee by the Company or, if different, Optionee’s
employer (the “Employer”);
4.
the Options and any Shares acquired thereunder, and the income from and value of same, are not part of
normal or expected compensation for purposes of calculating any severance, resignation, termination, redundancy, dismissal,
end-of-service payments, bonuses, holiday pay, long-service awards, pension or retirement or welfare benefits or similar
payments;
5.
the future value of the Shares underlying the Options is unknown, indeterminable, and cannot be
predicted with certainty;
6.
if the underlying Shares do not increase in value, the Options will have no value;
7.
if Optionee exercises the Options and acquires Shares, the value of such Shares may increase or decrease in
value, even below the Exercise Price;
8.
no claim or entitlement to compensation or damages shall arise from forfeiture of the Options;
9.
unless otherwise provided in the Plan or by the Company in its discretion, the Options and the benefits
evidenced by this Agreement do not create any entitlement to have the Options or any such benefits transferred to, or assumed
by, another company nor to be exchanged, cashed out or substituted for, in connection with any corporate transaction affecting
the Shares;
10.
unless  otherwise  agreed  with  the  Company,  the  Options  and  any  Shares  acquired  thereunder,  and  the
income from and value of same, are not granted as consideration for, or in connection with, the service Optionee may provide
as a director of a Subsidiary; and
2

EXHIBIT 10.12
11.
if Optionee provides services outside the U.S.,
i.
where applicable, neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries shall be liable for any
foreign exchange rate fluctuation between Optionee’s local currency and the United States Dollar that may affect the number and
value of the Options or of any amounts due to Optionee pursuant to the exercise of the Options or the subsequent sale of any
Shares acquired upon exercise; and
ii.
the Options and any Shares acquired thereunder, and the income from and value of same,
are not part of normal or expected compensation for any purpose.
C.
Exercise of Option.
1.
Right to Exercise. An Option granted hereunder is exercisable during the applicable Option’s Term in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Plan and this Agreement.
2.
Method of Exercise. An Option granted hereunder is exercisable by delivery of an exercise notice, in the
form of exercise notice found on the Company’s intranet site or as otherwise available from the Company (the “Exercise Notice”),
which shall state the election to exercise an Option, the number of Shares in respect of which such Option is being exercised (the
“Exercised Shares”), the date of grant of such Option, and such other representations and agreements as may be required by the
Company pursuant to the provisions of the Plan. The Exercise Notice shall be properly completed by Optionee and delivered to
the Stock Plan Administrator of the Company (or his or her designee). The Exercise Notice shall be accompanied by payment of
the aggregate Exercise Price as to all Exercised Shares. An Option shall be deemed to be exercised upon receipt by the Company
of such fully executed Exercise Notice accompanied by such aggregate Exercise Price.
The Company will not be required to issue any certificate or certificates for Shares hereunder prior to fulfillment of all the
following conditions: (a) the admission of such Shares to listing on all stock exchanges on which such class of stock is then
listed; (b) the completion of any registration or other qualification of such Shares under any U.S. or non-U.S. state or federal law
or under the rulings or regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) or any other regulatory body,
which the Administrator, in its absolute discretion, deems necessary or advisable; (c) the obtaining of any approval or other
clearance from any U.S. or non-U.S. governmental agency, which the Administrator, in its absolute discretion, determines to be
necessary or advisable; and (d) the lapse of such reasonable period of time following the date of exercise as the Administrator
may establish from time to time for reasons of administrative convenience. Optionee understands that the Company is under no
obligation to register or qualify the Common Stock with the SEC or any other U.S. or non-U.S. state or federal securities
commission or to seek approval or clearance from any governmental authority for the issuance or sale of the Shares. Further,
Optionee agrees that the Company shall have
3

EXHIBIT 10.12
unilateral authority to amend the Plan and the Agreement without Optionee’s consent to the extent necessary to comply with
securities or other laws applicable to the issuance of Shares.
Assuming such compliance, for tax purposes the Exercised Shares shall be considered transferred to Optionee on the date
the applicable Option is exercised with respect to such Exercised Shares.
D.
Method of Payment.
Payment of the aggregate Exercise Price shall be by any of the following, or a combination thereof, at the election of
Optionee, unless otherwise provided in the Addendum:
1.
cash;
2.
check;
3.
consideration received by the Company under a cashless exercise program implemented by the Company in
connection with the Plan, including, without limitation, a net exercise program to the extent permitted by the Company and by
applicable laws, whereby Shares are held back to cover the Exercise Price; or
4.
for U.S. taxpayers only, surrender of other Shares which (i) in the case of Shares acquired from the
Company, have been owned by Optionee for more than six (6) months on the date of surrender, and (ii) have a Fair Market
Value on the date of surrender equal to the aggregate Exercise Price of the Exercised Shares.
E.
Non-Transferability of Option.
Unless determined otherwise by the Administrator, an Option granted hereunder may not be sold, pledged, assigned,
hypothecated, transferred, or disposed of in any manner other than by will or by the laws of descent or distribution and may be
exercised, during the lifetime of the Optionee, only by the Optionee. If the Administrator makes an Option transferable, such Option
will contain such additional terms and conditions as the Administrator deems appropriate. Unless otherwise determined by the
Administrator, the Optionee may, subject to such terms and conditions as the Administrator deems advisable, assign or transfer all or
part of vested Options during an Optionee’s lifetime to (a) Optionee’s spouse, former spouse or dependent pursuant to a court-
approved domestic relations order that relates to the provision of child support, alimony payments or marital property rights, or (b)
trust or other similar estate planning entity that is solely for the benefit of the Optionee and/or the Optionee’s immediate family. In
such case, the transferee shall receive and hold the Options subject to the provisions of this section, and there shall be no further
assignation or transfer of the Options. The terms of the Plan and this Agreement shall be binding upon the executors, administrators,
heirs, successors and assigns of Optionee.
F.
Tax Consequences and Responsibilities.
4

EXHIBIT 10.12
Optionee acknowledges that, regardless of any action taken by the Company or the Employer, the ultimate liability for all
income tax, social insurance, payroll tax, fringe benefits tax, payment on account or other tax-related items related to Optionee’s
participation in the Plan and legally applicable to Optionee (“Tax-Related Items”) is and remains Optionee’s responsibility and
may exceed the amount, if any, actually withheld by the Company or the Employer. Optionee further acknowledges that the
Company and/or the Employer (i) make no representations or undertakings regarding the treatment of any Tax-Related Items in
connection with any aspect of the Option, including, but not limited to, the grant, vesting or exercise of the Option, the
subsequent sale of Shares acquired pursuant to such exercise and the receipt of any dividends; and (ii) do not commit to and are
under no obligation to structure the terms of the grant or any aspect of the Option to reduce or eliminate Optionee’s liability for
Tax-Related Items or achieve any particular tax result. Further, if Optionee is subject to Tax-Related Items in more than one
jurisdiction, Optionee acknowledges that the Company and/or the Employer (or former employer, as applicable) may be required
to withhold or account for Tax-Related Items in more than one jurisdiction.
Prior to the relevant taxable or tax withholding event, as applicable, Optionee agrees to make adequate arrangements
satisfactory to the Company and/or the Employer to satisfy all Tax- Related Items. In this regard, Optionee authorizes the
Company and/or the Employer, or their respective agents, at their discretion, to satisfy their withholding obligations with regard to
all Tax-Related Items by (i) withholding from proceeds of the sale of Shares acquired upon exercise of the Option arranged by the
Company (on Optionee’s behalf pursuant to this authorization without further consent), (ii) withholding from Optionee’s wages or
other cash compensation payable to Optionee by the Company and/or a Parent or Subsidiary, (iii) withholding Shares to be issued
upon exercise of the Option and otherwise deliverable to Optionee, including, without limitation, a net exercise program whereby
Shares are held back, or (v) any other method of withholding determined by the Company and, to the extent required by
applicable laws or the Plan, approved by the Committee.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if Optionee is an officer of the Company subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act (a
“Section 16 Officer”), then the Company will withhold Shares to be issued upon exercise of the Option in order to satisfy the
minimum statutory amount required to be withheld pursuant to the Tax-Related Items with respect to such Section 16 Officer in
accordance with method (iii) above, unless the use of such withholding method is impermissible or impracticable under applicable
laws, in which case the withholding obligation will be satisfied by method (ii) above, provided that, in the event the Section 16
Officer has elected to satisfy the Tax-Related Items through method (i) as permitted hereunder or has previously elected a Section
16 Officer Withholding Amount (as defined below) greater than the applicable minimum statutory amount required to be withheld
pursuant to the Tax-Related Items, the Company shall give effect to such election(s). The “Section 16 Officer Withholding
Amount” in respect of any issuance of Shares pursuant hereto means the (i) applicable minimum statutory amount required to be
withheld pursuant to the Tax-Related Items, or (ii) such greater amount, up to the sum of all applicable maximum rates, applied in
respect of the applicable issuance of Shares with respect to the Section 16 Officer at such Section 16 Officer’s election.
5

EXHIBIT 10.12
The Company and/or the Employer may withhold or account for Tax-Related Items by considering statutory withholding
rates or other withholding rates, including maximum rates applicable in Optionee’s jurisdiction(s), except as provided above for
Section 16 Officers. If Tax-Related Items are withheld at a rate which exceeds Optionee's obligation for Tax-Related Items,
Optionee may receive a cash refund of any over-withheld amount not remitted to tax authorities on Optionee’s behalf and will
have no entitlement to the Common Stock equivalent, or if not refunded, Optionee may seek a refund from the local tax
authorities. In the event Tax- Related Items are withheld at a rate which is less than Optionee’s obligations for Tax-Related
Items, Optionee may be required to pay any additional Tax-Related Items directly to the applicable tax authority or to the
Company and/or the Employer. If the obligation for Tax- Related Items is satisfied by withholding Shares, for tax purposes,
Optionee shall be deemed to have been issued the full number of Shares subject to the exercised Option, notwithstanding that a
number of the Shares is held back solely for the purpose of paying the Tax-Related Items.
Finally, Optionee agrees to pay to the Company or the Employer any amount of Tax- Related Items that the Company or
the Employer may be required to withhold or account for as a result of Optionee’s participation in the Plan that cannot be satisfied
by the means previously described. The Company may refuse to issue or deliver the Shares or the proceeds of the sale of Shares, if
Optionee fails to comply with his or her obligations in connection with the Tax- Related Items.
G.
Rights as a Stockholder.
Neither Optionee nor any person claiming under or through Optionee shall have any of the rights or privileges of a
stockholder of the Company in respect of any Shares deliverable hereunder unless and until certificates representing such
Shares shall have been issued (which may occur electronically), recorded on the records of the Company or its transfer agents
or registrars, and delivered to Optionee. After such issuance, recordation and delivery, Optionee will have all the rights of a
stockholder of the Company with respect to voting such Shares and receipt of dividends and distributions on such Shares.
H.
Address for Notices.
Any notice to be given to the Company under the terms of this Agreement shall be addressed to the Company at Netflix,
Inc., Attention: Employee Services, 100 Winchester Circle, Los Gatos, CA 95032, U.S.A.
(streamingemployeeservices@netflix.com), or at such other address as the Company may hereafter designate in writing.
I.
Administrator Authority.
The Administrator shall have the power to interpret the Plan and this Agreement and to adopt such rules for the
administration, interpretation and application of the Plan as are consistent therewith and to interpret or revoke any such rules. All
actions taken and all interpretations and determinations made by the Administrator in good faith shall be final and binding upon
Optionee, the Company and all other interested persons. The Administrator shall
6

EXHIBIT 10.12
not be personally liable for any action, determination or interpretation made in good faith with respect to the Plan or this
Agreement.
J.
Electronic Delivery and Participation.
The Company may, in its sole discretion, decide to deliver any documents related to Options awarded under the Plan or
future Options that may be awarded under the Plan by electronic means or request Optionee’s consent to participate in the Plan by
electronic means. Optionee hereby consents to receive such documents by electronic delivery and agrees to participate in the Plan
through any online or electronic system established and maintained by the Company or a third party designated by the Company.
K.
Entire Agreement.
The Plan is incorporated herein by reference. The Plan, this Agreement and any incidental grant or enrollment
documents, including any addendum and appendix attached thereto, constitute the entire agreement of the parties with respect to
the subject matter hereof and supersede in their entirety all other prior undertakings and agreements of the Company and
Optionee with respect to the subject matter hereof.
L.
Governing Law and Venue.
This Agreement shall be administered, construed and governed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware, but
without regard to its conflict of law rules. For purposes of any action, lawsuit or other proceedings brought to enforce this
Agreement, relating to it, or arising from it, the parties hereby submit to and consent to the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the
state and federal courts situated within New Castle County, Delaware and waive any objection the parties might have to personal
jurisdiction or venue in those courts.
M.
No Guarantee of Continued Service.
The transactions contemplated hereunder do not constitute an express or implied promise of continued engagement as a
Service Provider for the term of the Option, or any period at all, and shall not interfere with Optionee’s right or the right of the
Employer to terminate Optionee’s relationship as a Service Provider at any time, with or without cause.
N.
No Advice Regarding Grant.
The Company is not providing any tax, legal or financial advice, nor is the Company making any recommendations
regarding Optionee’s participation in the Plan, or Optionee’s acquisition or sale of the Shares. Optionee should consult with his or
her own personal tax, legal and financial advisors regarding his or her participation in the Plan before taking any action related to
the Plan.
O.
Language.
7

EXHIBIT 10.12
Optionee acknowledges that he or she is proficient in the English language, or had the opportunity to consult with an
advisor who is proficient in the English language so as to enable Optionee to understand the provisions of this Agreement and
the Plan, and understands the content of this Agreement and other Plan-related materials. If Optionee has received this
Agreement, or any other document related to the Options and/or the Plan translated into a language other than English and if the
meaning of the translated version is different than the English version, the English version will control.
P.
Severability.
The provisions of this Agreement are severable and if any one or more provisions are determined to be illegal or otherwise
unenforceable, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions shall nevertheless be binding and enforceable.
Q.
Addendum.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this Global Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement, the Option grant shall be subject
to any additional terms and conditions set forth in any Addendum to this Global Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement for
Optionee’s country.
Moreover, if Optionee transfers employment or relocates to one of the countries included in any Addendum, the additional terms
and conditions for such country will apply to Optionee, to the extent the Company determines that the application of such terms
and conditions is necessary or advisable for legal or administrative reasons. The Addendum constitutes part of this Global
Monthly-Grant Stock Option Agreement.
R.
Imposition of Other Requirements.
The Company reserves the right to impose other requirements on Optionee’s participation in the Plan, on the Options and
on any Shares purchased upon exercise of the Options, to the extent the Company determines it is necessary or advisable for legal
or administrative reasons, and to require Optionee to sign any additional agreements or undertakings that may be necessary to
accomplish the foregoing.
S.
Waiver.
Optionee acknowledges that a waiver by the Company of breach of any provision of this Agreement shall not operate or
be construed as a waiver of any other provision of this Agreement, or of any subsequent breach by Optionee or any other
optionees.
T.
Insider Trading Restrictions/Market Abuse Laws.
Optionee acknowledges that he or she is subject to the Netflix, Inc. Insider Trading Policy and that Optionee has reviewed
and agreed to this policy. Further, Optionee acknowledges that, depending on his or her country, broker’s country, or the country
in which the Shares are listed, he or she may be subject to insider trading restrictions and/or market abuse laws in applicable
jurisdictions, which may affect his or her ability to accept, acquire, sell or
8

EXHIBIT 10.12
attempt to sell, or other dispose of the Shares, rights to Shares, or rights linked to the value of Shares, during such times as
Optionee is considered to have “inside information” regarding the Company (as defined by the laws or regulations in applicable
jurisdictions, including the U.S. and Optionee’s country). Local insider trading laws and regulations may prohibit the cancellation
or amendment of orders Optionee placed before possessing inside information. Furthermore, Optionee may be prohibited from (i)
disclosing insider information to any third party, including fellow employees (other than on a “need to know” basis) and (ii)
“tipping” third parties or causing them to otherwise buy or sell securities. Any restrictions under these laws or regulations are
separate from and in addition to any restrictions that may be imposed under the Netflix, Inc. Insider Trading Policy. Optionee
acknowledges that it is Optionee’s responsibility to comply with any applicable restrictions, and Optionee should speak to his or
her personal advisor on this matter.
U.
Foreign Asset and Account Reporting.
Optionee’s country may have certain exchange control and/or foreign asset/account reporting requirements which may
affect Optionee’s ability to acquire or hold Shares under the Plan or cash received from participating in the Plan (including from
any dividends received or sale proceeds resulting from the sale of Shares) in a brokerage or bank account outside of Optionee’s
country. Optionee may be required to report such accounts, assets or transactions to the tax or other authorities in Optionee’s
country. Optionee also may be required to repatriate sale proceeds or other funds received as a result of Optionee’s participation
in the Plan to his or her country through a designated bank or broker and/or within a certain time after receipt. Optionee
acknowledges that it is Optionee’s responsibility to comply with any applicable regulations, and that Optionee should speak to
Optionee’s personal advisor on this matter.
***
The Options granted hereunder are granted under and governed by the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Agreement. By
accepting this Option, (1) Optionee confirms that Optionee has reviewed the Plan and this Agreement in their entirety, has had an
opportunity to obtain the advice of counsel prior to executing this Agreement and fully understands all provisions of the Plan and
Agreement, and (2) Optionee agrees to accept as binding, conclusive and final all decisions or interpretations of the Administrator
upon any questions relating to the Plan and Agreement. Optionee must promptly notify the Company in writing (including
electronically) of any change in Optionee’s residence address.
9

Exhibit 21.1
NETFLIX, INC.
LIST OF SIGNIFICANT SUBSIDIARIES*
Legal Name
Jurisdiction
Percent Owned
Netflix Entretenimento Brasil LTDA
Brazil
100 %
Netflix International B.V.
The Netherlands
100 %
Netflix G.K.
Japan
100 %
Netflix Studios, LLC
United States
100 %
Netflix Global, LLC
United States
100 %
* Pursuant to Item 601(b)(21)(ii) of Regulation S-K, the names of other subsidiaries of Netflix Inc. are omitted
because, considered in the aggregate, they would not constitute a significant subsidiary as of the end of the
year covered by this report.

EXHIBIT 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the following Registration Statements:
(1)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-89024) pertaining to Netflix.com, Inc. 1997 Stock Plan, as amended, Netflix, Inc. 2002 Stock Plan, Netflix,
Inc. 2002 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, and Netflix.com, Inc. Stand-Alone Stock Option Agreements,
(2)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-104250) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2002 Stock Plan and Netflix, Inc. 2002 Employee Stock Purchase Plan,
(3)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-113198) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2002 Stock Plan and Netflix, Inc. 2002 Employee Stock Purchase Plan,
(4)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-123501) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2002 Stock Plan and Netflix, Inc. 2002 Employee Stock Purchase Plan,
(5)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-136403) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. Amended and Restated 2002 Stock Plan and Netflix, Inc. 2002 Employee
Stock Purchase Plan,
(6)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-145147) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2002 Employee Stock Purchase Plan,
(7)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-160946) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2002 Employee Stock Purchase Plan,
(8)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-177561) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2011 Stock Plan,
(9)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-239465) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. 2020 Stock Plan, and
(10)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 No. 333-239468) pertaining to Netflix, Inc. Post-Effective Amendment No.1 for the 2011 Stock Plan and the 2020
Stock Plan
of our reports dated January 28, 2021, with respect to the consolidated financial statements of Netflix, Inc. and the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting of Netflix, Inc. included in this Annual Report (Form 10-K) of Netflix, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2020.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
San Jose, California
January 28, 2021

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION OF CO-CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Reed Hastings, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Netflix, Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to
ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control
over financial reporting.
 
Dated: January 28, 2021
 
By:
 
   /S/ REED HASTINGS
 
 
Reed Hastings
 
 
Co-Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION OF CO-CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Ted Sarandos, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Netflix, Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to
ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control
over financial reporting.
 
Dated: January 28, 2021
 
By:
 
   /S/ TED SARANDOS
 
 
Ted Sarandos
 
 
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Chief Content Officer

EXHIBIT 31.3
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Spencer Neumann, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Netflix, Inc.;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the
registrant and have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to
ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent function):
a)
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control
over financial reporting.
 
Dated: January 28, 2021
 
By:  
/S/    SPENCER NEUMANN        
 
 
Spencer Neumann
 
 
Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATIONS OF CO-CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Reed Hastings, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that the Annual Report
on Form 10-K of Netflix, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2020 fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934 and that information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of Netflix, Inc.
Dated: January 28, 2021
 
By:
 
/S/    REED HASTINGS        
 
 
Reed Hastings
 
 
Co-Chief Executive Officer
I, Ted Sarandos, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that the Annual Report
on Form 10-K of Netflix, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2020 fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934 and that information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of Netflix, Inc.
 
Dated: January 28, 2021
 
By:
 
/S/    TED SARANDOS
 
 
Ted Sarandos
 
 
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Chief Content Officer
I, Spencer Neumann, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that the Annual
Report on Form 10-K of Netflix, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2020 fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 and that information contained in such report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Netflix, Inc.
 
Dated: January 28, 2021
 
By:
 
/S/    SPENCER NEUMANN        
 
 
Spencer Neumann
 
 
Chief Financial Officer
