ORACLE CORP
FORM 10-K
(Annual Report)
Filed 06/25/15 for the Period Ending 05/31/15
  
  
Address
500 ORACLE PARKWAY
MAIL STOP 5 OP 7
REDWOOD CITY, CA 94065
Telephone
6505067000
CIK
0001341439
Symbol
ORCL
SIC Code
7372 - Prepackaged Software
Industry
Software & Programming
Sector
Technology
Fiscal Year
05/31
http://www.edgar-online.com
© Copyright 2015, EDGAR Online, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Distribution and use of this document restricted under EDGAR Online, Inc. Terms of Use.

Table of Contents 
      
UNITED STATES  
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION  
Washington, D.C. 20549  
   
FORM 10-K  
   
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015  
OR  
   
For the transition period from              to               
Commission file number: 001-35992  
   
Oracle Corporation  
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)  
   
(650) 506-7000  
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)  
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:  
   
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:  
None  
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.    YES        NO     
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    YES        NO    
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject 
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    YES        NO     
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every Interactive Data 
File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or 
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).    YES        NO     
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405 of this chapter) is not contained 
herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference 
in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.     
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting 
company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange 
Act.  
   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    YES        NO     
The aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $136,863,594,000 based on the number of shares held 
by non-affiliates of the registrant as of May 31, 2015, and based on the closing sale price of common stock as reported by the New York Stock 
Exchange on November 28, 2014, which is the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter. This 
calculation does not reflect a determination that persons are affiliates for any other purposes.  
Number of shares of common stock outstanding as of June 18, 2015: 4,336,077,000.  
Documents Incorporated by Reference:  
Portions of the registrant’s definitive proxy statement relating to its 2015 annual stockholders’ meeting are incorporated by reference into Part III 
 
 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF 
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 
 
 
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF 
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 
Delaware 
 
54-2185193 
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization) 
 
(I.R.S. Employer 
Identification No.) 
500 Oracle Parkway 
 
Redwood City, California 
 
94065 
(Address of principal executive offices) 
 
(Zip Code) 
Title of each class 
 
Name of each exchange on which registered 
Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share 
2.25% senior notes due January 2021  
3.125% senior notes due July 2025 
 
New York Stock Exchange 
New York Stock Exchange  
New York Stock Exchange 
Large accelerated filer      
  
Accelerated filer      
Non-accelerated filer      
  
Smaller reporting company      
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company) 
  

of this Annual Report on Form 10-K where indicated.  
       

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
FISCAL YEAR 2015  
FORM 10-K  
ANNUAL REPORT  
   
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
   
 
 
  
  Page  
PART I. 
 
  
Item 1. 
 Business 
   3   
Item 1A. 
 Risk Factors 
   19   
Item 1B. 
 Unresolved Staff Comments 
   33   
Item 2. 
 Properties 
   33   
Item 3. 
 Legal Proceedings 
   33   
Item 4. 
 Mine Safety Disclosures 
   33   
PART II.  
  
Item 5. 
 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
   34   
Item 6. 
 Selected Financial Data 
   36   
Item 7. 
 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
   37   
Item 7A. 
 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
   76   
Item 8. 
 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
   80   
Item 9. 
 Changes In and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
   80   
Item 9A. 
 Controls and Procedures 
   80   
Item 9B. 
 Other Information 
   81   
PART III .  
  
Item 10. 
 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 
   82   
Item 11. 
 Executive Compensation 
   82   
Item 12. 
 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters 
   82   
Item 13. 
 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
   82   
Item 14. 
 Principal Accountant Fees and Services 
   82   
PART IV .  
  
Item 15. 
 Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 
   83   
 Signatures 
   137   

Table of Contents  
Cautionary Note on Forward-Looking Statements  
For purposes of this Annual Report, the terms “Oracle,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Oracle Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. This 
Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements that are not historical in nature, are predictive in nature, or that depend upon or refer to future 
events or conditions or otherwise contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
as amended, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These include, among other things, statements regarding:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
as well as other statements regarding our future operations, financial condition and prospects, and business strategies. Forward-looking 
statements may be preceded by, followed by or include the words “expects,”  
   
1 
  
•   our expectation that we will continue to acquire companies, products, services and technologies; 
  
•   our beliefs regarding how our acquisitions, investments and innovations will help us achieve our long-term strategic plans; 
  
•   continued realization of gains or losses with respect to our foreign currency exposures; 
  
•   our expectation that our software and cloud business’ total revenues generally will continue to increase; 
  
•   our belief that software license updates and product support revenues and margins will grow; 
  
•   our expectation that our hardware business will have lower operating margins as a percentage of revenues than our software and cloud 
business; 
  
•   our international operations providing a significant portion of our total revenues and expenses; 
  
•   our expectation that we will continue to make significant investments in research and development and related product opportunities, 
including those related to hardware products and services, and our belief that research and development efforts are essential to 
maintaining our competitive position; 
  
•   the sufficiency of our sources of funding for acquisitions, dividends, stock repurchases and other matters; 
  
•   our expectation that we will continue paying comparable cash dividends on a quarterly basis; 
  
•   our belief that we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcomes related to our tax audits and that any tax 
settlement will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or results of operations, and our assumptions 
regarding the potential U.S. income tax liability associated with any repatriation of our undistributed earnings held by our foreign 
subsidiaries; 
  
•   our estimates and current intentions regarding potential future goodwill impairment losses, if any; 
  
•   our belief that the outcome of certain legal proceedings and claims to which we are a party will not, individually or in the aggregate, 
result in losses that are materially in excess of amounts already recognized, if any; 
  
•   our expectations regarding the timing and amount of expenses relating to the Fiscal 2015 Oracle Restructuring Plan and the improved 
efficiencies in our operations that such Plan will have; 
  
•   the timing and amount of our stock repurchases; 
  
•   our expectation that seasonal trends will continue in the future; 
  
•   our expectation that we will continue to depend on third party manufacturers to build certain hardware systems products and third party 
logistics providers to deliver our products; 
  
•   our expectation that to the extent customers renew support contracts or cloud software as a service and platform as a service contracts, 
we will recognize revenues for the full contracts’ values over the respective renewal periods; 
  
•   our ability to predict quarterly hardware systems revenues; 
  
•   the timing of customer orders and delays in our ability to manufacture or deliver a few large transactions substantially affecting the 
amount of hardware systems products revenues, expenses and operating margins that we will report; 

Table of Contents  
“anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” “will,” “should,” “is designed to” and similar expressions. We claim the 
protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 for all forward-
looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These 
forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions about our business that could affect our future results and could 
cause those results or other outcomes to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might 
cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual 
Report and as may be updated in filings we make from time to time with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC), including the 
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q to be filed by us in our fiscal year 2016, which runs from June 1, 2015 to May 31, 2016.  
We have no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or 
risks, except to the extent required by applicable securities laws. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be 
drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements. New information, future events or risks 
could cause the forward-looking events we discuss in this Annual Report not to occur. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-
looking statements, which reflect our expectations only as of the date of this Annual Report.  
   
2 

Table of Contents  
PART I  
Item 1.    Business  
Oracle Corporation provides products and services that address all aspects of corporate information technology (IT) environments—application, 
platform and infrastructure—and are available to customers either via cloud computing or on-premises deployment models. Our products include 
database and middleware software, application software, cloud infrastructure software and hardware systems (Oracle Engineered Systems, 
servers, storage, networking and industry specific products), along with support and related services. We offer over 400,000 worldwide 
customers a choice of deployment models to best suit their needs including (1) the deployment of our products via our Oracle Cloud offerings, 
(2) the acquisition of Oracle products and services for an on-premises IT environment or (3) a mix of these two models.  
For customers opting for a cloud computing model, Oracle offers a wide range of services in all three primary layers of the cloud: Software as a 
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Our Oracle Cloud offerings are designed to be: rapidly 
deployable to enable customers shorter time to innovation; easily maintainable to reduce integration and testing work; and cost effective by 
requiring lower upfront customer investment. Our Oracle Cloud offerings integrate the software, hardware and services on the customers’ behalf 
in IT environments that we deploy, support and manage for the customer. We are a leader in the core technologies of cloud IT environments, 
including database and middleware software as well as enterprise applications, virtualization, clustering, large-scale systems management and 
related infrastructure. Our products and services are the building blocks of our Oracle Cloud services, our partners’ cloud services and our 
customers’ cloud IT environments.  
In addition to offering a broad spectrum of cloud products and services, Oracle for decades has developed and sold its products and services to 
our customers worldwide for use in their global data centers and on-premises IT environments. An important element of our corporate strategy is 
to continue our investments in, and innovation with respect to, our products and services that we offer through our software and cloud, hardware 
and services businesses. In fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, we invested $5.5 billion, $5.2 billion and $4.9 billion, respectively, in research and 
development to enhance our existing portfolio of products and services and to develop new products and services. We have a deep understanding 
as to how all components within IT environments—application, platform and infrastructure—interact and function with one another. We focus 
our development efforts on improving the performance, operation and integration of these differing technologies to make them more cost-
effective and easier to deploy, manage and maintain for our customers and to improve their computing performance relative to our competitors. 
After purchasing Oracle products and services, customers can continue to take advantage of Oracle’s research and development investments and 
deep IT expertise by purchasing and renewing Oracle support offerings, which may include product enhancements that we periodically deliver to 
our Oracle E-Business Suite, Siebel, PeopleSoft and JD Edwards application software products, among others, or by renewing their SaaS, PaaS 
and IaaS contracts with us.  
Oracle customers are increasingly electing to run their IT environments using our suite of Oracle Cloud offerings. As customers deploy with the 
Oracle Cloud, many are adopting a hybrid IT model whereby certain of their IT resources are deployed and managed through the Oracle Cloud, 
while other of their IT resources are deployed and managed on-premises, and both sets of resources can be managed as one. We focus the 
engineering of our products and services to best connect these different deployment models to enable flexibility, ease, agility, compatibility, 
extensibility and seamlessness.  
A selective and active acquisition program is another important element of our corporate strategy. We believe our acquisitions enhance the 
products and services that we can offer to customers, expand our customer base, provide greater scale to accelerate innovation, contribute to our 
revenues and earnings, and increase stockholder value. In recent years, we have invested billions of dollars to acquire a number of companies, 
products, services and technologies that add to, are complementary to, or have otherwise enhanced our existing offerings. We expect to continue 
to acquire companies, products, services and technologies to further our corporate strategy.  
   
3 

Table of Contents  
We have three businesses that deliver our application, platform and infrastructure technologies: software and cloud, hardware systems, and 
services. These businesses can be further divided into certain operating segments (Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, 
included elsewhere in this Annual Report, provides additional information related to our operating segments):  
   
   
   
Oracle Corporation was incorporated in 2005 as a Delaware corporation and is the successor to operations originally begun in June 1977.  
Application, Platform and Infrastructure Technologies  
Oracle’s comprehensive portfolio of application, platform and infrastructure technologies address an organization’s business, infrastructure and 
development IT requirements. Our applications, platform and infrastructure technologies are based upon industry standards and are designed to 
be enterprise grade, reliable, scalable and secure. We offer these technologies through our software and cloud, hardware and services businesses 
and deliver them through flexible and interoperable deployment models that enable customer choice and best meet customer IT needs.  
Application and Platform Technologies  
Our application and platform technologies consist of comprehensive software and cloud offerings including our SaaS and PaaS offerings, Oracle 
Applications, Oracle Database, Oracle Fusion Middleware and Java, among others, and related support.  
Our application and platform technologies are substantially built on standards-based architectures that are designed to help customers reduce the 
cost and complexity of their IT infrastructure. Our commitment to industry standards results in software that works in customer environments 
with Oracle or non-Oracle hardware or software components and that can be adapted to meet specific industry or business needs. This approach 
is designed to support customer choice and reduce customer risk. Our software offerings are substantially designed to operate on both single 
server and clustered server configurations for cloud or on-premises IT environments, and to support a choice of operating systems including 
Oracle Solaris, Oracle Linux, Microsoft Windows and third party UNIX products, among others.  
Our application and platform technologies are marketed, sold and delivered through our software and cloud business, which includes our new 
software licenses and cloud software subscriptions segment and software license updates and product support segment, among others. New 
software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues represented 26% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015 and 28% in each of fiscal 2014 
and 2013. Software license updates and product support revenues represented 49%, 47% and 46% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 
2013, respectively.  
Application Technologies  
Our application technologies are available through the purchase of an on-premises software license or via subscription to our Oracle SaaS 
offerings. Regardless of the deployment model selected, our application technologies are designed to reduce the risk, cost and complexity of our 
customers’ IT infrastructures, while supporting customer choice with flexible deployment models that readily enable agility, compatibility and 
extendibility.  
   
4 
  
•   our software and cloud business is comprised of three operating segments: (1) new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions, 
which includes our SaaS and PaaS offerings, (2) cloud infrastructure as a service and (3) software license updates and product support. 
Our software and cloud business represented 77%, 76% and 75% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively; 
  
•   our hardware systems business is comprised of two operating segments: (1) hardware systems products and (2) hardware systems 
support. Our hardware systems business represented 14% of our total revenues in each of fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013; and 
  
•   our services business is comprised of the remainder of our operating segments and offers consulting services, enhanced support services 
and education services. Our services business represented 9%, 10% and 11% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively. 

Table of Contents  
Our application technologies are designed using an industry standards-based architecture to manage and automate core business functions across 
the enterprise, as well as to help customers differentiate and innovate in those processes unique to their industries or organizations. In addition to 
applications that are deployable to meet a number of business automation requirements across a broad range of industries, we also offer industry-
specific applications through a focused strategy of investments in internal development and strategic acquisitions. Our industry specific 
applications provide solutions to customers in the communications, engineering and construction, financial services, healthcare, hospitality and 
retail, manufacturing, public and utilities sectors, among others. Our ability to offer applications to address industry specific complex processes 
provides us an opportunity to expand our customers’ knowledge of our broader product offerings and address customer specific technology 
challenges.  
Oracle Software as a Service (SaaS)  
Our broad spectrum of SaaS offerings provides customers a choice of software applications that are delivered via a cloud-based IT environment 
that we host, manage and support. Our SaaS offerings are built upon open industry standards such as SQL, Java and HTML5 for easier 
application portability, integration and development. Our SaaS offerings include a broad suite of modular, next-generation cloud software 
applications that span core business functions including human capital management (HCM), customer experience (CX), enterprise resource 
planning (ERP), enterprise performance management (EPM) and supply chain management (SCM), among others. We also offer a number of 
cloud-based industry solutions to address specific customer needs within certain industries.  
We believe the comprehensiveness of our SaaS offerings provides greater benefit to our customers and differentiates us from many of our 
competitors that offer more limited or specialized cloud-based applications. Our SaaS offerings are designed to be interoperable with one 
another, thereby limiting the integration and tuning of multiple cloud applications from multiple vendors. Our SaaS offerings are designed to 
deliver secure data isolation and flexible upgrades, self-service access controls for users, a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) for integration 
with on-premises systems, built-in social, mobile and business insight capabilities, and a high performance, high availability infrastructure based 
on our infrastructure technologies including Oracle Engineered Systems. These SaaS capabilities are designed to simplify IT environments and 
enable customers to focus resources on business growth opportunities.  
Oracle Human Capital Management Cloud  
Our HCM cloud applications are designed to be complete and integrated to help organizations find, grow and retain the best talent, enable 
collaboration, provide complete workforce insights, increase operational efficiency and enable people to connect from any device. Oracle HCM 
Cloud delivers global human resources, workforce rewards, workforce management and talent management cloud services.  
Oracle Enterprise Resource Planning Cloud  
Our ERP cloud applications are designed to be complete and integrated to help organizations achieve business insight, improve workforce 
productivity and operate globally. Oracle ERP Cloud delivers financial management, financial reporting, procurement and project portfolio 
management cloud services.  
Oracle Customer Experience Cloud  
Our CX cloud applications are designed to be complete and integrated to help organizations deliver consistent and personalized customer 
experiences across all channels, touch points and interactions. Our CX cloud applications include, among others:  
   
   
   
5 
  
•   Oracle Marketing Cloud, which is designed to personalize customer experiences on a consistent platform and to increase customer 
engagement, advocacy, and revenue generating possibilities using cross-channel, content, and social marketing solutions with integrated 
data management and activation; 
  
•   Oracle Sales Cloud, which is designed to enable sales teams to engage with their customers earlier and to generate customer orders 
more frequently via a platform that equips sales teams with processes, tools, resources, and intelligence to leverage as a part of the sales 
cycle; 

Table of Contents  
   
   
Oracle Enterprise Performance Management Cloud  
Our EPM cloud applications are designed to be integrated to help organizations improve and simplify enterprise performance reporting and 
enterprise planning processes. Oracle EPM Cloud delivers financial and management reporting and planning and budgeting cloud services.  
Oracle Supply Chain Management Cloud  
Our SCM cloud applications are designed to help organizations optimize their supply chain and innovate products quickly. Oracle SCM Cloud 
delivers transportation and global trade management, inventory and cost management, innovation management and product development cloud 
services.  
Oracle Cloud Industry Solutions  
Oracle Cloud Industry Solutions are industry specific SaaS applications that are designed to address the distinct requirements of the 
communications, financial services, healthcare, hospitality and retail, manufacturing and utilities sectors, among others.  
Oracle Data as a Service  
Oracle Data as a Service (DaaS) provides a centralized way to source, manage and furnish external data to business users through a cloud service 
for marketing and customer intelligence purposes. Oracle DaaS offerings connect business users and applications to a rich set of information to 
inform business actions with a vendor-agnostic approach so customers can activate the data in an application or engine of choice.  
Oracle Applications  
We license Oracle Applications software for use in on-premises, data center and related IT environments to manage and automate core business 
functions across the enterprise including human capital and talent management; customer experience and customer relationship management; 
financial management and governance, risk and compliance; procurement; project portfolio management; supply chain management; business 
analytics and enterprise performance management; and industry specific applications, among others. Our Oracle Applications software strategy 
is designed to provide customers with complete choice and a secure path to benefit from the latest technology advances.  
Our Oracle Applications Unlimited program is Oracle’s commitment to ongoing investment and innovation in our current application offerings 
including our Oracle E-Business Suite, Siebel, PeopleSoft and JD Edwards application software products, among others. Since announcing the 
Oracle Applications Unlimited program in 2005, we have delivered major releases of all application product lines by combining business 
functionality with innovative technologies, providing customers with more adaptive industry processes, business intelligence and optimal end-
user productivity.  
Platform Technologies  
Our comprehensive platform technologies include license and subscription based database, middleware and development software offerings 
including Oracle Database software, the world’s most popular enterprise database, and Java, the computer industry’s most widely-used software 
development language, among others.  
   
6 
  
•   Oracle Commerce Cloud, which is designed to enable secure customer transactions through almost any device, to be scalable and to 
support personalized customer experiences through customer search, merchandising, promotions, and content management capabilities; 
  
•   Oracle Services Cloud, which is designed to provide a unified web, social, and contact center platform that is used to understand 
customer needs, to resolve customer problems and to ensure the delivery of accurate information to users; and 
  
•   Oracle Configure, Price and Quote Cloud, which is designed to help sales teams, channels, and ecommerce sites sell faster, more easily, 
and more accurately through almost any device. 

Table of Contents  
Our platform technologies are designed to provide a cost-effective, standards-based, high-performance platform for running and managing 
business applications for midsize businesses, as well as large, global enterprises. Our customers are increasingly focused on reducing the total 
cost of their IT infrastructure and we believe that our platform technologies help them achieve this goal.  
Our platform technologies are designed to accommodate demanding, non-stop business environments using clustered middleware and database 
servers and storage. These clusters are designed to scale incrementally as required to address our customers’ IT capacity requirements, satisfy 
their planning and procurement needs, support their business applications with a standardized platform architecture, reduce their risk of data loss 
and IT infrastructure downtime and efficiently utilize available IT resources to meet quality of service expectations.  
Oracle Platform as a Service (PaaS)  
Oracle PaaS is designed to deliver Oracle Database, Java and other platform services in the cloud to enable developers to extend applications, 
including Oracle SaaS applications, or build new applications. Customers and partners can use our open, standards based platform services that 
are based on Oracle WebLogic Server and our Oracle Database Cloud service, including tools for rapid application development, flexible cloud-
based file sharing and collaboration, intuitive business analysis and reporting, and mobile device connectivity.  
We believe our PaaS offerings are a large opportunity for us to expand our software and cloud business. We believe customers increasingly 
recognize the value of access to Oracle Database, Oracle Fusion Middleware and Java via a low cost, rapidly deployable, flexible and 
interoperable services model that we manage and maintain on their behalf. We believe we can market and sell our PaaS offerings to our 
extensive installed base of database and middleware customers, and current and future users of our popular Java software development language, 
among others.  
Oracle Database Cloud Services  
Oracle Database Cloud Service provides customers with access to the Oracle Database via a cloud computing IT model and a customer choice of 
a dedicated database instance with direct network connections and full administrative control or a dedicated schema with a full development and 
deployment platform managed by Oracle.  
Oracle Database Backup Service is a secure, scalable, on-demand storage solution for backing up Oracle databases to an off-site storage location 
in the cloud.  
Oracle Business Intelligence Cloud Service  
Oracle Business Intelligence Cloud Service is a cloud-based, enterprise-class analytics platform for creating business intelligence applications 
that are designed to convert customer data into business insight, upon which these customers can optimize decision-making.  
Oracle Java Cloud Service  
Oracle Java Cloud Service is a complete platform and infrastructure cloud solution for building, deploying and managing Java EE applications. 
Oracle Java Cloud Service provides easy, rapid and agile deployment of any Java application—all on top of infrastructure provided by Oracle.  
Oracle Developer Cloud Service  
Oracle Developer Cloud Service is an easy-to-use, automatically provisioned enterprise development platform deployed in the cloud that 
supports the complete software development lifecycle.  
Oracle Documents Cloud Service  
Oracle Documents Cloud Service is an enterprise level, content collaboration solution that enables information to be accessed, uploaded and 
shared via a cloud computing IT environment that is provided and secured by Oracle.  
   
7 

Table of Contents  
Oracle Messaging Cloud Service  
Oracle Messaging Cloud Service is a cloud-based, reliable messaging service that enables communication between software components both 
on-premises and in the Oracle Cloud using standard interfaces.  
Oracle Database  
We license our Oracle Database software to customers, which is designed to enable reliable and secure storage, retrieval and manipulation of all 
forms of data, including: transactional data, business information and analytics; semi-structured and unstructured data in the form of weblogs, 
text, social media feeds, XML files, office documents, images, video and spatial images; and other specialized forms of data, such as graph data. 
Oracle Database software is used for a variety of purposes, including with packaged applications and custom applications for transaction 
processing, data warehousing and business intelligence and as a document repository or specialized data store. Security continues to be a critical 
characteristic of the Oracle Database and our latest version, Oracle Database 12c, includes a number of security enhancements and new features 
including, among others, encryption of data in motion, conditional auditing, real application security, and transparent sensitive data protection. 
All security capabilities available are compatible with Oracle Database 12c’s new Oracle Multitenant architecture option, which enables 
customers to quickly and efficiently address the unique security requirements of each of their database instances.  
A number of optional add-on products are available with Oracle Database Enterprise Edition software to address specific customer requirements, 
including:  
   
   
   
In addition to Oracle Database, we also offer a portfolio of specialized database software products to address particular customer requirements, 
including the following:  
   
   
   
   
   
8 
  
•   a comprehensive portfolio of advanced defense, in depth security solutions that safeguard data at the source including Oracle Advanced 
Security, Oracle Database Vault, and Oracle Data Masking and Subsetting, as well as detective security options including Oracle Audit 
Vault and Database Firewall. Oracle Database security options are designed to ensure data privacy, protect against insider threats, and 
enable regulatory compliance for both Oracle and non-Oracle databases; 
  
•   in the areas of cloud computing and consolidation, we offer a new Oracle Multitenant software option that is designed to make it easier 
to consolidate multiple databases quickly and manage them as a cloud service, which enables customers to easily consolidate multiple 
databases into one without changing their applications. Our Oracle Multitenant architecture option offers the efficiency and cost savings 
of managing many databases at one time, yet retains the isolation and resource prioritization of separate databases that is necessary for 
multitenant cloud services; and 
  
•   in the areas of performance and scalability, we offer Oracle Real Application Clusters, Oracle Database In-Memory, Oracle Advanced 
Compression and Oracle Partitioning software options. Deploying Oracle Database In-Memory option with virtually any existing Oracle 
Database compatible application requires no application changes as it is fully integrated with Oracle Database’s scale-up, scale-out, 
storage tiering, availability and security technologies, which makes any Oracle in-memory database enterprise-ready. 
  
•   MySQL, the world’s most popular open source database, designed for high performance and scalability of web applications and 
embedded applications, available in Enterprise, Standard, Classic, Cluster and Community editions; 
  
•   Oracle TimesTen In-Memory Database, designed to deliver real-time data management and transaction processing speeds for 
performance-critical applications. Oracle TimesTen In-Memory Database can serve as a cache to accelerate Oracle Database and can 
work as a standalone database at the application tier; 
  
•   Oracle Berkeley DB, a family of open source, embeddable, relational, XML and key-value (NoSQL) databases designed for developers 
to embed within their applications and devices; and 
  
•   Oracle NoSQL Database, a distributed key-value database designed for high availability and massive scalability of high volume 
transaction processing with predictable low-latency. 

Table of Contents  
Big Data  
Oracle offers big data solutions to complement and extend its Oracle Database software offerings. Big data generally refers to a massive amount 
of unstructured, streaming and structured data that is so large that it is difficult to process using traditional IT techniques. As businesses drive 
more of their critical operations and information management through IT solutions, the volume of this data generated by businesses is increasing 
at unprecedented levels.  
We believe most businesses view big data as a high-value source of business intelligence that can be used to gain new insights into customer 
behavior, anticipate future demand more accurately, align workforce deployment with business activity forecasts and accelerate the pace of 
operations, among others. Oracle offers a comprehensive portfolio of products and services to help enterprises capture, manage, and analyze big 
data alongside an enterprise’s existing enterprise and streaming data.  
Our big data solutions for capturing unstructured, streaming and structured data complement existing Oracle Database environments and include 
Oracle NoSQL Database and popular open source software such as the Hadoop File System. Oracle Data Integration and Oracle Big Data 
Connectors are designed to easily and non-invasively integrate data from Hadoop file systems or Oracle NoSQL databases and Oracle databases 
to enable a data warehouse to further organize, analyze, interpret, report on and act on information from these high volume data sources.  
We offer Oracle Business Analytics products that are designed to leverage big data and enterprise data to enable organizations to analyze the 
data and discover new ways to strategize, plan, optimize business operations and capture new market opportunities. Oracle Business Analytics 
products include data discovery software, enterprise performance management and analytic application software, business intelligence software, 
and predictive analytics and self-learning decision optimization software. The Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine is designed to run analytic 
environments at optimal performance and scale, which is ideal for use with big data environments.  
Oracle Fusion Middleware  
We license our Oracle Fusion Middleware software, which is a broad family of integrated application infrastructure software products. These 
products are designed to form a reliable and scalable foundation on which customers can build, deploy, secure, access and integrate business 
applications and automate their business processes. Built with our Java technology platform, Oracle Fusion Middleware products can be used as 
a foundation for custom, packaged and composite applications—or applications that can be deployed in cloud environments.  
Oracle Fusion Middleware software is designed to protect customers’ IT investments and work with both Oracle and non-Oracle database, 
middleware and application software through its open architecture and adherence to industry standards. Specifically, Oracle Fusion Middleware 
software is designed to enable customers to integrate Oracle and non-Oracle business applications, automate business processes, scale 
applications to meet customer demand, simplify security and compliance, manage lifecycles of documents and get actionable, targeted business 
intelligence; all while continuing to utilize their existing IT systems. In addition, Oracle Fusion Middleware software supports multiple 
development languages and tools, which enables developers to build and deploy web services, websites, portals and web-based applications.  
Oracle Fusion Middleware software is available in various software products and suites, including the following:  
   
   
   
   
9 
  
•   Oracle WebLogic Server and Oracle Cloud Application Foundation, designed to be the most complete, best-of-breed platform for 
developing cloud applications; 
  
•   Oracle SOA Suite of software products used to create, deploy and manage applications on a Service-Oriented Architecture; 
  
•   Oracle Data Integration software products, which are designed to enable pervasive and continuous access to timely and trusted data 
across heterogeneous systems, including real-time and bulk data movement, transformation, bi-directional replication, data services and 
data quality for customer and product domains; 

Table of Contents  
   
   
   
   
Mobile Computing  
Among its other middleware offerings, Oracle provides a wide range of software for mobile computing to address the development needs of 
businesses that are increasingly focused on delivering mobile device applications to their customers. For example, Oracle Mobile Platform 
enables developers to build and extend enterprise applications for popular mobile devices from a single code base. Oracle Mobile Platform 
supports access to native device services, enables offline applications and is designed to protect enterprise investments from future technology 
shifts. Oracle Mobile Security offers comprehensive mobile identity and application management for provisioning of trusted access. Oracle 
Business Intelligence Mobile provides business intelligence functionality, from interactive dashboards to location intelligence, while enabling 
users to initiate business processes from a mobile device.  
Java  
Java is the computer industry’s most widely-used software development language and is viewed as a global standard. The Java programming 
language and platform together represent one of the most popular and powerful development environments in the world, one that is used by 
millions of developers globally to develop business applications. Oracle Fusion Middleware software products and certain of our Oracle 
Applications are built using our Java technology platform, which we believe is a key advantage for our business.  
Java is designed to enable developers to write software on a single platform and run it on many other different platforms, independent of 
operating system and hardware architecture. Java has been adopted by both independent software vendors (ISV) that have built their products on 
Java and by enterprise organizations building custom applications or consuming Java-based ISV products.  
Software License Updates and Product Support  
We seek to protect and enhance our customers’ current investments in Oracle application and platform technologies by offering proactive and 
personalized support services, including Oracle Lifetime Support and product enhancements and upgrades. Software license updates provide 
customers with rights to unspecified software product upgrades and maintenance releases and patches released during the term of the support 
period. Product support includes internet and telephone access to technical support personnel located in our global support centers, as well as 
internet access to technical content through “My Oracle Support”. Software license updates and product support contracts are generally priced as 
a percentage of the net new software license fees. Substantially all of our customers purchase software license updates and product support 
contracts when they acquire new software licenses and renew their software license updates and product support contracts annually.  
   
10 
  
•   Oracle Business Process Management Suite software products that are designed to enable businesses and IT professionals to design, 
implement, automate and evolve business processes and workflows within and across organizations; 
  
•   Oracle WebCenter software products, a complete set of web experience management, portals, content management and social networks 
software, designed to help people work together more efficiently through contextual collaboration tools that optimize connections 
between people, information and applications and to ensure users have access to the right information in the context of the business 
process in which they are engaged; 
  
•   Oracle Business Intelligence Suite, a comprehensive set of analytic software products designed to provide customers with the 
information they need to make better business decisions; 
  
•   Oracle Identity Management software, which is designed to enable customers to manage internal and external users, to secure corporate 
information from potential software threats and to streamline compliance initiatives while lowering the total cost of their security and 
compliance initiatives; and 
  
•   Development Tools for application development, database development and business intelligence, including Oracle JDeveloper, an 
integrated software environment designed to facilitate rapid development of applications using Oracle Fusion Middleware and popular 
open source technologies. 

Table of Contents  
Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)  
Our Oracle IaaS offerings, which are a part of our software and cloud business and represented 2% of total revenues in fiscal 2015 and 1% of 
total revenues in each of fiscal 2014 and 2013, provide deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT 
infrastructure, including:  
   
   
   
Infrastructure Technologies  
Oracle infrastructure technologies consist of our hardware systems products including Oracle Engineered Systems, servers, storage, networking, 
industry specific hardware, virtualization software, operating systems, management software and related hardware services including support. 
We also offer Oracle IaaS, which provides elastic compute and storage capabilities, among others.  
Our infrastructure technologies help customers manage growing amounts of data and business requirements, meet increasing compliance and 
regulatory demands and reduce energy, space and operational costs. Our infrastructure technologies support many of the world’s largest on-
premises and cloud IT environments, including the Oracle Cloud. Our infrastructure technologies are designed to seamlessly connect on-
premises and cloud IT environments to further enable interoperability, interchangeability and extendibility. We design our infrastructure 
technologies to work in customer environments that may include other Oracle or non-Oracle hardware or software components. Our flexible and 
open approach provides Oracle customers with a broad range of choices in how they deploy our infrastructure technologies, which we believe is 
a priority for our customers.  
We focus the operation and integration of our infrastructure technologies to make them easier to deploy, manage and maintain for our customers 
and to improve computing performance relative to our competitors’ offerings. For example, our Oracle Engineered Systems are designed to 
integrate multiple Oracle technology components to work together to deliver improved performance, availability, security and operational 
efficiency relative to our competitors’ products. These same Oracle technology components are tested together and supported together to 
streamline system deployment and maintenance cycles. We also engineer our hardware systems with virtualization and management capabilities 
to enable the rapid deployment and efficient management of cloud and on-premises IT infrastructures.  
Our infrastructure technologies are substantially marketed, sold and delivered through our hardware business, which includes our hardware 
systems products segment and hardware systems support segment. Our hardware systems products revenues represented 8% of our total 
revenues in each of fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013. Our hardware systems support revenues represented 6% of our total revenues in each of fiscal 
2015, 2014 and 2013.  
   
11 
  
•   comprehensive software and hardware management and maintenance services for customer IT infrastructure for a stated term that is 
hosted at our Oracle data center facilities, select partner data centers or physically on-premises at customer facilities; 
  
•   virtual machine instance services in which we deploy, secure, provision, manage and maintain certain of our hardware products for our 
customers to provide them with a set of cloud-based core infrastructure capabilities like elastic compute and storage services to run 
workloads in the cloud; and 
  
•   hardware and related support services offerings for certain of our Oracle Engineered Systems that are deployed at our customers’ data 
centers for a monthly fee that includes the option of elastic compute capacity on demand and Oracle Platinum and PlatinumPlus 
Services for a higher level of support and advisory services designed to ensure these hardware products remain configured and tuned 
correctly with quarterly automated assessments for performance, availability and security. 

Table of Contents  
Oracle Engineered Systems  
Oracle Engineered Systems are core to our infrastructure technology offerings and are important elements of our data center and cloud 
computing offerings including the Oracle Cloud. These pre-integrated products are designed to integrate multiple Oracle technology components 
to work together to deliver improved performance, availability, security and operational efficiency relative to our competitors’ products, to be 
upgraded effectively and efficiently and to simplify maintenance cycles by providing a single solution for software patching. They are tested 
before they are shipped to customers and delivered ready-to-run, enabling customers to shorten the time to production. Oracle’s Engineered 
Systems include:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Servers  
We offer a wide range of server systems using our SPARC microprocessor, which are designed to be differentiated by their reliability, security 
and scalability. Our SPARC-based T5 mid-range server and M6 high-end servers, for example, are designed to offer better performance and 
lower total cost of ownership than mainframe systems for business critical applications and for customers having more computationally intensive 
needs. Measurably increasing computing performance and reliability, these servers are ideal platforms for building cloud computing IT 
environments. We also offer servers using microprocessors from Intel Corporation (Intel). By offering customers a range of microprocessors, we 
intend to offer our customers maximum flexibility in choosing the types of hardware systems that they believe will be most appropriate and 
valuable for their particular IT environments.  
Our SPARC servers run the Oracle Solaris operating system and are designed for mission critical enterprise environments. SPARC servers are 
also a core component of the Oracle SuperCluster, one of our Oracle Engineered Systems.  
   
12 
  
•   Oracle Exadata Database Machine, a family of integrated software and hardware products that combines our database, storage and 
operating system software with our server, storage and networking hardware and is designed to provide a high performance database 
system for online transaction processing and data warehousing applications; 
  
•   Oracle Exalogic Elastic Cloud, an engineered system that combines Oracle Fusion Middleware software with our server, storage and 
networking hardware to run Java and non-Java applications and provide customers with an applications platform for cloud computing; 
  
•   Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine, a single server that is designed to be configured for in-memory analytics for business intelligence 
workloads; 
  
•   Oracle SuperCluster, a general purpose engineered system that combines the optimized database performance of Oracle Exadata storage 
and the accelerated middleware and application processing of the Oracle Exalogic Elastic Cloud on a SPARC/Solaris platform; 
  
•   Oracle Private Cloud Appliance, an engineered system delivering converged infrastructure for virtualized environments that is designed 
to be simple to use, rapidly deployable and capable of running almost any application built upon Linux, Microsoft Windows or Oracle 
Solaris operating systems; 
  
•   Oracle Database Appliance, an integrated, fault resilient system of database, operating system and virtualization software, servers, 
storage and networking hardware in a single box that is designed to deliver high availability database services for a wide range of 
homegrown and packaged online transaction processing (OLTP) and data warehousing applications; 
  
•   Oracle Big Data Appliance, a scalable, engineered system designed for acquiring, organizing and loading unstructured data into a 
Hadoop file system or Oracle NoSQL Database and optionally integrating that data with Oracle Databases. The key components of a big 
data platform are integrated into the Oracle Big Data Appliance to reduce deployment, integration and management risks in comparison 
to custom-built solutions; and 
  
•   Oracle Zero Data Loss Recovery Appliance, an engineered system that is integrated with Oracle Database and is designed to eliminate 
data loss exposure for databases without impacting production environments. 

Table of Contents  
Our Intel-based enterprise x86 servers are compatible with Oracle Solaris, Oracle Linux, Microsoft Windows and other operating systems. Our 
x86 servers are also a core component of many of our Oracle Engineered Systems including Oracle Exadata Database Machine, Oracle Exalogic 
Elastic Cloud, Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine and the Oracle Big Data Appliance.  
Storage  
Our storage products are designed to securely manage, protect, archive and restore customers’ mission critical data assets and consist of tape, 
disk, flash and hardware-related software including file systems software, back-up and archive software and storage management software and 
networking for mainframe and open systems environments. Our storage products are designed to improve data availability by providing fast data 
access and dynamic data protection for back-up and restoration and secure archiving for compliance. Our storage products are co-engineered 
with Oracle software and designed to provide performance benefits for our customers in Oracle Database and Oracle Applications environments, 
as well as to work with multi-vendor application and systems environments to maximize performance and efficiency while minimizing 
management overhead and lowering the total cost of ownership.  
Our Oracle ZFS Storage Appliance is designed to improve Network Attached Storage (NAS) performance and manageability and lower total 
cost of ownership by combining our advanced storage operating system with high-performance controllers, DRAM and flash-based caches and 
disks. The foundation of our Oracle FS1 flash storage system, targeted at flash Storage Area Network (SAN) environments, is a patented quality-
of-service architecture designed to meet business critical service level agreements for dynamic, multi-application workloads and enable 
customers to consolidate storage applications into a single data center storage solution.  
Our tape storage product line includes Oracle StorageTek libraries, drives, virtualization systems, media and associated software packages that 
provide data lifecycle management, deep analytics and file access through the familiar “drag-and-drop” paradigm. In addition to serving in tape’s 
traditional role as enterprise data backup, these products are intended to provide robust, scalable solutions at a lower total cost of ownership for 
long-term data archiving and preservation in vertical industries such as communications, energy, healthcare and internet, among others.  
Networking and Data Center Fabric Products  
Our networking and data center fabric products, including Oracle Virtual Networking, and Oracle InfiniBand and Ethernet products, are used 
with our server and storage products and are integrated into our management tools to help enterprise customers improve infrastructure 
performance, reduce cost and complexity and simplify storage and server connectivity.  
Industry Specific Hardware Offerings  
We offer hardware products and services designed for specific industries. Our point-of-sale hardware offerings include point-of-sale terminals 
and related hardware that are designed for managing businesses within the food and beverage, hotel and retail industries, among others. Our 
hardware products and services for communications networks include network signaling, policy control and subscriber data management 
solutions, and session border control technology, among others.  
Oracle Solaris and Oracle Linux Operating Systems, Virtualization and Other Hardware-Related Software  
The Oracle Solaris operating system is designed to provide a reliable, secure and scalable operating system environment through significant 
kernel feature development, networking, security, and file system technologies as well as close integration with hardware features. This design 
provides us with an ability to combine Oracle Solaris with our own hardware components to achieve certain performance and efficiency 
advantages in comparison to our competitors. The Oracle Solaris operating system is based on the UNIX operating system, but is unique among 
UNIX systems in that it is available on our SPARC servers and x86 servers. We also support Oracle Solaris deployed on other companies’ 
hardware products.  
   
13 

Table of Contents  
The Oracle Linux operating system with Oracle’s Unbreakable Enterprise Kernel is a Linux operating system for enterprise workloads including 
databases, middleware and applications. Oracle’s Unbreakable Enterprise Kernel is designed to work well with Oracle products and enables 
users to patch core operating systems without downtime.  
Oracle provides a broad portfolio of virtualization solutions from the desktop to the data center. Oracle VM is server virtualization software for 
both Oracle SPARC and x86 servers and supports both Oracle and non-Oracle applications. Oracle VM software is designed to enable different 
applications to share a single physical system for higher utilization and efficiency and simplify software deployment by enabling pre-configured 
software images to be created and rapidly deployed without installation or configuration errors. In addition, Oracle Solaris 11 provides 
comprehensive, built-in virtualization capabilities for both SPARC and x86 servers, networking and storage resources.  
In addition to Oracle Solaris and Oracle Linux operating systems and Oracle’s virtualization software, we also develop a range of other 
hardware-related software, including development tools, compilers, management tools for servers and storage, diagnostic tools and file systems.  
Management Software  
Oracle invests in a range of management technologies and products in order to meet the needs of customers building and efficiently operating 
complex IT environments, including both end users’ and service providers’ cloud environments. Oracle Enterprise Manager is a comprehensive 
management solution for all Oracle infrastructure, platform and applications technologies and provides an integrated view of the entire IT 
lifecycle including deployment, monitoring, and lifecycle management. Oracle Enterprise Manager can be applied to traditional on-premises, 
cloud, and hybrid cloud environments in a seamless manner via a single interface, which accelerates customer deployment of and transition to 
the cloud with Oracle products. Oracle also enhances and integrates with certain key open technologies including OpenStack, which is broadly 
supported by Oracle products for customers that require seamless integration with this method of cloud management and provisioning. The 
combination of Oracle’s comprehensive solutions and investments in open standards allows Oracle customers to manage Oracle products 
efficiently across a range of IT offerings from traditional on-premises environments to the most advanced cloud architectures.  
Hardware Systems Support  
Our hardware systems support offerings provide customers with software updates for software components that are essential to the functionality 
of our hardware products, such as Oracle Solaris and certain other software products, and can include product repairs, maintenance services and 
technical support services. We continue to evolve hardware systems support processes that are intended to proactively identify and solve quality 
issues and to increase the amount of new and renewed hardware systems support contracts sold in connection with the sales of our hardware 
systems products. Hardware systems support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net hardware systems products fees.  
Services  
We offer services solutions to help customers and partners maximize the performance of their investments in Oracle application, platform and 
infrastructure technologies. We believe our services are differentiated based on our focus on Oracle technologies, extensive experience and 
broad sets of intellectual property and best practices. Our services business represented 9%, 10% and 11% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 
2014 and 2013, respectively. Our services business, which is comprised of the remainder of our operating segments, offers the following:  
   
   
14 
  
•   consulting services that are designed to help our customers and global system integrator partners more successfully architect and deploy 
our products, including IT strategy alignment, enterprise architecture planning and design, initial product implementation and 
integration, and ongoing product enhancements and upgrades. We utilize a global, blended delivery model to optimize value for our 
customers and partners, consisting of on-premises consultants from local geographies, industry specialists and consultants from our 
global delivery and solution centers; 

Table of Contents  
   
Marketing and Sales  
We directly market and sell our products and services to businesses of many sizes and in many industries, government agencies and educational 
institutions. We also market and sell our products through indirect channels. No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our total 
revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 or 2013.  
In the United States, our sales and services employees are based in our headquarters and in field offices throughout the country. Outside the 
United States, our international subsidiaries sell, support and service our products and offerings in their local countries as well as within other 
foreign countries where we do not operate through a direct sales subsidiary. Our geographic coverage allows us to draw on business and 
technical expertise from a global workforce, provides stability to our operations and revenue streams to offset geography specific economic 
trends and offers us an opportunity to take advantage of new markets for our products. Our international operations subject us to certain risks, 
which are more fully described in “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report. A summary of our domestic and international 
revenues and long-lived assets is set forth in Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
We also market our products worldwide through indirect channels. The companies that comprise our indirect channel network are members of 
the Oracle Partner Network. The Oracle Partner Network is a global program that manages our business relationships with a large, broad-based 
network of companies, including independent software and hardware vendors, system integrators and resellers that deliver innovative solutions 
and services based upon our product offerings. By offering our partners access to our product offerings, educational information, technical 
services, marketing and sales support, the Oracle Partner Network program extends our market reach by providing our partners with the 
resources they need to be successful in delivering solutions to customers globally. The majority of our hardware systems products are sold 
through indirect channels including independent distributors and value added resellers.  
Seasonality and Cyclicality  
Our quarterly revenues have historically been affected by a variety of seasonal factors, including the structure of our sales force incentive 
compensation plans, which are common in the technology industry. Our total revenues and operating margins are typically highest in our fourth 
fiscal quarter and lowest in our first fiscal quarter. The operating margins of our businesses are generally affected by seasonal factors in a similar 
manner as our revenues (in particular, our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions segment) as certain expenses within our cost 
structure are relatively fixed in the short term. See “Selected Quarterly Financial Data” in Item 7 of this Annual Report for a more complete 
description of the seasonality and cyclicality of our revenues, expenses and margins.  
Competition  
We face intense competition in all aspects of our business. The nature of the IT industry creates a competitive landscape that is constantly 
evolving as firms emerge, expand or are acquired, as technology evolves and as customer demands and competitive pressures otherwise change. 
Our customers are demanding less complexity and lower total cost in the implementation, sourcing, integration and ongoing maintenance of their 
enterprise software and hardware systems. Our enterprise software and cloud and hardware offerings compete directly with some offerings from 
some of the largest and most competitive companies in the world, including Microsoft Corporation (Microsoft), International Business Machines 
Corporation (IBM), Intel, Hewlett-Packard Company (HP) and SAP AG and smaller companies like  
   
15 
  
•   advanced customer support services, which are provided on-premises and remotely to our customers to enable increased performance 
and higher availability of their Oracle products and services; and 
  
•   education services for Oracle products and services, including training and certification programs that are offered to customers, partners 
and employees through a variety of formats, including instructor led classes at our education centers, live virtual training, self-paced 
online training, private events and custom training. 

Table of Contents  
salesforce.com, inc. and Workday, Inc., as well as many others. In addition, due to the low barriers to entry in many of our market segments, 
new technologies and new and growing competitors frequently emerge to challenge our offerings. Our competitors range from companies 
offering broad IT solutions across many of our lines of business to vendors providing point solutions, or offerings focused on a specific 
functionality, product area or industry. In addition, as we expand into new market segments, we will face increased competition as we will 
compete with existing competitors, as well as firms that may be partners in other areas of our business and other firms with whom we have not 
previously competed like Amazon.com, Inc. Moreover, we or our competitors may take certain strategic actions—including acquisitions, 
partnerships and joint ventures, or repositioning of product lines—which invite even greater competition in one or more product categories.  
Key competitive factors in each of the segments in which we currently compete and may compete in the future include: total cost of ownership, 
performance, scalability, reliability, security, functionality, efficiency, ease of management and quality of technical support. Our product and 
service sales (and the relative strength of our products and services versus those of our competitors) are also directly and indirectly affected by 
the following, among other things:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
For more information about the competitive risks we face, refer to Item 1A. “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
Manufacturing  
To produce our hardware products, we rely on both our internal manufacturing operations as well as third party manufacturing partners. Our 
internal manufacturing operations consist primarily of materials procurement, assembly, testing and quality control of our Oracle Engineered 
Systems and certain of our enterprise and data center servers, storage systems and networking products. For all other manufacturing, we 
generally rely on third party manufacturing partners to produce our hardware related components and hardware products and we may involve our 
internal manufacturing operations in the final assembly, testing and quality control processes for these components and products. We distribute 
most of our hardware products either from our facilities or partner facilities. Our manufacturing processes substantially are based on 
standardization of components across product types, centralization of assembly and distribution centers and a “build-to-order” methodology in 
which products generally are built only after customers have placed firm orders. Production of our hardware products requires that we purchase 
materials, supplies, product subassemblies and full assemblies from a number of vendors. For most of our hardware products, we have existing 
alternate sources of supply or such sources are readily available.  
   
16 
  
•   the adoption of cloud based IT offerings including software as a service, platform as a service and infrastructure as a service offerings; 
  
•   total cost of ownership; 
  
•   ease of deployment, use and maintenance of our products and services offerings; 
  
•   compatibility between Oracle products and services deployed within on-premises IT environments and public cloud IT environments, 
including our Oracle Cloud environments; 
  
•   the adoption of commodity servers and microprocessors; 
  
•   the broader “platform” competition between our industry standard Java technology platform and the .NET programming environment of 
Microsoft; 
  
•   operating system competition among our Oracle Solaris and Linux operating systems, with alternatives including Microsoft’s Windows 
Server, and other UNIX and Linux operating systems; 
  
•   the adoption of open source alternatives to commercial software by enterprise software customers; 
  
•   products, features and functionality developed internally by customers and their IT staff; 
  
•   products, features or functionality customized and implemented for customers by consultants, systems integrators or other third parties; 
and 
  
•   attractiveness of offerings from business processing outsourcers. 

Table of Contents  
However, we do rely on sole sources for certain of our hardware products. As a result, we continue to evaluate potential risks of disruption to our 
supply chain operations. Refer to “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A within this Annual Report for additional discussion of the challenges we 
encounter with respect to the sources and availability of supplies for our products and the related risks to our business.  
Research and Development  
We develop the substantial majority of our products internally. In addition, we have extended our product offerings and intellectual property 
through acquisitions of businesses and technologies. We also purchase or license intellectual property rights in certain circumstances. Internal 
development allows us to maintain technical control over the design and development of our products. We have a number of United States and 
foreign patents and pending applications that relate to various aspects of our products and technology. While we believe that our patents have 
value, no single patent is essential to us or to any of our principal business segments. Research and development expenditures were $5.5 billion, 
$5.2 billion and $4.9 billion in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, or 14% of total revenues in fiscal 2015 and 13% of total revenues in 
each of fiscal 2014 and 2013. Rapid technological advances in hardware and software development, evolving standards in computer hardware 
and software technology, changing customer needs and frequent new product introductions and enhancements characterize the software and 
cloud and hardware markets in which we compete. We plan to continue to dedicate a significant amount of resources to research and 
development efforts to maintain and improve our current product and services offerings.  
Employees  
As of May 31, 2015, we employed approximately 132,000 full-time employees, including approximately 35,000 in sales and marketing, 
approximately 11,000 in software license updates and product support, approximately 6,000 in our cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS operations, 
approximately 1,000 in the manufacturing of our hardware systems products, approximately 5,000 in hardware systems support, approximately 
23,000 in services, approximately 38,000 in research and development and approximately 13,000 in general and administrative positions. Of 
these employees, approximately 49,000 were employed in the United States and approximately 83,000 were employed internationally. None of 
our employees in the United States is represented by a labor union; however, in certain foreign subsidiaries labor unions or workers’ councils 
represent some of our employees.  
Available Information  
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed 
pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, are available, free of charge, on our Investor Relations 
website at www.oracle.com/investor as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the United 
States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The information posted on or accessible through our website is not incorporated into this 
Annual Report.  
   
17 

Table of Contents  
Executive Officers of the Registrant  
Our executive officers are listed below.  
   
Ms. Catz, 53, has been our Chief Executive Officer since September 2014. She served as our President from January 2004 to September 2014, 
our Chief Financial Officer most recently from April 2011 until September 2014 and a Director since October 2001. She was previously our 
Chief Financial Officer from November 2005 until September 2008 and our Interim Chief Financial Officer from April 2005 until July 2005. 
Prior to being named our President, she held various other positions with us since joining Oracle in 1999. She also currently serves as a director 
of HSBC Holdings plc.  
Mr. Hurd, 58, has been our Chief Executive Officer since September 2014. He served as our President from September 2010 to September 2014 
and a Director since September 2010. Prior to joining us, he served as Chairman of the Board of Directors of HP from September 2006 to 
August 2010 and as Chief Executive Officer, President and a member of the Board of Directors of HP from April 2005 to August 2010.  
Mr. Ellison, 70, has been our Chairman of the Board and Chief Technology Officer since September 2014. He served as our Chief Executive 
Officer from June 1977, when he founded Oracle, until September 2014. He has served as a Director since June 1977. He previously served as 
our Chairman of the Board from May 1995 to January 2004.  
Mr. Henley, 70, has served as our Vice Chairman of the Board since September 2014. He previously served as our Chairman of the Board from 
January 2004 to September 2014 and has served as a Director since June 1995. He served as our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial 
Officer from March 1991 to July 2004.  
Mr. Kurian, 48, has been our President, Product Development since January 2015. He served as our Executive Vice President, Product 
Development from July 2009 until January 2015. He served as our Senior Vice President of Development from February 2001 until July 2009. 
Mr. Kurian worked in Oracle Server Technologies as Vice President of Development from March 1999 until February 2001. He also held 
various other positions with us since joining Oracle in 1996.  
Mr. Fowler, 54, has been Executive Vice President, Systems since February 2010. Prior to Oracle’s acquisition of Sun Microsystems, Inc., 
Mr. Fowler served as Sun’s Executive Vice President, Systems Group from May 2006 to February 2010, as Executive Vice President, Network 
Systems Group from May 2004 to May 2006 and as Chief Technology Officer, Software Group from July 2002 to May 2004.  
Ms. Daley, 56, has been our Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary since April 2015 and was our Senior Vice President, 
General Counsel and Secretary from October 2007 to April 2015. She served as our Vice President, Legal, Associate General Counsel and 
Assistant Secretary from June 2004 to October 2007, as Associate General Counsel and Assistant Secretary from October 2001 to June 2004 and 
as Associate General Counsel from February 2001 to October 2001. She held various other positions with us since joining Oracle’s Legal 
Department in 1992.  
Mr. West, 53, has been our Executive Vice President, Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer since April 2015. He served as our 
Senior Vice President, Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer from February 2008 to April 2015 and served as our Vice President, 
Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer from April 2007 to February 2008. His previous experience includes 14 years with Arthur 
Andersen LLP, most recently as a partner.  
   
18 
Name 
  Office(s) 
Safra A. Catz 
  Chief Executive Officer and Director 
Mark V. Hurd 
  Chief Executive Officer and Director 
Lawrence J. Ellison 
  Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Technology Officer 
Jeffrey O. Henley 
  Executive Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors 
Thomas Kurian 
  President, Product Development 
John Fowler 
  Executive Vice President, Systems 
Dorian E. Daley 
  Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary 
William Corey West 
  Executive Vice President, Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer 

Table of Contents  
Item 1A.    Risk Factors  
We operate in rapidly changing economic and technological environments that present numerous risks, many of which are driven by factors that 
we cannot control or predict. The following discussion, as well as our “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” discussion in Management’s 
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Item 7), highlights some of these risks. The risks described below are 
not exhaustive and you should carefully consider these risks and uncertainties before investing in our securities.  
Economic, political and market conditions can adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, including our 
revenue growth and profitability, which in turn could adversely affect our stock price.     Our business is influenced by a range of factors that 
are beyond our control and that we have no comparative advantage in forecasting. These include:  
   
   
   
   
Macroeconomic developments like the continued slow pace of economic recovery in Europe and parts of the United States, Asia and South 
America could negatively affect our business, operating results, financial condition and outlook, which, in turn, could adversely affect our stock 
price. Any general weakening of, and related declining corporate confidence in, the global economy or the curtailment of government or 
corporate spending could cause current or potential customers to reduce or eliminate their information technology (IT) budgets and spending, 
which could cause customers to delay, decrease or cancel purchases of our products and services or cause customers not to pay us or to delay 
paying us for previously purchased products and services.  
In addition, political unrest in places like Ukraine, Syria and Iraq and the related potential impact on global stability, terrorist attacks and the 
potential for other hostilities in various parts of the world, potential public health crises and natural disasters continue to contribute to a climate 
of economic and political uncertainty that could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition, including our revenue growth 
and profitability. These factors generally have the strongest effect on our sales of new software licenses, hardware systems products, hardware 
systems support and related services and, to a lesser extent, also may affect our renewal rates for software license updates and product support 
and our subscription-based cloud offerings.  
We may experience foreign currency gains and losses. Changes in currency exchange rates can adversely affect customer demand and our 
revenue and profitability.     We conduct a significant number of transactions and hold cash in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar. Changes in 
the values of major foreign currencies, particularly the Euro, Japanese Yen and British Pound, relative to the U.S. Dollar can significantly affect 
our total assets, revenues, operating results and cash flows, which are reported in U.S. Dollars. In particular, the economic uncertainties relating 
to European sovereign and other debt obligations may cause the value of the Euro to fluctuate relative to the U.S. Dollar. Fluctuations in foreign 
currency rates, most notably the recent strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Euro, adversely affects our revenue growth in terms of the 
amounts that we report in U.S. Dollars after converting our Euro-based results into U.S. Dollars and in terms of actual demand for our products 
and services as these products become relatively more expensive for Euro-based enterprises to purchase. In addition, currency variations can 
adversely affect margins on sales of our products in countries outside of the United States. Generally, our revenues and operating results are 
adversely affected when the dollar strengthens relative to other currencies and are positively affected when the dollar weakens. In addition, our 
reported assets generally are adversely affected when the dollar strengthens relative to other currencies as a significant portion of our 
consolidated cash and bank deposits, among other assets, are held in foreign currencies. The U.S. dollar strengthened relative to other currencies, 
including the Euro, in fiscal 2015, which is reflected in our results.  
Certain of our international subsidiaries operate in economies that have been designated as highly inflationary. We have incurred foreign 
currency losses associated with the devaluation of currencies in these highly inflationary economies relative to the U.S. Dollar and we may 
continue to incur such losses in these countries or other emerging market countries where we do business.  
   
19 
  
•   general economic and business conditions; 
  
•   overall demand for enterprise software, cloud offerings, hardware systems and services; 
  
•   governmental budgetary constraints or shifts in government spending priorities; and 
  
•   general political developments. 

Table of Contents  
In addition, we incur foreign currency transaction gains and losses, primarily related to sublicense fees and other intercompany agreements 
among us and our subsidiaries that we expect to cash settle in the near term, which are charged against earnings in the period incurred. We have 
a program which primarily utilizes foreign currency forward contracts designed to offset the risks associated with certain foreign currency 
exposures. We may suspend the program from time to time. As a part of this program, we enter into foreign currency forward contracts so that 
increases or decreases in our foreign currency exposures are offset at least in part by gains or losses on the foreign currency forward contracts in 
an effort to mitigate the risks and volatility associated with our foreign currency transaction gains or losses. A large portion of our consolidated 
operations are international, and we expect that we will continue to realize gains or losses with respect to our foreign currency exposures, net of 
gains or losses from our foreign currency forward contracts. For example, we will experience foreign currency gains and losses in certain 
instances if it is not possible or cost effective to hedge our foreign currency exposures, if our hedging efforts are ineffective, or should we 
suspend our foreign currency forward contract program. Our ultimate realized loss or gain with respect to currency fluctuations will generally 
depend on the size and type of cross-currency exposures that we enter into, the currency exchange rates associated with these exposures and 
changes in those rates, whether we have entered into foreign currency forward contracts to offset these exposures and other factors. All of these 
factors could materially impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.  
We may fail to achieve our financial forecasts due to inaccurate sales forecasts or other factors.     Our revenues, particularly our new 
software licenses revenues and hardware systems revenues, are difficult to forecast. As a result, our quarterly operating results can fluctuate 
substantially.  
We use a “pipeline” system, a common industry practice, to forecast sales and trends in our business. Our sales personnel monitor the status of 
all proposals and estimate when a customer will make a purchase decision and the dollar amount of the sale. These estimates are aggregated 
periodically to generate a sales pipeline. Our pipeline estimates can prove to be unreliable both in a particular quarter and over a longer period of 
time, in part because the “conversion rate” or “closure rate” of the pipeline into contracts can be very difficult to estimate. A reduction in the 
conversion rate, or in the pipeline itself, could cause us to plan or budget incorrectly and adversely affect our business or results of operations. In 
particular, a slowdown in IT spending or economic conditions generally can unexpectedly reduce the conversion rate in particular periods as 
purchasing decisions are delayed, reduced in amount or cancelled. The conversion rate can also be affected by the tendency of some of our 
customers to wait until the end of a fiscal period in the hope of obtaining more favorable terms, which can also impede our ability to negotiate, 
execute and deliver upon these contracts in a timely manner. In addition, for newly acquired companies, we have limited ability to predict how 
their pipelines will convert into sales or revenues for a number of quarters following the acquisition. Conversion rates post-acquisition may be 
quite different from the acquired companies’ historical conversion rates. Differences in conversion rates can also be affected by changes in 
business practices that we implement in our newly acquired companies. These changes may negatively affect customer behavior.  
A substantial portion of our new software licenses and hardware systems contracts is completed in the latter part of a quarter and a significant 
percentage of these are larger orders. Because a significant portion of our cost structure is largely fixed in the short-term, sales and revenue 
shortfalls tend to have a disproportionately negative impact on our profitability. The number of large new software licenses transactions and, to a 
lesser extent, hardware systems products transactions increases the risk of fluctuations in our quarterly results because a delay in even a small 
number of these transactions could cause our quarterly sales, revenues and profitability to fall significantly short of our predictions.  
Our Oracle Cloud strategy, including our Oracle Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS) and Data as a Service (DaaS) offerings, may adversely affect our revenues and profitability.     We offer customers a full range of 
consumption models including the deployment of our products via our cloud based SaaS, PaaS, IaaS and DaaS offerings. These business models 
continue to evolve, and we may not be able to compete effectively, generate significant revenues or maintain the profitability of our cloud 
offerings. Additionally, the increasing prevalence of cloud and SaaS delivery models offered by us and our competitors may unfavorably impact 
the pricing of our on-premises enterprise software offerings and our cloud offerings, and has a dampening impact on overall demand for our on-
premises software product and service  
   
20 

Table of Contents  
offerings, which could reduce our revenues and profitability, at least in the near-term. If we do not successfully execute our cloud computing 
strategy or anticipate the cloud computing needs of our customers, our reputation as a cloud services provider could be harmed and our revenues 
and profitability could decline.  
Our cloud offerings are generally purchased by customers on a subscription basis and revenues from these offerings are generally recognized 
ratably over the term of the subscriptions. The deferred revenue that results from sales of our cloud offerings may prevent any deterioration in 
sales activity associated with our cloud offerings from becoming immediately observable in our consolidated statement of operations. This is in 
contrast to revenues associated with our new software licenses arrangements whereby new software licenses revenues are generally recognized 
in full at the time of delivery of the related software licenses. We incur certain expenses associated with the infrastructures and marketing of our 
cloud offerings in advance of our ability to recognize the revenues associated with these offerings. As customer demand for our cloud offerings 
increases, we experience volatility in our reported revenues and operating results due to the differences in timing of revenue recognition between 
our new software licenses arrangements and cloud offering arrangements.  
We have also acquired a number of cloud computing companies, and the integration of these companies into our Oracle Cloud strategy may not 
be as efficient or scalable as anticipated, which could adversely affect our ability to fully realize the benefits anticipated from these acquisitions.  
Our success depends upon our ability to develop new products and services, integrate acquired products and services and enhance our 
existing products and services.     Rapid technological advances and evolving standards in computer hardware and software development and 
communications infrastructure, changing and increasingly sophisticated customer needs and frequent new product introductions and 
enhancements characterize the industries in which we compete. If we are unable to develop new or sufficiently differentiated products and 
services, enhance and improve our products and support services in a timely manner or position and price our products and services to meet 
demand, customers may not purchase or subscribe to our software, hardware or cloud offerings or renew software support, hardware support or 
cloud subscriptions contracts. Renewals of these contracts are important to the growth of our business. In addition, we cannot provide any 
assurance that the standards on which we choose to develop new products will allow us to compete effectively for business opportunities in 
emerging areas.  
We have continued to refresh and release new offerings of our software and cloud and hardware products and services, including our Database 
Multitenant, Database In-Memory, SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, DaaS and Oracle Engineered Systems offerings. Our business may be adversely affected if: 
   
   
   
   
   
If our security measures for our software, hardware, services or Oracle Cloud offerings are compromised and as a result, our data, our 
customers’ data or our IT systems are accessed improperly, made unavailable, or improperly modified, our products and services may be 
perceived as vulnerable, our brand and reputation could be damaged, the IT services we provide to our customers could be disrupted, and 
customers may stop using our products and services, all of which could reduce our revenue and earnings, increase our expenses and expose 
us to legal claims and regulatory actions.    We are in the information technology business, and our products and services, including our Oracle 
Cloud offerings, store, retrieve, manipulate and manage our customers’ information and data, external data, as well as our own data. We have a 
reputation for secure and reliable product offerings and related services and we have invested a great deal of time and resources in protecting the 
integrity and security of our products, services and the internal and external data that we manage.  
   
21 
  
•   we do not continue to develop and release these or other new or enhanced products and services within the anticipated time frames; 
  
•   there is a delay in market acceptance of a new, enhanced or acquired product line or service; 
  
•   there are changes in information technology trends that we do not adequately anticipate or address with our product development 
efforts; 
  
•   we do not timely optimize complementary product lines and services; or 
  
•   we fail to adequately integrate, support or enhance acquired product lines or services. 

Table of Contents  
At times, we encounter attempts by third parties to identify and exploit product and service vulnerabilities, penetrate or bypass our security 
measures, and gain unauthorized access to our or our customers’, partners’ and suppliers’ software, hardware and cloud offerings, networks and 
systems, any of which could lead to the compromise of personal information or the confidential information or data of Oracle or our customers. 
Computer hackers and others may be able to develop and deploy IT related viruses, worms, and other malicious software programs that could 
attack our products and services, exploit potential security vulnerabilities of our products and services, create system disruptions and cause 
shutdowns or denials of service. This is also true for third party data, products or services incorporated into our own. Data may also be accessed 
or modified improperly as a result of customer, partner, employee or supplier error or malfeasance and third parties may attempt to fraudulently 
induce customers, partners, employees or suppliers into disclosing sensitive information such as user names, passwords or other information in 
order to gain access to our data, our customers’, suppliers’ or partners’ data or the IT systems of Oracle, its customers, suppliers or partners.  
High-profile security breaches at other companies have increased in recent years, and security industry experts and government officials have 
warned about the risks of hackers and cyber-attacks targeting information technology products and businesses. Although this is an industry-wide 
problem that affects other software and hardware companies, it affects Oracle in particular because computer hackers tend to focus their efforts 
on the most prominent IT companies, and they may focus on Oracle because of our reputation for, and marketing efforts associated with, having 
secure products and services. These risks will increase as we continue to grow our cloud offerings and store and process increasingly large 
amounts of data, including personal information and our customers’ confidential information and data and other external data, and host or 
manage parts of our customers’ businesses in cloud-based IT environments, especially in customer sectors involving particularly sensitive data 
such as health sciences, financial services and the government. We also have an active acquisition program and have acquired a number of 
companies, products, services and technologies over the years. While we make significant efforts to address any IT security issues with respect 
to our acquired companies, we may still inherit such risks when we integrate these companies within Oracle.  
If a cyber-attack or other security incident described above were to allow unauthorized access to or modification of our customers’ or suppliers’ 
data, other external data or our own data or our IT systems or if the services we provide to our customers were disrupted, or if our products or 
services are perceived as having security vulnerabilities, we could suffer significant damage to our brand and reputation. Customers could lose 
confidence in the security and reliability of our products and services, including our cloud offerings, and perceive them to be not secure. This in 
turn could lead to fewer customers using our products and services and result in reduced revenue and earnings. The costs we would incur to 
address and fix these security incidents would increase our expenses. These types of security incidents could also lead to lawsuits, regulatory 
investigations and claims and increased legal liability, including in some cases contractual costs related to customer notification and fraud 
monitoring.  
Our business practices with respect to the collection, use and management of personal information could give rise to liabilities or 
reputational harm as a result of governmental regulation, legal requirements or industry standards relating to consumer privacy and data 
protection.     As regulatory focus on privacy issues continues to increase and worldwide laws and regulations concerning the handling of 
personal information expand and become more complex, potential risks related to data collection and use within our business will intensify. U.S. 
and foreign governments have enacted or are considering enacting legislation or regulations, or may in the near future interpret existing 
legislation or regulations, in a manner that could significantly impact the ability of Oracle and our customers and data partners to collect, 
augment, analyze, use, transfer and share personal and other information that is integral to certain services Oracle provides and data services. 
This could be true particularly in those jurisdictions where privacy laws or regulators take a broader view of how personal information is 
defined, therefore subjecting the handling of such data to heightened restrictions that may be obstructive to the operations of Oracle and its 
customers and data providers. This impact may be acute in countries that have passed or are considering passing legislation that requires data to 
remain localized “in country”, as this imposes financial costs on any service provider that is required to store data in jurisdictions not of its 
choosing and nonstandard operational processes that are difficult and costly to integrate with global processes. Regulators globally are also 
imposing greater monetary fines for privacy violations, and the European  
   
22 

Table of Contents  
Union (EU) is considering legislation that would impose fines for privacy violations based on a percentage of global revenues. Changes in laws 
or regulations associated with the enhanced protection of certain types of sensitive data, such as healthcare data or other personal information, 
could greatly increase our cost of providing our products and services or even prevent us from offering certain of our services in jurisdictions 
that we operate. Additionally, public perception and standards related to the privacy of personal information can shift rapidly, in ways that may 
affect Oracle’s reputation or influence regulators to enact regulations and laws that may limit Oracle’s ability to provide certain products. Any 
failure, or perceived failure, by Oracle to comply with U.S. federal, state, or foreign laws and regulations, including laws and regulations 
regulating privacy, data security, or consumer protection, or other policies, public perception, standards, self-regulatory requirements or legal 
obligations, could result in lost or restricted business, proceedings, actions or fines brought against us or levied by governmental entities or 
others, or could adversely affect our business and harm our reputation.  
We might experience significant coding, manufacturing or configuration errors in our software, hardware and cloud offerings.     Despite 
testing prior to their release and throughout the lifecycle of a product or service, software, hardware and cloud offerings sometimes contain 
coding or manufacturing errors that can impact their function, performance and security, and result in other negative consequences. The 
detection and correction of any errors in released software, hardware or cloud offerings can be time consuming and costly. Errors in our 
software, hardware or cloud offerings could affect their ability to properly function or operate with other software, hardware or cloud offerings, 
could delay the development or release of new products or services or new versions of products or services, could result in creating security 
vulnerabilities in our products or services, and could adversely affect market acceptance of our products or services. This includes third party 
software products or services incorporated into our own. If we experience errors or delays in releasing our software, hardware or cloud offerings 
or new versions thereof, our sales could be affected and revenues could decline. In addition, we run Oracle’s business operations as well as cloud 
and other services that we offer to our customers on our products and networks. Therefore, any flaws could affect our ability to conduct our 
business operations and the operations of our customers. Enterprise customers rely on our software and hardware products and services to run 
their businesses and errors in our software, hardware or cloud offerings could expose us to product liability, performance and warranty claims as 
well as significant harm to our brand and reputation, which could impact our future sales.  
If we are unable to compete effectively, the results of operations and prospects for our business could be harmed.     We face intense 
competition in all aspects of our business. The nature of the IT industry creates a competitive landscape that is constantly evolving as firms 
emerge, expand or are acquired, and as technology evolves. Many vendors develop and market databases, middleware products, application 
development tools, business applications, collaboration products and business intelligence products, among others, that compete with our 
software and cloud offerings. These vendors include on-premises software companies and companies that offer cloud based SaaS, PaaS, IaaS 
and DaaS offerings and business process outsourcing (BPO) as competitive alternatives to buying software and hardware. Our competitors that 
offer business applications and middleware products may influence a customer’s purchasing decision for the underlying database in an effort to 
persuade potential customers not to acquire our products. We could lose customers if our competitors introduce new competitive products, add 
new functionality, acquire competitive products, reduce prices or form strategic alliances with other companies. We may also face increasing 
competition from open source software initiatives in which competitors may provide software and intellectual property for free. Existing or new 
competitors could gain sales opportunities or customers at our expense.  
Our hardware systems business competes with, among others, (i) systems manufacturers and resellers of systems based on our own 
microprocessors and operating systems and those of our competitors, (ii) microprocessor/chip manufacturers, (iii) providers of storage products 
and (iv) certain industry-specific hardware manufacturers including those serving communications, hospitality and retail industries. Our 
hardware systems business causes us to compete with certain companies that historically have been partners. Some of these competitors may 
have more experience than we do in managing a hardware business. A large portion of our hardware products are based on our SPARC 
microprocessor and Oracle Solaris operating system platform, which has a smaller installed base than certain of our competitors’ platforms and 
which may make it difficult for us to win new customers that have already made significant investments in our competitors’ platforms. Certain of 
these competitors also  
   
23 

Table of Contents  
compete very aggressively on price. A loss in our competitive position could result in lower revenues or profitability, which could adversely 
impact our ability to realize the revenue and profitability forecasts for our hardware systems business.  
Our international sales and operations subject us to additional risks that can adversely affect our operating results.     We derive a substantial 
portion of our revenues from, and have significant operations, outside of the United States. Our international operations include software and 
hardware systems development, manufacturing, assembly, sales, customer support, consulting and other services and shared administrative 
service centers.  
Compliance with international and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international operations increases our cost of doing business in 
foreign jurisdictions. These laws and regulations include U.S. laws and local laws which include data privacy requirements, labor relations laws, 
tax laws, anti-competition regulations, prohibitions on payments to governmental officials, import and trade restrictions and export requirements. 
Violations of these laws and regulations could result in fines, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or our employees, and prohibitions on 
the conduct of our business. Any such violations could result in prohibitions on our ability to offer our products and services in one or more 
countries, could delay or prevent potential acquisitions and could also materially damage our reputation, our brand, our international expansion 
efforts, our ability to attract and retain employees, our business and our operating results. Compliance with these laws requires a significant 
amount of management attention and effort, which may divert management’s attention from running our business operations and could harm our 
ability to grow our business, or may increase our expenses as we engage specialized or other additional resources to assist us with our 
compliance efforts. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to anticipate these risks and manage these difficulties. We monitor our operations 
and investigate allegations of improprieties relating to transactions and the way in which such transactions are recorded. Where circumstances 
warrant, we provide information and report our findings to government authorities, but no assurance can be given that action will not be taken by 
such authorities.  
We are also subject to a variety of other risks and challenges in managing an organization operating in various countries, including those related 
to:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
The variety of risks and challenges listed above could also disrupt or otherwise negatively impact the supply chain operations for our hardware 
systems products segment and the sales of our products and services in affected countries or regions.  
As the majority shareholder of Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSS), a publicly traded company in India, and Oracle Corporation 
Japan (NOKK), a publicly traded company in Japan, we are faced with several additional risks, including being subject to local securities 
regulations and being unable to exert full control that we would otherwise have if OFSS or NOKK were wholly owned subsidiaries.  
   
24 
  
•   general economic conditions in each country or region; 
  
•   fluctuations in currency exchange rates and related impacts to customer demand and our operating results; 
  
•   difficulties in transferring funds from or converting currencies in certain countries such as Venezuela that have led to a devaluation of 
our net assets, in particular our cash assets, in that country’s currency; 
  
•   regulatory changes, including government austerity measures in certain countries that we may not be able to sufficiently plan for or 
avoid that may unexpectedly impair bank deposits or other cash assets that we hold in these countries or that impose additional taxes 
that we may be required to pay in these countries; 
  
•   political unrest, terrorism and the potential for other hostilities, including those in Ukraine, Syria, Iraq and Yemen; 
  
•   natural disasters; 
  
•   longer payment cycles and difficulties in collecting accounts receivable; 
  
•   overlapping tax regimes; 
  
•   our ability to repatriate funds held by our foreign subsidiaries to the United States at favorable tax rates; 
  
•   public health risks, particularly in areas in which we have significant operations; and 
  
•   reduced protection for intellectual property rights in some countries. 

Table of Contents  
Acquisitions present many risks and we may not realize the financial and strategic goals that were contemplated at the time of a transaction. 
    In recent years, we have invested billions of dollars to acquire a number of companies, products, services and technologies. A selective and 
active acquisition program is an important element of our overall corporate strategy and we expect to continue to make acquisitions in the future. 
Risks we may face in connection with our acquisition program include:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
25 
  
•   our ongoing business may be disrupted and our management’s attention may be diverted by acquisition, transition or integration 
activities; 
  
•   we may have difficulties (i) managing an acquired company’s technologies or lines of business; (ii) entering new markets where we 
have no or limited direct prior experience or where competitors may have stronger market positions; or (iii) retaining key personnel 
from the acquired companies; 
  
•   an acquisition may not further our business strategy as we expected, we may not integrate an acquired company or technology as 
successfully as we expected or we may overpay for, or otherwise not realize the expected return on, our investments, which could 
adversely affect our business or operating results and potentially cause impairment to assets that we recorded as a part of an acquisition 
including intangible assets and goodwill; 
  
•   our operating results or financial condition may be adversely impacted by claims or liabilities that we assume from an acquired 
company or technology or that are otherwise related to an acquisition, including, among others, claims from government agencies, 
terminated employees, current or former customers, former stockholders or other third parties; pre-existing contractual relationships of 
an acquired company that we would not have otherwise entered into, the termination or modification of which may be costly or 
disruptive to our business; unfavorable revenue recognition or other accounting treatment as a result of an acquired company’s 
practices; and intellectual property claims or disputes; 
  
•   we may fail to identify or assess the magnitude of certain liabilities, shortcomings or other circumstances prior to acquiring a company 
or technology, which could result in unexpected litigation or regulatory exposure, unfavorable accounting treatment, unexpected 
increases in taxes due, a loss of anticipated tax benefits or other adverse effects on our business, operating results or financial condition; 
  
•   we may not realize the anticipated increase in our revenues from an acquisition for a number of reasons, including if a larger than 
predicted number of customers decline to renew software or hardware support contracts or cloud-based subscription contracts, if we are 
unable to sell the acquired products or service offerings to our customer base or if contract models of an acquired company do not allow 
us to recognize revenues on a timely basis; 
  
•   we may have difficulty incorporating acquired technologies, products, services and their related supply chain operations with our 
existing lines of business and supply chain infrastructure and maintaining uniform standards, architecture, controls, procedures and 
policies; 
  
•   we may have multiple product lines or services offerings as a result of our acquisitions that are offered, priced and supported differently, 
which could cause customer confusion and delays; 
  
•   we may have higher than anticipated costs in continuing support and development of acquired products or services, in general and 
administrative functions that support new business models, or in compliance with associated regulations that are more complicated than 
we had anticipated; 
  
•   we may be unable to obtain timely approvals from, or may otherwise have certain limitations, restrictions, penalties or other sanctions 
imposed on us by, worker councils or similar bodies under applicable employment laws as a result of an acquisition, which could 
adversely affect our integration plans in certain jurisdictions and potentially increase our integration and restructuring expenses; 
  
•   we may be unable to obtain required approvals from governmental authorities under competition and antitrust laws on a timely basis, if 
at all, which could, among other things, delay or prevent us from completing a transaction, otherwise restrict our ability to realize the 
expected financial or strategic goals of an acquisition or have other adverse effects on our current business and operations; 

Table of Contents  
   
   
   
The occurrence of any of these risks could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows, 
particularly in the case of a larger acquisition or several concurrent acquisitions.  
Our periodic workforce restructurings, including reorganizations of our sales force, can be disruptive.     We have in the past restructured or 
made other adjustments to our workforce, including our direct sales force on which we rely heavily, in response to management changes, product 
changes, performance issues, acquisitions and other internal and external considerations. In the past, these types of sales force restructurings 
have resulted in increased restructuring costs, increased sales and marketing costs and temporary reduced productivity while the sales teams 
adjusted to their new roles and responsibilities. In addition, we may not achieve or sustain the expected growth or cost savings benefits of these 
restructurings, or do so within the expected timeframe. These effects could recur in connection with future acquisitions and other restructurings 
and our revenues and other results of operations could be negatively affected.  
Our hardware systems revenues and profitability could decline if we do not manage the risks associated with our hardware systems business. 
   Our hardware systems business may adversely affect our overall profitability if we do not effectively manage the associated risks. We may not 
achieve our estimated revenue, profit or other financial projections with respect to our hardware systems business in a timely manner or at all 
due to a number of factors, including:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
26 
  
•   our use of cash to pay for acquisitions may limit other potential uses of our cash, including stock repurchases, dividend payments and 
retirement of outstanding indebtedness; 
  
•   we may significantly increase our interest expense, leverage and debt service requirements if we incur additional debt to pay for an 
acquisition and we may have to delay or not proceed with a substantial acquisition if we cannot obtain the necessary funding to 
complete the acquisition in a timely manner or on favorable terms; 
  
•   to the extent that we issue a significant amount of equity securities in connection with future acquisitions, existing stockholders may be 
diluted and earnings per share may decrease; and 
  
•   we may experience additional or unexpected changes in how we are required to account for our acquisitions pursuant to U.S. generally 
accepted accounting principles, including arrangements that we assume from an acquisition. 
  
•   as we develop and introduce new versions or next generations of our hardware systems products, customers may defer or delay 
purchases of existing hardware systems products and wait for these new releases, all of which could adversely affect our hardware 
systems revenues in the short term; 
  
•   our hardware systems business has higher expenses as a percentage of revenues, and thus has been less profitable, than our software and 
cloud business; 
  
•   we have focused on our more profitable Oracle Engineered Systems, such as our Oracle Exadata Database Machine, Oracle Exalogic 
Elastic Cloud, Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine and Oracle SuperCluster products, which are in the relatively early stages of 
adoption by our customers, and the de-emphasis of our lower profit margin commodity hardware systems products could adversely 
affect our hardware systems revenues because the lower profit systems have historically constituted a larger portion of our hardware 
systems revenues; 
  
•   we face a greater risk of potential write-downs and impairments of inventory, higher warranty expenses than in our software and cloud 
and services businesses, and amortization and potential impairment of intangible assets associated with our hardware systems business. 
Any of these items could result in material charges and adversely affect our operating results; 
  
•   we may not be able to increase sales of hardware systems support contracts or such increase may take longer than we anticipate, which 
could result in lower revenues and profitability, or slower than expected growth of such revenues and profitability; and 
  
•   we may acquire hardware companies that are strategically important to us but (i) operate in hardware businesses with historically lower 
operating margins than our own; (ii) have different legacy business 

Table of Contents  
Our hardware systems offerings are complex products, and if we cannot successfully manage this complexity, the results of our hardware 
systems business will suffer.     Designing, developing, manufacturing and introducing new hardware systems products are complicated 
processes. The development process for our hardware systems products is uncertain and requires a high level of innovation. After the 
development phase, we must be able to forecast customer demand and manufacture new hardware systems products in sufficient volumes to 
meet this demand and do so in a cost effective manner. Our “build-to-order” manufacturing model, in which our hardware systems products 
generally are not built until after customers place orders, may from time to time experience delays in delivering our hardware systems products 
to customers in a timely manner. These delays could cause our customers to purchase hardware products and services from our competitors. We 
must also manage new hardware product introductions and transitions to minimize the impact of customer delayed purchases of existing 
hardware systems products in anticipation of new hardware systems product releases. It is also possible that we could experience design or 
manufacturing flaws which could delay or prevent the production of the components for which we have previously committed to pay or need to 
fulfill orders from customers and could also prevent the production of our hardware products or cause our hardware products to be returned, 
recalled or rejected resulting in lost revenues, increases in warranty costs or costs related to remediation efforts, damage to our reputation, 
penalties and litigation.  
We depend on suppliers to design, develop, manufacture and deliver on a timely basis the necessary technologies and components for our 
hardware products, and there are some technologies and components that can only be purchased from a single vendor due to price, quality, 
technology, availability or other business constraints. As a result, our supply chain operations could be disrupted or negatively impacted by 
natural disasters, political unrest, port stoppages or other transportation disruptions or slowdowns or other factors affecting the countries or 
regions where these single source component vendors are located or where the products are being shipped. We may be unable to purchase these 
items from the respective single vendors on acceptable terms or may experience significant delays or quality issues in the delivery of necessary 
technologies, parts or components from a particular vendor. If we had to find a new supplier for these technologies, parts and components, 
hardware systems product shipments could be delayed, which would adversely affect our hardware systems revenues. We could also experience 
fluctuations in component prices which, if unanticipated, could negatively impact our hardware systems business cost structure. Additionally, we 
could experience changes in shipping and logistics of our hardware products, which could result in fluctuations in prices and negatively impact 
our hardware systems margins. These factors may make it difficult for us to plan and procure appropriate component inventory levels in a timely 
fashion to meet customer demand for our hardware products. Therefore, we may experience component inventory shortages which may result in 
production delays or customers choosing to purchase fewer hardware products from us or systems products from our competitors. We negotiate 
supply commitments with vendors early in the manufacturing process to ensure we have sufficient technologies and components for our 
hardware products to meet anticipated customer demand. We must also manage our levels of older component inventories used in our hardware 
products to minimize inventory write-offs or write-downs. If we have excess inventory, it may be necessary to write-down the inventory, which 
would adversely affect our operating results. If one or more of the risks described above occurs, our hardware systems business and related 
operating results could be materially and adversely affected.  
We are susceptible to third party manufacturing and logistics delays, which could result in the loss of sales and customers.     We outsource 
the design, manufacturing, assembly and delivery of certain of our hardware products to a variety of companies, many of which are located 
outside the United States. Our reliance on these third parties reduces our control over the design, manufacturing and delivery process, exposing 
us to risks, including reduced control over quality assurance, product costs, product supply and delivery delays as well as the political and 
economic uncertainties and natural disasters of the international locations where certain of these third party manufacturers have facilities and 
operations. Some countries may raise national security concerns or  
   
27 
  
practices and go-to-market strategies that we may alter as a part of our integration efforts, which may significantly impact our estimated 
revenues and profits from the acquired company; (iii) leverage different platforms or competing technologies that we may encounter 
difficulties in integrating; or (iv) utilize unique manufacturing processes that affect our ability to scale these acquired products within 
our own manufacturing operations. 

Table of Contents  
impose market access restrictions based on location of manufacture or sourcing. Any manufacturing disruption or logistics delays by these third 
parties could impair our ability to fulfill orders for these hardware systems products for extended periods of time. If we are unable to manage our 
relationships with these third parties effectively, or if these third parties experience delays, disruptions, capacity constraints, regulatory issues or 
quality control problems in their operations, or fail to meet our future requirements for timely delivery, our ability to ship and deliver certain of 
our hardware systems products to our customers could be impaired and our hardware systems business could be harmed.  
We have simplified our supply chain processes by reducing the number of third party manufacturing partners and the number of locations where 
these third party manufacturers build our hardware systems products. We therefore have become more dependent on a fewer number of these 
manufacturing partners and locations. If these partners experience production problems or delays or cannot meet our demand for products, we 
may not be able to find alternate manufacturing sources in a timely or cost effective manner, if at all. If we are required to change third party 
manufacturers, our ability to meet our scheduled hardware systems products deliveries to our customers could be adversely affected, which could 
cause the loss of sales and existing or potential customers, delayed revenue recognition or an increase in our hardware systems products 
expenses, all of which could adversely affect the margins of our hardware business.  
These challenges and risks also exist when we acquire companies with hardware products and related supply chain operations. In some cases, we 
may be dependent, at least initially, on these acquired companies’ supply chain operations that we are less familiar with and thus we may be 
slower to adjust or react to these challenges and risks.  
Our software indirect sales channel could affect our future operating results.     Our software indirect channel network is comprised primarily 
of resellers, system integrators/implementers, consultants, education providers, internet service providers, network integrators and independent 
software vendors. Our relationships with these channel participants are important elements of our software marketing and sales efforts. Our 
financial results could be adversely affected if our contracts with channel participants were terminated, if our relationships with channel 
participants were to deteriorate, if any of our competitors enter into strategic relationships with or acquire a significant channel participant, if the 
financial condition or operations of our channel participants were to weaken or if the level of demand for our channel participants’ products and 
services were to decrease. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in maintaining, expanding or developing our relationships with 
channel participants. If we are not successful, we may lose sales opportunities, customers and revenues.  
We may not be able to protect our intellectual property rights.     We rely on copyright, trademark, patent and trade secret laws, confidentiality 
procedures, controls and contractual commitments to protect our intellectual property rights. Despite our efforts, these protections may be 
limited. Unauthorized third parties may try to copy or reverse engineer portions of our products or otherwise obtain and use our intellectual 
property. Any patents owned by us may be invalidated, circumvented or challenged. Any of our pending or future patent applications, whether or 
not being currently challenged, may not be issued with the scope of the claims we seek, if at all. In addition, the laws of some countries do not 
provide the same level of protection of our intellectual property rights as do the laws and courts of the United States. If we cannot protect our 
intellectual property rights against unauthorized copying or use, or other misappropriation, we may not remain competitive.  
Third parties have claimed and, in the future, may claim infringement or misuse of intellectual property rights and/or breach of license 
agreement provisions.     We periodically receive notices from, or have lawsuits filed against us by, others claiming infringement or other 
misuse of their intellectual property rights and/or breach of our agreements with them. These third parties include entities that do not have the 
capabilities to design, manufacture, or distribute products or services or that acquire intellectual property like patents for the sole purpose of 
monetizing their acquired intellectual property through asserting claims of infringement and misuse. We expect the number of such claims will 
increase as:  
   
   
   
   
28 
  
•   we continue to acquire companies and expand into new businesses; 
  
•   the number of products and competitors in our industry segments grows; 
  
•   the use and support of third party code (including open source code) becomes more prevalent in the industry; 

Table of Contents  
   
Responding to any such claim, regardless of its validity, could:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
We may lose key employees or may be unable to hire enough qualified employees.     We rely on the continued service of our senior 
management, including our Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors, Chief Technology Officer and founder, our Chief Executive Officers, 
other members of our executive team and other key employees and the hiring of new qualified employees. In the technology industry, there is 
substantial and continuous competition for highly skilled business, product development, technical and other personnel. In addition, acquisitions 
could cause us to lose key personnel of the acquired companies or at Oracle. We may also experience increased compensation costs that are not 
offset by either improved productivity or higher sales. We may not be successful in recruiting new personnel and in retaining and motivating 
existing personnel. With rare exceptions, we do not have long-term employment or non-competition agreements with our employees. Members 
of our senior management team have left Oracle over the years for a variety of reasons, and we cannot assure you that there will not be additional 
departures, which may be disruptive to our operations.  
We continually focus on improving our cost structure by hiring personnel in countries where advanced technical expertise and other expertise are 
available at lower costs. When we make adjustments to our workforce, we may incur expenses associated with workforce reductions that delay 
the benefit of a more efficient workforce structure. We may also experience increased competition for employees in these countries as the trend 
toward globalization continues, which may affect our employee retention efforts and increase our expenses in an effort to offer a competitive 
compensation program. Our general compensation program includes stock options and restricted stock units (RSUs), which are important tools 
in attracting and retaining employees in our industry. If our stock price performs poorly, it may adversely affect our ability to retain or attract 
employees. In addition, because we expense all stock-based compensation, we have changed and may in the future change our stock-based and 
other compensation practices. For example, in fiscal 2015, we introduced RSU grants for certain of our employees and performance related stock 
unit grants for certain of our executives. We continue to evaluate our compensation practices and other changes we consider from time to time 
include a reduction in the number of employees granted equity awards, a reduction in the number of stock options or RSUs granted per employee 
and alternative forms of stock-based compensation, all of which may have an impact on our ability to retain employees and also impact the 
amount of stock-based compensation expense that we record. Any changes in our compensation practices or changes made by competitors could 
affect our ability to retain and motivate existing personnel and recruit new personnel.  
Our sales to government clients subject us to business volatility and risks, including government budgeting cycles and appropriations, early 
termination, audits, investigations, sanctions and penalties.     We derive revenues from contracts with the U.S. government, state and local 
governments, and foreign governments and their respective agencies, which may terminate most of these contracts at any time, without cause. 
There is increased pressure for governments and their agencies, both domestically and internationally, to reduce spending. Further, our U.S. 
federal government contracts are subject to the approval of appropriations made by the U.S. Congress to fund the expenditures under these 
contracts. Similarly, our contracts at the state and local levels in the U.S. and our contracts with foreign governments and their agencies are 
generally subject to government  
   
29 
  
•   the volume of issued patents continues to increase; and 
  
•   the proliferation of non-practicing entities asserting intellectual property infringement claims increases. 
  
•   be time consuming, costly and result in litigation; 
  
•   divert management’s time and attention from developing our business; 
  
•   require us to pay monetary damages or enter into royalty and licensing agreements that we would not normally find acceptable; 
  
•   require us to stop selling or to redesign certain of our products; 
  
•   require us to release source code to third parties, possibly under open source license terms; 
  
•   require us to satisfy indemnification obligations to our customers; or 
  
•   otherwise adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows. 

Table of Contents  
funding authorizations. Additionally, government contracts are generally subject to audits and investigations which could result in various civil 
and criminal penalties and administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, refund of a portion of fees received, forfeiture of profits, 
suspension of payments, fines and suspensions or debarment from future government business.  
We may need to change our pricing models to compete successfully.     The intense competition we face in the sales of our products and 
services and general economic and business conditions can put pressure on us to change our prices. If our competitors offer deep discounts on 
certain products or services or develop products that the marketplace considers more valuable, we may need to lower prices or offer other 
favorable terms in order to compete successfully. Any such changes may reduce margins and could adversely affect operating results. 
Additionally, the increasing prevalence of cloud and SaaS delivery models offered by us and our competitors may unfavorably impact the 
pricing of our on-premises enterprise software offerings and our cloud offerings, as well as overall demand for our on-premises software product 
and service offerings, which could reduce our revenues and profitability. Our software license updates and product support fees and hardware 
systems support fees are generally priced as a percentage of our net new software licenses fees and net new hardware systems products fees, 
respectively. Our competitors may offer lower pricing on their support offerings, which could put pressure on us to further discount our product 
or support pricing.  
Any broad-based change to our prices and pricing policies could cause our revenues to decline or be delayed as our sales force implements and 
our customers adjust to the new pricing policies. Some of our competitors may bundle products for promotional purposes or as a long-term 
pricing strategy or provide guarantees of prices and product implementations. These practices could, over time, significantly constrain the prices 
that we can charge for certain of our products. If we do not adapt our pricing models to reflect changes in customer use of our products or 
changes in customer demand, our revenues could decrease. The increase in open source software distribution may also cause us to change our 
pricing models.  
We may not receive significant revenues from our current research and development efforts for several years, if at all.     Developing 
software, cloud and hardware offerings is expensive and the investment in the development of these offerings often involves a long return on 
investment cycle. An important element of our corporate strategy is to continue to make significant investments in research and development and 
related product and service opportunities both through internal investments and the acquisition of intellectual property from companies that we 
have acquired. Accelerated product and service introductions and short software and hardware life cycles require high levels of expenditures for 
research and development that could adversely affect our operating results if not offset by revenue increases. We believe that we must continue 
to dedicate a significant amount of resources to our research and development efforts to maintain our competitive position. However, we do not 
expect to receive significant revenues from these investments for several years, if at all.  
Business disruptions could adversely affect our operating results.    A significant portion of our critical business operations are concentrated in 
a few geographic areas. We are a highly automated business and a disruption or failure of our systems could cause delays in completing sales 
and providing services, including some of our cloud offerings. A major earthquake, fire or other catastrophic event that results in the destruction 
or disruption of any of our critical business or IT systems could severely affect our ability to conduct normal business operations and, as a result, 
our future operating results could be materially and adversely affected.  
Adverse litigation results could affect our business.     We are subject to various legal proceedings. Litigation can be lengthy, expensive and 
disruptive to our operations, and can divert our management’s attention away from running our core business. The results of our litigation also 
cannot be predicted with certainty. An adverse decision could result in monetary damages or injunctive relief that could affect our business, 
operating results or financial condition. Additional information regarding certain of the lawsuits we are involved in is discussed under Note 18 of 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
We may have exposure to additional tax liabilities.     As a multinational corporation, we are subject to income taxes as well as non-income 
based taxes, in both the United States and various foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision 
for income taxes and other tax liabilities. We are regularly under audit by tax authorities and those authorities often do not agree with positions 
taken by us on our tax returns.  
   
30 

Table of Contents  
Changes in tax laws or tax rulings may have a significantly adverse impact on our effective tax rate. For example, the United States, many 
countries in the EU, and other countries where we do business, are actively considering changes in relevant tax, accounting and other laws, 
regulations and interpretations, including changes to tax laws applicable to corporate multinationals, which, if enacted, could have a significant 
adverse impact on our effective tax rate. Further, in the ordinary course of a global business, there are many intercompany transactions and 
calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Our intercompany transfer pricing has been and is currently being reviewed by the 
U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and by foreign tax jurisdictions and will likely be subject to additional audits in the future. Although, we 
have negotiated certain unilateral Advance Pricing Agreements with the IRS and certain selected bilateral Advance Pricing Agreements that 
cover some of our intercompany transfer pricing issues and preclude the relevant tax authorities from making a transfer pricing adjustment 
within the scope of these agreements, these agreements do not cover substantial elements of our transfer pricing. In recent periods, transfer 
pricing audits in many foreign jurisdictions have become increasingly contentious. Similarly, certain jurisdictions are increasingly raising 
concerns about certain withholding tax matters. In addition, our provision for income taxes could be adversely affected by earnings being lower 
than anticipated in jurisdictions which we consider to be indefinitely reinvested outside the United States that have lower statutory tax rates and 
earnings being higher than anticipated in jurisdictions that have higher statutory tax rates.  
We are also subject to non-income based taxes, such as payroll, sales, use, value-added, net worth, property and goods and services taxes, in both 
the United States and various foreign jurisdictions. We are regularly under audit by tax authorities with respect to these non-income based taxes 
and may have exposure to additional non-income based tax liabilities. Our acquisition activities have increased our non-income based tax 
exposures, particularly with our entry into the hardware systems business, which increased the volume and complexity of laws and regulations 
that we are subject to and with which we must comply.  
Although we believe that our income and non-income based tax estimates are reasonable, there is no assurance that the final determination of tax 
audits or tax disputes will not be different from what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals.  
Charges to earnings resulting from acquisitions may adversely affect our operating results.     Under business combination accounting 
standards pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations , we recognize the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any non-
controlling interests in acquired companies generally at their acquisition date fair values and, in each case, separately from goodwill. Goodwill as 
of the acquisition date is measured as the excess amount of consideration transferred, which is also generally measured at fair value, and the net 
of the acquisition date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Our estimates of fair value are based upon 
assumptions believed to be reasonable but which are inherently uncertain. After we complete an acquisition, the following factors could result in 
material charges and adversely affect our operating results and may adversely affect our cash flows:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
31 
  
•   costs incurred to combine the operations of companies we acquire, such as transitional employee expenses and employee retention, 
redeployment or relocation expenses; 
  
•   impairment of goodwill, in particular within our consulting reporting unit, or impairment of intangible assets, both of which we have 
added to significantly in recent years and may continue to increase in the future; 
  
•   amortization of intangible assets acquired; 
  
•   a reduction in the useful lives of intangible assets acquired; 
  
•   identification of, or changes to, assumed contingent liabilities, both income tax and non-income tax related, after our final determination 
of the amounts for these contingencies or the conclusion of the measurement period (generally up to one year from the acquisition date), 
whichever comes first; 
  
•   charges to our operating results to maintain certain duplicative pre-merger activities for an extended period of time or to maintain these 
activities for a period of time that is longer than we had anticipated, charges to eliminate certain duplicative pre-merger activities, and 
charges to restructure our operations or to reduce our cost structure; 

Table of Contents  
   
Substantially all of these costs will be accounted for as expenses that will decrease our net income and earnings per share for the periods in 
which those costs are incurred. For example, we recognized a goodwill impairment loss in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015 relating to our 
hardware systems reporting unit. Charges to our operating results in any given period could differ substantially from other periods based on the 
timing and size of our future acquisitions and the extent of integration activities. A more detailed discussion of our accounting for business 
combinations and other items is presented in the “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Item 7).  
There are risks associated with our outstanding and future indebtedness.     As of May 31, 2015, we had an aggregate of $42.0 billion of 
outstanding indebtedness that will mature between calendar year 2016 and calendar year 2055 and we may incur additional indebtedness in the 
future. Our ability to pay interest and repay the principal for our indebtedness is dependent upon our ability to manage our business operations, 
generate sufficient cash flows to service such debt and the other factors discussed in this section. There can be no assurance that we will be able 
to manage any of these risks successfully.  
We may also need to refinance a portion of our outstanding debt as it matures. There is a risk that we may not be able to refinance existing debt 
or that the terms of any refinancing may not be as favorable as the terms of our existing debt. Furthermore, if prevailing interest rates or other 
factors at the time of refinancing result in higher interest rates upon refinancing, then the interest expense relating to that refinanced indebtedness 
would increase. Should we incur future increases in interest expense, our ability to utilize certain of our foreign tax credits to reduce our U.S. 
federal income tax could be limited, which could unfavorably affect our provision for income taxes and effective tax rate. In addition, changes 
by any rating agency to our outlook or credit rating could negatively affect the value of both our debt and equity securities and increase the 
interest amounts we pay on outstanding or future debt. These risks could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.  
Environmental and other related laws and regulations subject us to a number of risks and could result in significant liabilities and costs.     
Some of our cloud and hardware systems operations are subject to state, federal and international laws governing protection of the environment, 
proper handling and disposal of materials used for these products, human health and safety, the use of certain chemical substances and the labor 
practices of suppliers. We endeavor to comply with these environmental and other laws, yet compliance with these environmental and other laws 
could increase our product design, development, procurement, manufacturing, delivery and administration costs, limit our ability to manage 
excess and obsolete non-compliant inventory, change our sales activities, or otherwise impact future financial results of our cloud and hardware 
systems businesses. Any violation of these laws can subject us to significant liability, including fines, penalties and possible prohibition of sales 
of our products and services into one or more states or countries and result in a material adverse effect on the financial condition or results of 
operations of our cloud and hardware systems businesses.  
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted disclosure requirements for companies that use certain “conflict 
minerals” (commonly referred to as tantalum, tin, tungsten and gold) in their products. Our supply chain is multi-tiered, global and highly 
complex. As a provider of hardware systems end products, we are several steps removed from the mining and smelting or refining of any conflict 
minerals in our supply chain. Accordingly, our ability to determine with certainty the origin and chain of custody of conflict minerals is limited. 
Our relationships with customers and suppliers could suffer if we are unable to describe our products as “conflict-free.” We may also face 
increased costs in complying with conflict minerals disclosure requirements.  
A significant portion of our hardware systems revenues come from international sales. Environmental legislation, such as the EU Directive on 
Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS), the EU Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE Directive) and China’s 
regulation on Management Methods for Controlling Pollution Caused by Electronic Information Products, may increase our cost of doing 
business internationally and impact our hardware systems revenues from the EU, China and other countries with similar environmental 
legislation as we endeavor to comply with and implement these requirements. The cumulative impact of international environmental legislation 
could be significant.  
   
32 
  
•   charges to our operating results due to expenses incurred to effect the acquisition; and 
  
•   charges to our operating results due to the expensing of certain stock awards assumed in an acquisition. 

Table of Contents  
Our stock price could become more volatile and your investment could lose value.    All of the factors discussed in this section could affect our 
stock price. The timing of announcements in the public market regarding new products, product enhancements or technological advances by our 
competitors or us and any announcements by us of acquisitions, major transactions, or management changes could also affect our stock price. 
Changes in the amounts and frequency of share repurchases or dividends could adversely affect our stock price. Our stock price is subject to 
speculation in the press and the analyst community, changes in recommendations or earnings estimates by financial analysts, changes in 
investors’ or analysts’ valuation measures for our stock, our credit ratings and market trends unrelated to our performance. A significant drop in 
our stock price could also expose us to the risk of securities class actions lawsuits, which could result in substantial costs and divert 
management’s attention and resources, which could adversely affect our business.  
Item 1B.    Unresolved Staff Comments  
None.  
Item 2.    Properties  
Our properties consist of owned and leased office facilities for sales, support, research and development, consulting, manufacturing and 
administrative personnel. Our headquarters facility consists of approximately 2.0 million square feet in Redwood City, California, substantially 
all of which we own. We lease our principal internal manufacturing facility for our hardware systems products in Hillsboro, Oregon. We also 
own or lease other office facilities for current use consisting of approximately 25.6 million square feet in various other locations in the United 
States and abroad. We believe our facilities are in good condition and suitable for the conduct of our business. Approximately 2.5 million square 
feet, or 9%, of total owned and leased space is sublet or is being actively marketed for sublease or disposition.  
Item 3.    Legal Proceedings  
The material set forth in Note 18 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated 
herein by reference.  
Item 4.    Mine Safety Disclosures  
None.  
   
33 

Table of Contents  
PART II  
   
Our common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “ORCL”. Prior to July 15, 2013, our common stock traded on 
the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “ORCL”. According to the records of our transfer agent, we had 11,383 stockholders of 
record as of May 31, 2015. The following table sets forth the low and high sale prices per share of our common stock, based on the last daily 
sale, in each of our last eight fiscal quarters.  
   
We declared and paid cash dividends totaling $0.51 and $0.48 per outstanding common share over the course of fiscal 2015 and fiscal 2014, 
respectively.  
In June 2015, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.15 per share of our outstanding common stock payable on July 29, 
2015 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on July 8, 2015. We currently expect to continue paying comparable cash dividends on 
a quarterly basis; however, future declarations of dividends and the establishment of future record and payment dates are subject to the final 
determination of our Board of Directors.  
For equity compensation plan information, please refer to Item 12 in Part III of this Annual Report.  
Stock Repurchase Programs  
Our Board of Directors has approved a program for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. On September 18, 2014, we announced that 
our Board of Directors approved an expansion of our stock repurchase program by an additional $13.0 billion. Approximately $9.2 billion 
remained available for stock repurchases as of May 31, 2015 pursuant to our stock repurchase program.  
Our stock repurchase authorization does not have an expiration date and the pace of our repurchase activity will depend on factors such as our 
working capital needs, our cash requirements for acquisitions and dividend payments, our debt repayment obligations or repurchases of our debt, 
our stock price and economic and market conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to time through open market purchases or 
pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan. Our stock repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.  
The following table summarizes the stock repurchase activity for the three months ended May 31, 2015 and the approximate dollar value of 
shares that may yet be purchased pursuant to our stock repurchase program:  
   
   
34 
Item 5. 
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
 
  
Fiscal 2015 
   
Fiscal 2014 
 
 
  
Low Sale 
 
Price 
   
High Sale 
 
Price 
   
Low Sale 
 
Price 
   
High Sale 
 
Price 
 
Fourth Quarter 
  
$ 41.47    
$ 44.73    
$ 37.50     
$ 42.20   
Third Quarter 
  
$ 39.95    
$ 46.23    
$ 33.23     
$ 39.11   
Second Quarter 
  
$ 37.56    
$ 42.41    
$ 32.02     
$ 35.29   
First Quarter 
  
$ 39.61    
$ 42.81    
$ 29.96     
$ 34.40   
(in millions, except per share amounts) 
  
Total Number of 
Shares  
Purchased 
   
Average Price 
Paid per  
Share 
   
Total Number of 
Shares Purchased as 
Part of Publicly  
Announced  
Program 
   
Approximate Dollar 
Value of Shares that 
May Yet Be  
Purchased  
Under the Program  
March 1, 2015—March 31, 2015 
  
 
16.2    
$ 
43.20    
 
16.2     
$ 
10,542.3   
April 1, 2015—April 30, 2015 
  
 
15.4    
$ 
43.40    
 
15.4     
$ 
9,875.7   
May 1, 2015—May 31, 2015 
  
 
14.4    
$ 
43.99    
 
14.4     
$ 
9,240.8   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
   
Total 
  
 
46.0    
$ 
43.51    
 
46.0     
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
   

Table of Contents  
Stock Performance Graph and Cumulative Total Return  
The graph below compares the cumulative total stockholder return on our common stock with the cumulative total return of the S&P 500 Index 
and the S&P Information Technology Index for each of the last five fiscal years ended May 31, 2015, assuming an investment of $100 at the 
beginning of such period and the reinvestment of any dividends. The comparisons in the graphs below are based upon historical data and are not 
indicative of, nor intended to forecast, future performance of our common stock.  
   
  
*$100 INVESTED ON MAY 31, 2010 IN STOCK OR  
INDEX-INCLUDING REINVESTMENT OF DIVIDENDS  
   
   
35 
 
  
5/10 
   
5/11 
   
5/12 
   
5/13 
   
5/14 
   
5/15 
 
Oracle Corporation 
   100.00      152.74      119.11      153.47      193.53     202.77   
S&P 500 Index 
   100.00      125.95      125.43      159.64      192.28     214.99   
S&P Information Technology Index 
   100.00      121.13      130.30      150.00      185.84     220.80   

Table of Contents  
Item 6.    Selected Financial Data  
The following table sets forth selected financial data as of and for the last five fiscal years. This selected financial data should be read in 
conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 15 of this Annual Report. Over the last five fiscal 
years, we have acquired a number of companies, including MICROS Systems, Inc. in fiscal 2015, among others. The results of our acquired 
companies have been included in our consolidated financial statements since their respective dates of acquisition and have contributed to our 
revenues, income, earnings per share and total assets.  
   
   
   
   
36 
 
 
As of and for the Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions, except per share amounts) 
 
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
  
2012 
  
2011 
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data: 
 
 
 
 
 
Total revenues 
 $ 38,226    $ 38,275   $ 37,180    $ 37,121   $ 35,622   
Operating income 
 $ 13,871    $ 14,759   $ 14,684    $ 13,706   $ 12,033   
Net income 
 $ 
9,938    $ 10,955   $ 10,925    $ 9,981   $
8,547   
Earnings per share—diluted 
 $ 
2.21    $ 
2.38   $
2.26    $ 
1.96   $
1.67   
Diluted weighted average common shares outstanding 
  
4,503     
4,604    
4,844     
5,095    
5,128   
Cash dividends declared per common share 
 $ 
0.51    $ 
0.48   $
0.30    $ 
0.24   $
0.21   
Consolidated Balance Sheets Data: 
 
 
 
 
 
Working capital 
 $ 47,892    $ 33,739   $ 28,813    $ 24,630   $ 24,975   
Total assets 
 $  110,903    $  90,266   $  81,745    $  78,274   $  73,476   
Notes payable and other borrowings 
 $ 41,958    $ 24,097   $ 18,427    $ 16,421   $ 15,863   
  Our results of operations for fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014 were significantly impacted by movements in international currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar, which decreased our 
fiscal 2015 total revenues by 4 percentage points, total operating expenses by 3 percentage points and total operating income by 6 percentage points in comparison to fiscal 2014. 
  Total working capital sequentially increased in most periods primarily due to the favorable impact to our net current assets resulting from our net income generated during these periods 
and the issuances of long-term senior notes of $20.0 billion in fiscal 2015, €2.0 billion and $3.0 billion in fiscal 2014 and $5.0 billion in fiscal 2013. These increases were partially offset 
by cash used for acquisitions, repurchases of common stock and dividend payments made in all periods presented and repayments of certain of our senior notes in fiscal 2015, 2013 and 
2011. 
  Our notes payable and other borrowings, which represented the summation of our notes payable, current and other current borrowings, and notes payable and other non-current 
borrowings as reported per our consolidated balance sheets as of the dates listed in the table above, increased between fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2015 due to the issuances of long-term senior 
notes of $20.0 billion in fiscal 2015, €2.0 billion and $3.0 billion in fiscal 2014, and $5.0 billion in fiscal 2013, and $1.7 billion of short-term borrowings made pursuant to our revolving 
credit agreement in fiscal 2012. See Note 8 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our notes 
payable and other borrowings. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 

Table of Contents  
Item 7.    Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations  
We begin Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations with an overview of our key operating 
business segments and significant trends. This overview is followed by a summary of our critical accounting policies and estimates that we 
believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. We then provide a more 
detailed analysis of our results of operations and financial condition.  
Business Overview  
Oracle Corporation provides products and services that address all aspects of corporate information technology (IT) environments—application, 
platform and infrastructure—and are available to customers either via cloud computing or on-premises deployment models. Our products include 
database and middleware software, application software, cloud infrastructure software, and hardware systems (Oracle Engineered Systems, 
servers, storage, networking and industry specific products), along with support and related services. We offer over 400,000 worldwide 
customers a choice of deployment models to best suit their needs including (1) the deployment of our products via our Oracle Cloud offerings, 
(2) the acquisition of Oracle products and services for an on-premises IT environment or (3) a mix of these two models.  
For customers opting for a cloud computing model, Oracle offers a wide range of services in all three primary layers of the cloud: Software as a 
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Our Oracle Cloud offerings are designed to be: rapidly 
deployable to enable customers shorter time to innovation; easily maintainable to reduce integration and testing work; and cost effective by 
requiring lower upfront customer investment. Our Oracle Cloud offerings integrate the software, hardware and services on the customers’ behalf 
in IT environments that we deploy, support and manage for the customer. We are a leader in the core technologies of cloud IT environments, 
including database and middleware software as well as enterprise applications, virtualization, clustering, large-scale systems management and 
related infrastructure. Our products and services are the building blocks of our Oracle Cloud services, our partners’ cloud services and our 
customers’ cloud IT environments.  
In addition to offering a broad spectrum of cloud products and services, Oracle for decades has developed and sold its products and services to 
our customers worldwide for use in their global data centers and on-premises IT environments. An important element of our corporate strategy is 
to continue our investments in, and innovation with respect to, our products and services that we offer through our software and cloud, hardware 
and services businesses. In fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, we invested $5.5 billion, $5.2 billion and $4.9 billion, respectively, in research and 
development to enhance our existing portfolio of products and services and to develop new products and services. We have a deep understanding 
as to how all components within IT environments—application, platform and infrastructure—interact and function with one another. We focus 
our development efforts on improving the performance, operation and integration of these differing technologies to make them more cost-
effective and easier to deploy, manage and maintain for our customers and to improve their computing performance relative to our competitors. 
After purchasing Oracle products and services, customers can continue to take advantage of Oracle’s research and development investments and 
deep IT expertise by purchasing and renewing Oracle support offerings, which may include product enhancements that we periodically deliver to 
our Oracle E-Business Suite, Siebel, PeopleSoft and JD Edwards application software products, among others, or renewing their SaaS, PaaS and 
IaaS contracts with us.  
Oracle customers are increasingly electing to run their IT environments using our suite of Oracle Cloud offerings. As customers deploy with the 
Oracle Cloud, many are adopting a hybrid IT model whereby certain of their IT resources are deployed and managed through the Oracle Cloud, 
while other of their IT resources are deployed and managed on-premises, and both sets of resources can be managed as one. We focus the 
engineering of our products and services to best connect these different deployment models to enable flexibility, ease, agility, compatibility, 
extensibility and seamlessness.  
A selective and active acquisition program is another important element of our corporate strategy. We believe our acquisitions enhance the 
products and services that we can offer to customers, expand our customer base, provide greater scale to accelerate innovation, grow our 
revenues and earnings, and increase stockholder value.  
   
37 

Table of Contents  
In recent years, we have invested billions of dollars to acquire a number of companies, products, services and technologies that add to, are 
complementary to, or have otherwise enhanced our existing offerings. We expect to continue to acquire companies, products, services and 
technologies to further our corporate strategy.  
We have three businesses that deliver our application, platform and infrastructure technologies: software and cloud, hardware systems, and 
services. These businesses can be further divided into certain operating segments (Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, 
included elsewhere in this Annual Report, provides additional information related to our operating segments). Each of our businesses and 
operating segments has unique characteristics and faces different opportunities and challenges. Although we report our actual results in U.S. 
Dollars, we conduct a significant number of transactions in currencies other than U.S. Dollars. Therefore, we present constant currency 
information to provide a framework for assessing how our underlying businesses performed excluding the effects of foreign currency rate 
fluctuations. An overview of our three businesses and related operating segments follows.  
Software and Cloud Business  
Our software and cloud business, which represented 77%, 76% and 75% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, is 
comprised of three operating segments: (1) new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions, (2) cloud infrastructure as a service and 
(3) software license updates and product support. On a constant currency basis, we expect that our software and cloud business’ total revenues 
generally will continue to increase due to continued demand for our software products and cloud software subscription offerings, our software 
license updates and product support offerings, including the high percentage of customers that renew their software license updates and product 
support contracts, and our acquisitions, which should allow us to grow and continue to make investments in research and development.  
New Software Licenses and Cloud Software Subscriptions:     Our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions line of business 
markets, sells and delivers our application and platform technologies including our SaaS and PaaS offerings (our SaaS and PaaS offerings are 
collectively referred to as cloud software subscriptions), which provide customers a choice of software applications and platforms that are 
delivered via a cloud-based IT environment that we host, manage and support, and the licensing of our software products including Oracle 
Applications, Oracle Database, Oracle Fusion Middleware and Java, among others. Our application and platform technologies are substantially 
built on standards-based architectures that are designed to help customers reduce the cost and complexity of their IT infrastructure. Our 
commitment to industry standards results in software that works in customer environments with Oracle or non-Oracle hardware or software 
components and that can be adapted to meet specific industry or business needs. We focus the engineering of our products and services to best 
connect cloud and on-premises deployment models to enable flexibility, ease, agility, compatibility, extensibility and seamlessness. Our software 
offerings are substantially designed to operate on both single server and clustered server configurations for cloud or on-premises IT 
environments, and to support a choice of operating systems including Oracle Solaris, Oracle Linux, Microsoft Windows and third party UNIX 
products, among others. These approaches are designed to support customer choice and reduce customer risk. Our customers include businesses 
of many sizes, government agencies, educational institutions and resellers. We market and sell our software products and services to these 
customers with a sales force positioned to offer the combinations that best fit their needs. We enable customers to evolve and transform to 
substantially any IT environment at whatever pace is most appropriate for them.  
The growth in our new software licenses and our SaaS and PaaS revenues that we report is affected by the strength of general economic and 
business conditions, governmental budgetary constraints, the competitive position of our software offerings, our acquisitions and foreign 
currency fluctuations. The substantial majority of our new software license transactions are characterized by long sales cycles and the timing of a 
few large software license transactions can substantially affect our quarterly new software licenses revenues. New software licenses and cloud 
software subscriptions revenues represented 26% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015 and 28% in each of fiscal 2014 and 2013. Our cloud 
software subscriptions contracts, which consist of SaaS and PaaS arrangements, are generally one to three years in duration and we strive to 
renew these contracts when they are eligible for renewal. Our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions segment’s margin has 
historically trended upward over the course of the four quarters within a particular fiscal year due to the historical  
   
38 

Table of Contents  
upward trend of our new software licenses revenues over those quarterly periods and because the majority of our costs for this segment are 
predominantly fixed in the short-term. However, our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions segment’s margin has been and will 
continue to be affected by the fair value adjustments relating to the cloud SaaS and PaaS obligations that we assumed in our business 
combinations (described further below) and by the amortization of intangible assets associated with companies and technologies that we have 
acquired.  
For certain of our acquired businesses, we recorded adjustments to reduce the cloud SaaS and PaaS obligations to their estimated fair values at 
the acquisition dates. As a result, as required by business combination accounting rules, we did not recognize cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues 
related to acquired contracts that would have been otherwise recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $12 
million, $17 million and $45 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. To the extent underlying cloud SaaS and PaaS contracts are 
renewed with us following an acquisition, we will recognize the revenues for the full values of these contracts over their respective contractual 
periods.  
Cloud Infrastructure as a Service:     Our cloud infrastructure as a service offerings, which represented 2% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015 
and 1% in each of fiscal 2014 and 2013, provide comprehensive software and hardware management and maintenance services for customer IT 
infrastructure for a fee for a stated term that is hosted at our Oracle data center facilities, select partner data centers or physically on-premises at 
customer facilities; deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT infrastructure including virtual machine 
instances that are subscription-based and designed for computing and reliable and secure object storage; and certain of our Oracle Engineered 
Systems and related support offerings that are deployed in our customers’ data centers for a monthly fee.  
Software License Updates and Product Support:     Customers that purchase software license updates and product support are granted rights to 
unspecified product upgrades and maintenance releases and patches released during the term of the support period, as well as technical support 
assistance. Our software license updates and product support contracts are generally one year in duration. Substantially all of our software 
license customers renew their software license updates and product support contracts annually. The growth of software license updates and 
product support revenues is primarily influenced by three factors: (1) the percentage of our software support contract customer base that renews 
its software support contracts, (2) the amount of new software support contracts sold in connection with the sale of new software licenses and 
(3) the amount of software support contracts assumed from companies we have acquired.  
Software license updates and product support revenues, which represented 49%, 47% and 46% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 
2013, respectively, is our highest margin business unit. Our software support margins during fiscal 2015 were 90% and accounted for 81% of 
our total margins over the same period. Our software license updates and product support margins have been affected by fair value adjustments 
relating to software support obligations assumed in business combinations (described further below) and by amortization of intangible assets. 
However, over the longer term, we believe that software license updates and product support revenues and margins will grow for the following 
reasons:  
   
   
   
We recorded adjustments to reduce software support obligations assumed in business combinations to their estimated fair values at the 
acquisition dates. As a result, as required by business combination accounting rules,  
   
39 
  
•   substantially all of our customers, including customers from acquired companies, renew their software support contracts when eligible 
for renewal; 
  
•   substantially all of our customers purchase software license updates and product support contracts when they buy new software licenses, 
resulting in a further increase in our software support contract base. Even if new software licenses revenues growth was flat, software 
license updates and product support revenues would continue to grow in comparison to the corresponding prior year periods assuming 
contract renewal and cancellation rates and foreign currency rates remained relatively constant since substantially all new software 
licenses transactions result in the sale of software license updates and product support contracts, which add to our software support 
contract base; and 
  
•   our acquisitions have increased our software support contract base, as well as the portfolio of products available to be licensed and 
supported. 

Table of Contents  
we did not recognize software license updates and product support revenues related to software support contracts that would have been otherwise 
recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $11 million, $3 million and $14 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 
2013, respectively. To the extent underlying software support contracts are renewed with us following an acquisition, we will recognize the 
revenues for the full values of the software support contracts over the respective support periods, the majority of which are one year.  
Hardware Systems Business  
Our hardware systems business is comprised of two operating segments: (1) hardware systems products and (2) hardware systems support. Our 
hardware business represented 14% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013. We expect our hardware business to have lower 
operating margins as a percentage of revenues than our software and cloud business due to the incremental costs we incur to produce and 
distribute these products and to provide support services, including direct materials and labor costs. We expect to make investments in research 
and development to improve existing hardware products and services and to develop new hardware products and services.  
Hardware Systems Products:     We provide a broad selection of hardware systems and related services including Oracle Engineered Systems, 
servers, storage, networking, workstations and related devices, industry specific hardware, virtualization software, operating systems, and 
management software to support diverse IT environments, including cloud computing environments. We engineer our hardware systems with 
virtualization and management capabilities to enable the rapid deployment and efficient management of cloud and on-premises IT 
infrastructures. Our hardware products support many of the world’s largest cloud infrastructures, including the Oracle Cloud.  
Our hardware systems products are designed to be easier to deploy, manage and maintain for our customers and to improve computing 
performance relative to our competitors’ offerings. We design our hardware products to seamlessly connect on-premises and cloud IT 
environments to further enable interoperability, interchangeability and extendibility and to work in customer environments that may include 
other Oracle or non-Oracle hardware or software components. Our flexible and open approach provides Oracle customers with a broad range of 
choices in how they deploy our hardware products, which we believe is a priority for our customers.  
Oracle Engineered Systems are core to our hardware offerings and are important elements of our data center and cloud computing offerings 
including the Oracle Cloud. These pre-integrated products are designed to integrate multiple Oracle technology components to work together to 
deliver improved performance, availability, security and operational efficiency relative to our competitors’ products, to be upgraded effectively 
and efficiently and to simplify maintenance cycles by providing a single solution for software patching. Oracle Engineered Systems are tested 
before they are shipped to customers and delivered ready-to-run, enabling customers to shorten the time to production.  
We offer a wide range of server systems using our SPARC microprocessor. Our SPARC servers run the Oracle Solaris operating system and are 
designed to be differentiated by their reliability, security, and scalability. Our mid-size and large servers are designed to offer better performance 
and lower total cost of ownership than mainframe systems for business critical applications, for customers having more computationally 
intensive needs, and as platforms for building cloud computing IT environments. Our SPARC servers are also a core component of the Oracle 
SuperCluster, one of our Oracle Engineered Systems.  
We also offer enterprise x86 servers. These x86 servers are based on microprocessors from Intel Corporation and are compatible with Oracle 
Solaris, Oracle Linux, Microsoft Windows and other operating systems. Our x86 servers are also a core component of many of our Oracle 
Engineered Systems including Oracle Exadata Database Machine, Oracle Exalogic Elastic Cloud, Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine and the 
Oracle Big Data Appliance.  
Our storage products are designed to securely manage, protect, archive and restore customers’ mission critical data assets and consist of tape, 
disk, flash and hardware-related software including file systems software, back-up and archive software and storage management software and 
networking for mainframe and open systems environments.  
   
40 

Table of Contents  
Our networking and data center fabric products, including Oracle Virtual Networking, and Oracle InfiniBand and Ethernet technologies, are used 
with our server and storage products and are integrated into our management tools to help enterprise customers improve infrastructure 
performance, reduce cost and complexity and simplify storage and server connectivity.  
We offer hardware products and services designed for specific industries. Our point-of-sale hardware offerings include point-of-sale terminals 
and related hardware that are designed for managing businesses within the food and beverage, hotel and retail industries, among others. Our 
hardware products and services for communications networks include network signaling, policy control and subscriber data management 
solutions, and session border control technology, among others.  
The majority of our hardware systems products are sold through indirect channels, including independent distributors and value added resellers.  
To produce our hardware products, we rely on both our internal manufacturing operations as well as third party manufacturing partners. Our 
internal manufacturing operations consist primarily of materials procurement, assembly, testing and quality control of our Oracle Engineered 
Systems and certain of our enterprise and data center servers and storage systems. For all other manufacturing, we generally rely on third party 
manufacturing partners to produce our hardware related components and hardware products and we may involve our internal manufacturing 
operations in the final assembly, testing and quality control processes for these components and products. We distribute most of our hardware 
products either from our facilities or partner facilities. We strive to reduce costs by simplifying our manufacturing processes through increased 
standardization of components across product types and a “build-to-order” manufacturing process in which products generally are built only 
after customers have placed firm orders.  
Our hardware systems products revenues, cost of hardware systems products and hardware systems operating margins that we report are affected 
by our strategy for and the competitive position of our hardware systems products, the strength of general economic and business conditions, 
governmental budgetary constraints, certain of our acquisitions and foreign currency rate fluctuations. In addition, our operating margins for our 
hardware systems products segment have been and will be affected by the amortization of intangible assets.  
Our quarterly hardware systems products revenues are difficult to predict. The timing of customer orders and delays in our ability to timely 
manufacture or deliver a few large hardware transactions, among other factors, could substantially affect the amount of hardware systems 
products revenues, expenses and operating margins that we report.  
Hardware Systems Support:     Our hardware systems support offerings provide customers with software updates for software components that 
are essential to the functionality of our hardware products, such as Oracle Solaris and certain other software products, and can include product 
repairs, maintenance services and technical support services. Typically, our hardware systems support contract arrangements are priced as a 
percentage of the net hardware systems products fees, are invoiced to the customer at the beginning of the support period and are one year in 
duration. We continue to evolve hardware systems support processes that are intended to proactively identify and solve quality issues and to 
increase the amount of new and renewed hardware systems support contracts sold in connection with the sales of our hardware systems products. 
Our hardware systems support revenues that we report are influenced by a number of factors, including the volume of purchases of hardware 
products, the mix of hardware products purchased, whether customers decide to purchase hardware systems support contracts at or in close 
proximity to the time of hardware product sale, the percentage of our hardware systems support contract customer base that renews its support 
contracts and our acquisitions. Substantially all of these factors are heavily influenced by our customers’ decisions to either maintain or upgrade 
their existing hardware systems’ infrastructure to newly developed technologies that are available.  
Our hardware systems support margins have been and will be affected by certain of our acquisitions and related accounting, including fair value 
adjustments relating to hardware systems support obligations assumed, and by the amortization of intangible assets. As required by business 
combination accounting rules, we recorded adjustments to reduce our hardware systems support revenues for contracts assumed from our 
acquisitions to their estimated fair values. These amounts would have been recorded as hardware systems support revenues by  
   
41 

Table of Contents  
the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $4 million, $11 million and $14 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively. To the extent underlying hardware systems support contracts are renewed with us following an acquisition, we will recognize the 
revenues for the full values of the hardware systems support contracts over the respective support periods.  
Services Business  
Our services business, which represented 9%, 10% and 11% of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2013, respectively, is 
comprised of the remainder of our operating segments. Our services business has lower margins than our software and cloud and hardware 
businesses. Our services revenues are impacted by our strategy for and the competitive position of our services, certain of our acquisitions, 
general economic conditions, governmental budgetary constraints, personnel reductions in our customers’ IT departments, tighter controls over 
discretionary spending and the growth in our software and hardware systems products revenues. Our services business’ offerings include:  
   
   
   
Acquisitions  
A selective and active acquisition program is another important element of our corporate strategy. In recent years, we have invested billions of 
dollars to acquire a number of complementary companies, products, services and technologies including MICROS Systems, Inc. (MICROS) in 
fiscal 2015, Responsys, Inc. (Responsys) and Tekelec Global, Inc. (Tekelec) in fiscal 2014, and Acme Packet, Inc. (Acme Packet) in fiscal 2013, 
among others. We believe our acquisition program strengthens our competitive position, enhances the products and services that we can offer to 
customers, expands our customer base, provides greater scale to accelerate innovation, grows our revenues and earnings and increases 
stockholder value. We expect to continue to acquire companies, products, services and technologies in furtherance of our corporate strategy. 
Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report provides additional information related to our 
recent acquisitions.  
We believe we can fund our future acquisitions with our internally available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, cash generated 
from operations, additional borrowings or from the issuance of additional securities. We estimate the financial impact of any potential 
acquisition with regard to earnings, operating margin, cash flow and return on invested capital targets before deciding to move forward with an 
acquisition.  
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates  
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as set forth in the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) and we consider the various staff accounting 
bulletins and other applicable guidance issued by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). GAAP, as set forth within the 
ASC, requires us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which 
we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these  
   
42 
  
•   consulting services that are designed to help our customers and global system integrator partners more successfully architect and deploy 
our products, including IT strategy alignment, enterprise architecture planning and design, initial product implementation and 
integration, and ongoing product enhancements and upgrades. We utilize a global, blended delivery model to optimize value for our 
customers and partners, consisting of on-premises consultants from local geographies, industry specialists and consultants from our 
global delivery and solution centers; 
  
•   advanced customer support services, which are provided on-premises and remotely to our customers to enable increased performance 
and higher availability of their Oracle products and services; and 
  
•   education services for Oracle products and services, including training and certification programs that are offered to customers, partners 
and employees through a variety of formats, including instructor-led classes at our education centers, live virtual training, self-paced 
online training, private events and custom training. 

Table of Contents  
estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and 
liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. To the 
extent there are differences between these estimates, judgments or assumptions and actual results, our financial statements will be affected. The 
accounting policies that reflect our more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions and which we believe are the most critical to aid in 
fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s 
judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting among available alternatives would not produce a 
materially different result. Our senior management has reviewed our critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Finance and 
Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.  
Revenue Recognition  
Our sources of revenues include: (1) software and cloud revenues, including new software licenses revenues earned from granting licenses to use 
our software products and industry specific software; cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues generated from fees for granting customers access to a 
broad range of our software and related support offerings on a subscription basis in a secure, standards-based cloud computing environment; 
cloud IaaS revenues generated from fees for deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT infrastructure 
generally on a subscription basis; and software license updates and product support revenues (described further below); (2) hardware systems 
revenues, which include the sale of hardware systems products including Oracle Engineered Systems, computer servers, storage products, 
networking and data center fabric products, and industry specific hardware; and hardware systems support revenues; and (3) services, which 
include software and hardware related services including consulting, advanced customer support and education revenues. Revenues generally are 
recognized net of any taxes collected from customers and subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.  
Revenue Recognition for Software Products and Software Related Services (Software Elements)  
New software licenses revenues primarily represent fees earned from granting customers licenses to use our database, middleware and 
application software and exclude cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues and revenues derived from software license updates, which are included in 
software license updates and product support revenues. The basis for our new software licenses revenue recognition is substantially governed by 
the accounting guidance contained in ASC 985-605, Software-Revenue Recognition. We exercise judgment and use estimates in connection with 
the determination of the amount of software and software related services revenues to be recognized in each accounting period.  
For software license arrangements that do not require significant modification or customization of the underlying software, we recognize new 
software licenses revenues when: (1) we enter into a legally binding arrangement with a customer for the license of software; (2) we deliver the 
products; (3) the sale price is fixed or determinable and free of contingencies or significant uncertainties; and (4) collection is probable. 
Revenues that are not recognized at the time of sale because the foregoing conditions are not met, are recognized when those conditions are 
subsequently met.  
Substantially all of our software license arrangements do not include acceptance provisions. However, if acceptance provisions exist as part of 
public policy, for example, in agreements with government entities where  
   
43 
  
•   Revenue Recognition 
  
•   Business Combinations 
  
•   Goodwill and Intangible Assets—Impairment Assessments 
  
•   Accounting for Income Taxes 
  
•   Legal and Other Contingencies 
  
•   Stock-Based Compensation 

Table of Contents  
acceptance periods are required by law, or within previously executed terms and conditions that are referenced in the current agreement and are 
short-term in nature, we generally recognize revenues upon delivery provided the acceptance terms are perfunctory and all other revenue 
recognition criteria have been met. If acceptance provisions are not perfunctory (for example, acceptance provisions that are long-term in nature 
or are not included as standard terms of an arrangement), revenues are recognized upon the earlier of receipt of written customer acceptance or 
expiration of the acceptance period.  
The vast majority of our software license arrangements include software license updates and product support contracts, which are entered into at 
the customer’s option and are recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, typically one year. Software license updates provide 
customers with rights to unspecified software product upgrades, maintenance releases and patches released during the term of the support period. 
Product support includes internet access to technical content, as well as internet and telephone access to technical support personnel. Software 
license updates and product support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net new software licenses fees. Substantially all of our 
customers renew their software license updates and product support contracts annually.  
Revenue Recognition for Multiple-Element Arrangements — Software Products and Software Related Services (Software Arrangements)  
We often enter into arrangements with customers that purchase both software related products and software related services from us at the same 
time, or within close proximity of one another (referred to as software related multiple-element arrangements). Such software related multiple-
element arrangements include the sale of our software products, software license updates and product support contracts and other software 
related services whereby software license delivery is followed by the subsequent or contemporaneous delivery of the other elements. For those 
software related multiple-element arrangements, we have applied the residual method to determine the amount of new software license revenues 
to be recognized pursuant to ASC 985-605. Under the residual method, if fair value exists for undelivered elements in a multiple-element 
arrangement, such fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred with the remaining portion of the arrangement consideration generally 
recognized upon delivery of the software license. We allocate the fair value of each element of a software related multiple-element arrangement 
based upon its fair value as determined by our vendor specific objective evidence (VSOE—described further below), with any remaining amount 
allocated to the software license.  
Revenue Recognition for Cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS Offerings, Hardware Systems Products, Hardware Systems Support and Related Services 
(Nonsoftware Elements)  
Our revenue recognition policy for nonsoftware deliverables including cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS offerings, hardware systems products, support 
and related services is based upon the accounting guidance contained in ASC 605-25, Revenue Recognition , Multiple-Element Arrangements, 
and we exercise judgment and use estimates in connection with the determination of the amount of cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS revenues, 
hardware systems products revenues, support and related services revenues to be recognized in each accounting period.  
Revenues from the sales of our nonsoftware elements are recognized when: (1) persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; (2) we deliver the 
products and passage of the title to the buyer occurs; (3) the sale price is fixed or determinable; and (4) collection is reasonably assured. 
Revenues that are not recognized at the time of sale because the foregoing conditions are not met are recognized when those conditions are 
subsequently met. When applicable, we reduce revenues for estimated returns or certain other incentive programs where we have the ability to 
sufficiently estimate the effects of these items. Where an arrangement is subject to acceptance criteria and the acceptance provisions are not 
perfunctory (for example, acceptance provisions that are long-term in nature or are not included as standard terms of an arrangement), revenues 
are recognized upon the earlier of receipt of written customer acceptance or expiration of the acceptance period.  
Our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings generally provide customers access to certain of our software within a cloud-based IT environment that we 
manage, host and support and offer to customers on a subscription basis. Revenues for our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings are generally 
recognized ratably over the contract term commencing with the date the service is made available to customers and all other revenue recognition 
criteria have been satisfied.  
   
44 

Table of Contents  
Our cloud IaaS offerings provide deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT infrastructure including 
comprehensive software and hardware management and maintenance services arrangements for customer IT infrastructure for a stated term that 
is hosted at our data center facilities, select partner data centers or physically on-premises at customer facilities generally for a term-based fee; 
and virtual machine instances that are subscription-based and designed for computing and reliable and secure object storage. Revenues for these 
cloud IaaS offerings are generally recognized ratably over the contract term commencing with the date the service is made available to customers
and all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied.  
Revenues from the sale of hardware systems products represent amounts earned primarily from the sale of our Oracle Engineered Systems, 
computer servers, storage, networking and industry specific hardware.  
Our hardware systems support offerings generally provide customers with software updates for the software components that are essential to the 
functionality of our hardware products and can also include product repairs, maintenance services and technical support services. Hardware 
systems support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net hardware systems products fees. Hardware systems support contracts 
are entered into at the customer’s option and are recognized ratably over the contractual term of the arrangements, which are typically one year.  
Revenue Recognition for Multiple-Element Arrangements—Cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS Offerings, Hardware Systems Products, Hardware 
Systems Support and Related Services (Nonsoftware Arrangements)  
We enter into arrangements with customers that purchase both nonsoftware related products and services from us at the same time, or within 
close proximity of one another (referred to as nonsoftware multiple-element arrangements). Each element within a nonsoftware multiple-element 
arrangement is accounted for as a separate unit of accounting provided the following criteria are met: the delivered products or services have 
value to the customer on a standalone basis; and for an arrangement that includes a general right of return relative to the delivered products or 
services, delivery or performance of the undelivered product or service is considered probable and is substantially controlled by us. We consider 
a deliverable to have standalone value if the product or service is sold separately by us or another vendor or could be resold by the customer. 
Further, our revenue arrangements generally do not include a general right of return relative to the delivered products. Where the aforementioned 
criteria for a separate unit of accounting are not met, the deliverable is combined with the undelivered element(s) and treated as a single unit of 
accounting for the purposes of allocation of the arrangement consideration and revenue recognition. For those units of accounting that include 
more than one deliverable but are treated as a single unit of accounting, we generally recognize revenues over the contractual period of the 
arrangement or in the case of our cloud offerings, we generally recognize revenues over the contractual term of the cloud software subscription. 
For the purposes of revenue classification of the elements that are accounted for as a single unit of accounting, we allocate revenue to the 
respective revenue line items within our consolidated statements of operations based on a rational and consistent methodology utilizing our best 
estimate of relative selling prices of such elements.  
For our nonsoftware multiple-element arrangements, we allocate revenue to each element based on a selling price hierarchy at the arrangement’s 
inception. The selling price for each element is based upon the following selling price hierarchy: VSOE if available, third party evidence (TPE) 
if VSOE is not available, or estimated selling price (ESP) if neither VSOE nor TPE are available (a description as to how we determine VSOE, 
TPE and ESP is provided below). If a tangible hardware systems product includes software, we determine whether the tangible hardware 
systems product and the software work together to deliver the product’s essential functionality and, if so, the entire product is treated as a 
nonsoftware deliverable. The total arrangement consideration is allocated to each separate unit of accounting for each of the nonsoftware 
deliverables using the relative selling prices of each unit based on the aforementioned selling price hierarchy. We limit the amount of revenue 
recognized for delivered elements to an amount that is not contingent upon future delivery of additional products or services or meeting of any 
specified performance conditions.  
When possible, we establish VSOE of selling price for deliverables in software and nonsoftware multiple-element arrangements using the price 
charged for a deliverable when sold separately and for software license updates and product support and hardware systems support, based on the 
renewal rates offered to customers. TPE  
   
45 

Table of Contents  
is established by evaluating similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone arrangements with similarly situated 
customers. If we are unable to determine the selling price because VSOE or TPE does not exist, we determine ESP for the purposes of allocating 
the arrangement by reviewing historical transactions, including transactions whereby the deliverable was sold on a standalone basis and 
considering several other external and internal factors including, but not limited to, pricing practices including discounting, margin objectives, 
competition, contractually stated prices, the geographies in which we offer our products and services, the type of customer (i.e., distributor, value 
added reseller, government agency and direct end user, among others) and the stage of the product lifecycle. The determination of ESP is made 
through consultation with and approval by our management, taking into consideration our pricing model and go-to-market strategy. As our, or 
our competitors’, pricing and go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which could result in changes to 
our determination of VSOE, TPE and ESP. As a result, our future revenue recognition for multiple-element arrangements could differ materially 
from our results in the current period. Selling prices are analyzed on an annual basis or more frequently if we experience significant changes in 
our selling prices.  
Revenue Recognition Policies Applicable to both Software and Nonsoftware Elements  
Revenue Recognition for Multiple-Element Arrangements — Arrangements with Software and Nonsoftware Elements  
We also enter into multiple-element arrangements that may include a combination of our various software related and nonsoftware related 
products and services offerings including new software licenses, software license updates and product support, cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS 
offerings, hardware systems products, hardware systems support, consulting, advanced customer support services and education. In such 
arrangements, we first allocate the total arrangement consideration based on the relative selling prices of the software group of elements as a 
whole and to the nonsoftware elements. We then further allocate consideration within the software group to the respective elements within that 
group following the guidance in ASC 985-605 and our policies as described above. After the arrangement consideration has been allocated to the 
elements, we account for each respective element in the arrangement as described above.  
Other Revenue Recognition Policies Applicable to Software and Nonsoftware Elements  
Many of our software arrangements include consulting implementation services sold separately under consulting engagement contracts and are 
included as a part of our services business. Consulting revenues from these arrangements are generally accounted for separately from new 
software licenses revenues because the arrangements qualify as services transactions as defined in ASC 985-605. The more significant factors 
considered in determining whether the revenues should be accounted for separately include the nature of services (i.e., consideration of whether 
the services are essential to the functionality of the licensed product), degree of risk, availability of services from other vendors, timing of 
payments and impact of milestones or acceptance criteria on the realizability of the software license fee. Revenues for consulting services are 
generally recognized as the services are performed. If there is a significant uncertainty about the project completion or receipt of payment for the 
consulting services, revenues are deferred until the uncertainty is sufficiently resolved. We estimate the proportional performance on contracts 
with fixed or “not to exceed” fees on a monthly basis utilizing hours incurred to date as a percentage of total estimated hours to complete the 
project. If we do not have a sufficient basis to measure progress towards completion, revenues are recognized when we receive final acceptance 
from the customer that the services have been completed. When total cost estimates exceed revenues, we accrue for the estimated losses 
immediately using cost estimates that are based upon an average fully burdened daily rate applicable to the consulting organization delivering 
the services. The complexity of the estimation process and factors relating to the assumptions, risks and uncertainties inherent with the 
application of the proportional performance method of accounting affects the amounts of revenues and related expenses reported in our 
consolidated financial statements. A number of internal and external factors can affect our estimates, including labor rates, utilization and 
efficiency variances and specification and testing requirement changes.  
Our advanced customer support services are offered as standalone arrangements or as a part of arrangements to customers buying other software 
and non-software products and services. We offer these advanced support  
   
46 

Table of Contents  
services, both on-premises and remote, to Oracle customers to enable increased performance and higher availability of their products and 
services. Depending upon the nature of the arrangement, revenues from these services are recognized as the services are performed or ratably 
over the term of the service period, which is generally one year or less.  
Education revenues are also a part of our services business and include instructor-led, media-based and internet-based training in the use of our 
software and hardware products. Education revenues are recognized as the classes or other education offerings are delivered.  
If an arrangement contains multiple elements and does not qualify for separate accounting for the product and service transactions, then new 
software licenses revenues and/or hardware systems products revenues, including the costs of hardware systems products, are generally 
recognized together with the services based on contract accounting using either the percentage-of-completion or completed-contract method. 
Contract accounting is applied to any bundled software and cloud, hardware systems and services arrangements: (1) that include milestones or 
customer specific acceptance criteria that may affect collection of the software license or hardware systems product fees; (2) where consulting 
services include significant modification or customization of the software or hardware systems product or are of a specialized nature and 
generally performed only by Oracle; (3) where significant consulting services are provided for in the software license contract or hardware 
systems product contract without additional charge or are substantially discounted; or (4) where the software license or hardware systems 
product payment is tied to the performance of consulting services. For the purposes of revenue classification of the elements that are accounted 
for as a single unit of accounting, we allocate revenues to software and nonsoftware elements based on a rational and consistent methodology 
utilizing our best estimate of the relative selling price of such elements.  
We also evaluate arrangements with governmental entities containing “fiscal funding” or “termination for convenience” provisions, when such 
provisions are required by law, to determine the probability of possible cancellation. We consider multiple factors, including the history with the 
customer in similar transactions, the “essential use” of the software or hardware systems products and the planning, budgeting and approval 
processes undertaken by the governmental entity. If we determine upon execution of these arrangements that the likelihood of cancellation is 
remote, we then recognize revenues once all of the criteria described above have been met. If such a determination cannot be made, revenues are 
recognized upon the earlier of cash receipt or approval of the applicable funding provision by the governmental entity.  
We assess whether fees are fixed or determinable at the time of sale and recognize revenues if all other revenue recognition requirements are 
met. Our standard payment terms are net 30 days. However, payment terms may vary based on the country in which the agreement is executed. 
Payments that are due within six months are generally deemed to be fixed or determinable based on our successful collection history on such 
arrangements, and thereby satisfy the required criteria for revenue recognition.  
While most of our arrangements for sales within our businesses include short-term payment terms, we have a standard practice of providing 
long-term financing to creditworthy customers primarily through our financing division. Since fiscal 1989, when our financing division was 
formed, we have established a history of collection, without concessions, on these receivables with payment terms that generally extend up to 
five years from the contract date. Provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we recognize new software licenses revenues 
and hardware systems products revenues for these arrangements upon delivery, net of any payment discounts from financing transactions. We 
have generally sold receivables financed through our financing division on a non-recourse basis to third party financing institutions within 90 
days of the contracts’ dates of execution and we classify the proceeds from these sales as cash flows from operating activities in our consolidated 
statements of cash flows. We account for the sales of these receivables as “true sales” as defined in ASC 860, Transfers and Servicing , as we are 
considered to have surrendered control of these financing receivables.  
In addition, we enter into arrangements with leasing companies for the sale of our hardware systems products. These leasing companies, in turn, 
lease our products to end-users. The leasing companies generally have no recourse to us in the event of default by the end-user and we recognize 
revenue upon delivery, if all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.  
   
47 

Table of Contents  
Our customers include several of our suppliers and, occasionally, we have purchased goods or services for our operations from these vendors at 
or about the same time that we have sold our products to these same companies (Concurrent Transactions). Software license agreements or sales 
of hardware systems that occur within a three-month time period from the date we have purchased goods or services from that same customer are 
reviewed for appropriate accounting treatment and disclosure. When we acquire goods or services from a customer, we negotiate the purchase 
separately from any sales transaction, at terms we consider to be at arm’s length and settle the purchase in cash. We recognize revenues from 
Concurrent Transactions if all of our revenue recognition criteria are met and the goods and services acquired are necessary for our current 
operations.  
Business Combinations  
We apply the provisions of ASC 805, Business Combinations , in the accounting for our acquisitions. It requires us to recognize separately from 
goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the 
excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use 
our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as contingent 
consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, 
which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the 
corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or 
liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.  
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition 
date, including our estimates for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, restructuring liabilities, pre-acquisition contingencies and 
contingent consideration, where applicable. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable 
and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and 
are inherently uncertain.  
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include but are not limited to:  
   
   
   
   
Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.  
We estimate the fair values of our cloud SaaS and PaaS (collectively, cloud software subscriptions), software license updates and product 
support, and hardware systems support obligations assumed. The estimated fair values of these performance obligations are determined utilizing 
a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a 
normal profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the obligations are based on the historical direct costs related to providing the services 
including the correction of any errors in the products acquired. The sum of these costs and operating profit approximates, in theory, the amount 
that we would be required to pay a third party to assume the performance obligations. We do not include any costs associated with selling efforts 
or research and development or the related fulfillment margins on these costs. Profit associated with any selling efforts is excluded because the  
   
48 
  
•   future expected cash flows from software license sales, cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS contracts, hardware systems product sales, support 
agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts, acquired developed technologies and patents; 
  
•   expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the 
projects when completed; 
  
•   the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will 
continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio; and 
  
•   discount rates. 

Table of Contents  
acquired entities would have concluded those selling efforts on the performance obligations prior to the acquisition date. We also do not include 
the estimated research and development costs in our fair value determinations, as these costs are not deemed to represent a legal obligation at the 
time of acquisition. As a result, we did not recognize cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues related to cloud SaaS and PaaS contracts in the amounts of 
$12 million, $17 million and $45 million that would have been otherwise recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in fiscal 
2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. We did not recognize software license updates and product support revenues related to support contracts in 
the amounts of $11 million, $3 million and $14 million that would have been otherwise recorded by the acquired businesses as independent 
entities in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In addition, we did not recognize hardware systems support revenues related to hardware 
systems support contracts that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $4 
million, $11 million and $14 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Historically, substantially all of our customers, including 
customers from acquired companies, renew their software license updates and product support contracts when the contracts are eligible for 
renewal and we strive to renew cloud SaaS and PaaS, and hardware systems support contracts. To the extent cloud SaaS and PaaS, software 
support or hardware systems support contracts are renewed, we will recognize the revenues for the full values of the contracts over their 
respective contractual periods, which are generally one year in duration.  
In connection with a business combination or other strategic initiative, we may estimate costs associated with restructuring plans committed to 
by our management. Restructuring costs are typically comprised of employee severance costs, costs of consolidating duplicate facilities and 
contract termination costs. Restructuring expenses are based upon plans that have been committed to by our management, but may be refined in 
subsequent periods. We account for costs to exit or restructure certain activities of an acquired company separately from the business 
combination pursuant to ASC 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations. A liability for costs associated with an exit or disposal activity is 
recognized and measured at its fair value in our consolidated statement of operations in the period in which the liability is incurred. When 
estimating the fair value of facility restructuring activities, assumptions are applied regarding estimated sub-lease payments to be received, 
which can differ materially from actual results. This may require us to revise our initial estimates which may materially affect our results of 
operations and financial position in the period the revision is made.  
For a given acquisition, we may identify certain pre-acquisition contingencies as of the acquisition date and may extend our review and 
evaluation of these pre-acquisition contingencies throughout the measurement period in order to obtain sufficient information to assess whether 
we include these contingencies as a part of the fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and, if so, to determine their 
estimated amounts.  
If we cannot reasonably determine the fair value of a pre-acquisition contingency (non-income tax related) by the end of the measurement 
period, which is generally the case given the nature of such matters, we will recognize an asset or a liability for such pre-acquisition contingency 
if: (i) it is probable that an asset existed or a liability had been incurred at the acquisition date and (ii) the amount of the asset or liability can be 
reasonably estimated. Subsequent to the measurement period, changes in our estimates of such contingencies will affect earnings and could have 
a material effect on our results of operations and financial position.  
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances assumed in connection with a business combination are initially 
estimated as of the acquisition date. We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition 
date with any adjustments to our preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if identified within the measurement period. Subsequent to 
the measurement period or our final determination of the tax allowance’s or contingency’s estimated value, whichever comes first, changes to 
these uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances will affect our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statement of 
operations and could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.  
Goodwill and Intangible Assets — Impairment Assessments  
We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate its carrying value may not be 
recoverable in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles—Goodwill and Other . According to ASC 350, we can opt to perform a qualitative 
assessment to test a reporting unit’s goodwill for  
   
49 

Table of Contents  
impairment or we can directly perform the two step impairment test. Based on our qualitative assessment, if we determine that the fair value of a 
reporting unit is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50 percent) to be less than its carrying amount, the two step impairment test 
prescribed by ASC 350 will be performed. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value 
of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not considered impaired and we are not 
required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting 
unit, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill. If 
the carrying value of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we would record an impairment loss equal to the difference. 
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include 
revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and 
market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be 
reasonable but that are inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and 
assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units.  
Based upon our most recent annual goodwill impairment review which took place as of March 1, 2015, we recorded a goodwill impairment loss 
related to our hardware systems products reporting unit. We considered several approaches to determine the fair value of our hardware systems 
reporting unit and concluded the most appropriate to be the income approach. Based upon the completion of our annual forecasting process, the 
fair value of our hardware systems products reporting unit under the income approach was impacted by lower forecasted operating results, 
primarily caused by lower forecasted revenues and our continued investment in research and development activities. We compared the implied 
fair value of goodwill in our hardware systems products reporting unit to its carrying value, which resulted in a $186 million goodwill 
impairment loss, representing the aggregate amount of goodwill in our hardware systems products reporting unit. The aggregate hardware 
systems reporting unit goodwill that was impaired in fiscal 2015 resulted from our acquisitions of Pillar Data Systems, Inc., Xsigo Systems, Inc., 
GreenBytes, Inc. and MICROS Systems, Inc. Such impairment loss was recorded to acquisition related and other expenses in our fiscal 2015 
consolidated statement of operations. We did not recognize any goodwill impairment losses in fiscal 2014 or 2013.  
Our most recent annual goodwill impairment review for our other reporting units, which also took place on March 1, 2015, did not result in a 
goodwill impairment loss. Other than our consulting reporting unit, all of our other reporting units had fair values that substantially exceeded 
their carrying values. Our consulting reporting unit had $1.8 billion of goodwill on March 1, 2015, and experienced revenue and operating 
margin declines in fiscal 2015. As of our most recent annual goodwill impairment review, our consulting reporting unit’s fair value was 16% in 
excess of its carrying value. We estimate that should our consulting reporting unit’s projected margins and related cash flows unfavorably 
deviate from our projections by 20% or more, our consulting reporting unit likely would incur a goodwill impairment loss.  
We make judgments about the recoverability of purchased finite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate 
that an impairment may exist. Each period we evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of purchased intangible assets and whether events or 
changes in circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. Recoverability of finite lived intangible assets is measured 
by comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. We review indefinite 
lived intangible assets for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be 
recoverable. Recoverability of indefinite lived intangible assets is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to its fair value. If 
the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value 
of the impaired asset.  
Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our intangible and other long-lived assets are complex and 
subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends and internal factors such 
as changes in our business strategy and our internal  
   
50 

Table of Contents  
forecasts. Although we believe the historical assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and 
estimates could materially impact our reported financial results. We did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges in fiscal 2015, 
2014 or 2013.  
Accounting for Income Taxes  
Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide income tax provision. In the ordinary course of a global business, there are many 
transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Some of these uncertainties arise as a consequence of revenue sharing 
and cost reimbursement arrangements among related entities, the process of identifying items of revenues and expenses that qualify for 
preferential tax treatment and segregation of foreign and domestic earnings and expenses to avoid double taxation. Although we believe that our 
estimates are reasonable, the final tax outcome of these matters could be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax 
provisions and accruals. Such differences could have a material effect on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such 
determination is made.  
Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes have been provided because such 
earnings are planned to be indefinitely reinvested outside the United States. Remittances of foreign earnings to the United States are planned 
based on projected cash flow, working capital and investment needs of our foreign and domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we 
estimate the amount that will be distributed to the United States and provide U.S. federal taxes on these amounts. Material changes in our 
estimates as to how much of our foreign earnings will be distributed to the United States or tax legislation that limits or restricts the amount of 
undistributed foreign earnings that we consider indefinitely reinvested outside the United States could materially impact our income tax 
provision and effective tax rate.  
We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In order for us to 
realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in those jurisdictions where the deferred tax assets are 
located. We consider future growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate, 
historical earnings, taxable income in prior years, if carryback is permitted under the law and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in 
determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net 
deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period in which 
we make such a determination, or goodwill would be adjusted at our final determination of the valuation allowance related to an acquisition 
within the measurement period. If we later determine that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets would be realized, we would 
reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance as an adjustment to earnings at such time.  
We calculate our current and deferred tax provision based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in 
income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. Adjustments based on filed returns are generally recorded in the period when the tax returns 
are filed and the global tax implications are known, which can materially impact our effective tax rate.  
The amount of income tax we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed 
assessments. Our estimate of the potential outcome for any uncertain tax issue is highly judgmental. A description of our accounting policies 
associated with tax related contingencies assumed as a part of a business combination is provided under “Business Combinations” above. For 
those tax related contingencies that are not a part of a business combination, we account for these uncertain tax issues pursuant to ASC 740, 
Income Taxes , which contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax 
return. The first step is to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be 
sustained in an audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the 
largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. Although we believe we have adequately reserved for our 
uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given with respect to the final outcome of these matters. We adjust reserves for our uncertain tax 
positions due to changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit, judicial rulings, and refinement of estimates or realization 
of earnings or deductions that differ from  
   
51 

Table of Contents  
our estimates. To the extent that the final outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences generally will impact 
our provision for income taxes in the period in which such a determination is made. Our provisions for income taxes include the impact of 
reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate and also include the related interest and penalties.  
In addition, as a part of our accounting for business combinations, intangible assets are recognized at fair values and goodwill is measured as the 
excess of consideration transferred over the net estimated fair values of assets acquired. Impairment charges associated with goodwill are 
generally not tax deductible and will result in an increased effective income tax rate in the period that any impairment is recorded. Amortization 
expenses associated with acquired intangible assets are generally not tax deductible pursuant to our existing tax structure; however, deferred 
taxes have been recorded for non-deductible amortization expenses as a part of the accounting for business combinations. We have taken into 
account the allocation of these identified intangibles among different taxing jurisdictions, including those with nominal or zero percent tax rates, 
in establishing the related deferred tax liabilities.  
Legal and Other Contingencies  
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. Quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter and assess our 
potential financial exposure. A description of our accounting policies associated with contingencies assumed as a part of a business combination 
is provided under “Business Combinations” above. For legal and other contingencies that are not a part of a business combination, we accrue a 
liability for an estimated loss if the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably 
estimated. Significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether the amount of an 
exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at 
the time the accruals are made. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims and 
litigation and may revise our estimates. Such revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of 
operations and financial position.  
Stock-Based Compensation  
We account for share-based payments to employees, including grants of service-based employee stock options, service-based restricted stock 
awards, performance-based restricted stock awards (PSUs) and purchases under employee stock purchase plans, in accordance with ASC 718, 
Compensation—Stock Compensation, which requires that share-based payments (to the extent they are compensatory) be recognized in our 
consolidated statements of operations based on their fair values and the estimated number of shares we ultimately expect will vest. For our 
service-based awards, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the service period of the award, which is 
generally four years. For our PSUs, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the service period for each 
separately vesting tranche, as the performance conditions to evaluate attainment of each tranche for each participant are independent of the 
performance conditions for the other tranches.  
We are required to estimate the stock awards that we ultimately expect to vest and to reduce stock-based compensation expense for the effects of 
estimated forfeitures of awards over the expense recognition period. Although we estimate the rate of future forfeitures based upon historical 
experience, actual forfeitures in the future may differ. To the extent our actual forfeitures are different than our estimates, we record a true-up for 
the difference in the period that a grantee terminates or the awards vest and such true-ups could materially affect our operating results. 
Additionally, we also consider on a quarterly basis whether there have been any significant changes in facts and circumstances that would affect 
our expected forfeiture rate.  
We estimate the fair values of employee stock options using a Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. The fair value of an award is affected by 
our stock price on the date of grant as well as other assumptions including the estimated volatility of our stock price over the term of the awards 
and the estimated period of time that we expect employees to hold their stock options. The risk-free interest rate assumption we use is based 
upon U.S. treasury interest rates appropriate for the expected life of the awards. We use the implied volatility of publicly traded  
   
52 

Table of Contents  
options in our stock in order to estimate future stock price trends as we believe that implied volatility is more representative of future stock price 
trends than historical volatility. In order to determine the estimated period of time that we expect employees to hold their stock options, we have 
used historical rates of employee groups by seniority of job classification. Our expected dividend rate is based upon an annualized dividend yield 
based on the per share dividend declared by our Board of Directors. The aforementioned inputs entered into the option valuation model we use to 
fair value our stock awards are subjective estimates and changes to these estimates will cause the fair values of our stock awards and related 
stock-based compensation expense that we record to vary.  
We issue PSUs to certain key executives. We estimate the fair values of the PSUs based upon their intrinsic values as of the grant dates as the 
vesting conditions and related terms of the PSUs were communicated to each participating employee as of their respective grant dates and 
include attainment metrics that are defined, fixed and consistently determined based upon consistent U.S. GAAP metrics or internal metrics and 
that require the employee to render service. The performance conditions of the PSUs affect the number of PSUs that will ultimately vest and be 
issued to the grantee based upon a “target” that is subject to certain attainment maximums, with the possibility that none will vest if applicable 
performance conditions are not met. We update the amount of stock-based compensation expense, net of forfeitures, to record as of the end of 
each reporting period based on the expected attainment of performance targets, which is subject to change until a final determination is known. 
Changes to the target estimates are reflected in the amount of stock-based compensation expense that we recognize for each PSU tranche on a 
cumulative basis during the reporting period in which the target estimates are altered and may cause the amount of stock-based compensation 
expense that we record for such reporting period to vary.  
We record deferred tax assets for stock-based compensation awards that result in deductions on our income tax returns, based on the amount of 
stock-based compensation recognized and the fair values attributable to the vested portion of stock awards assumed in connection with a 
business combination, at the statutory tax rate in the jurisdiction in which we will receive a tax deduction. Because the deferred tax assets we 
record are based upon the stock-based compensation expenses in a particular jurisdiction, the aforementioned inputs that affect the fair values of 
our stock awards may also indirectly affect our income tax expense. In addition, differences between the deferred tax assets recognized for 
financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on our income tax returns are recorded in additional paid-in capital.  
To the extent we change the terms of our employee stock-based compensation programs, experience market volatility in the pricing of our 
common stock that increases the implied volatility calculation of publicly traded options in our stock, refine different assumptions in future 
periods such as forfeiture rates or PSU target performance attainment that differ from our current estimates, or assume stock awards from 
acquired companies that are different in nature than our stock award arrangements, among other potential impacts, the stock-based compensation 
expense that we record in future periods and the tax benefits that we realize may differ significantly from what we have recorded in previous 
reporting periods.  
Results of Operations  
Impact of Acquisitions  
The comparability of our operating results in fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014 was impacted by our acquisitions, primarily our acquisitions of 
MICROS in the second quarter of fiscal 2015 and Responsys in the third quarter of fiscal 2014.  
The comparability of our operating results in fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2013 was impacted by our acquisitions, primarily our acquisitions of 
Responsys in the third quarter of fiscal 2014, Tekelec in the first quarter of fiscal 2014 and Acme Packet in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013.  
In our discussion of changes in our results of operations from fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2013, we 
may qualitatively disclose the impact of our acquired products and services (for the one year period subsequent to the acquisition date) to the 
growth in certain of our operating segments’ revenues where such qualitative discussions would be meaningful for an understanding of the 
factors that influenced the changes in our results of operations. When material, we may also provide quantitative disclosures related to such  
   
53 

Table of Contents  
acquired products and services. The contributions of our acquisitions to certain of our operating segments’ revenues, margins and expenses for 
each of the respective period comparisons generally are not provided in our discussions, as they either were not separately identifiable due to the 
integration of these businesses and operating segments into our existing operations, and/or were insignificant to our results of operations during 
the periods presented.  
We caution readers that, while pre- and post-acquisition comparisons, as well as any quantified amounts themselves, may provide indications of 
general trends, any acquisition information that we provide has inherent limitations for the following reasons:  
   
   
Constant Currency Presentation  
Our international operations have provided and will continue to provide a significant portion of our total revenues and expenses. As a result, total 
revenues and expenses will continue to be affected by changes in the U.S. Dollar against major international currencies. In order to provide a 
framework for assessing how our underlying businesses performed excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations, we compare the 
percent change in the results from one period to another period in this Annual Report using constant currency disclosure. To present this 
information, current and comparative prior period results for entities reporting in currencies other than U.S. Dollars are converted into U.S. 
Dollars at constant exchange rates (i.e., the rates in effect on May 31, 2014, which was the last day of our prior fiscal year) rather than the actual 
exchange rates in effect during the respective periods. For example, if an entity reporting in Euros had revenues of 1.0 million Euros from 
products sold on May 31, 2015 and 2014, our financial statements would reflect reported revenues of $1.08 million in fiscal 2015 (using 1.08 as 
the month-end average exchange rate for the period) and $1.36 million in fiscal 2014 (using 1.36 as the month-end average exchange rate for the 
period). The constant currency presentation, however, would translate the fiscal 2015 results using the fiscal 2014 exchange rate and indicate, in 
this example, no change in revenues during the period. In each of the tables below, we present the percent change based on actual, unrounded 
results in reported currency and in constant currency.  
   
54 
  
•   any qualitative and quantitative disclosures cannot specifically address or quantify the substantial effects attributable to changes in 
business strategies, including our sales force integration efforts. We believe that if our acquired companies had operated independently 
and sales forces had not been integrated, the relative mix of products sold would have been different; and 
  
•   although substantially all of our software license customers, including customers from acquired companies, renew their software license 
updates and product support contracts when the contracts are eligible for renewal and we strive to renew cloud SaaS and PaaS contracts 
and hardware systems support contracts, the amounts shown as cloud SaaS and PaaS deferred revenues, software license updates and 
product support deferred revenues, and hardware systems support deferred revenues in our supplemental disclosure related to certain 
charges (presented below) are not necessarily indicative of revenue improvements we will achieve upon contract renewals to the extent 
customers do not renew. 

Table of Contents  
Total Revenues and Operating Expenses  
   
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Our results of operations for fiscal 2015 compared to fiscal 2014 were significantly impacted by 
movements in international currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar, which decreased our total revenues by 4 percentage points, total operating 
expenses by 3 percentage points and total operating income by 6 percentage points.  
Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency variations of 4 percentage points, our total revenues increased in fiscal 2015 due to revenue 
increases in our software and cloud and hardware systems businesses. The constant currency growth in our software and cloud revenues was 
attributable to growth in our software license updates and product support revenues, growth in our SaaS, PaaS and IaaS revenues, and revenue 
contributions from our recent acquisitions. The constant currency growth in our hardware systems business was attributable to growth in our 
hardware systems support revenues, which were primarily attributable to revenue contributions from our recent acquisitions. Excluding the 
effects of currency rate fluctuations, the Americas contributed 69%, EMEA contributed 28% and Asia Pacific contributed 3% to the growth in 
our total revenues during fiscal 2015.  
Excluding the effects of favorable currency variations of 3 percentage points, our total operating expenses increased during fiscal 2015 due to 
expense increases across all of our lines of business, the largest of which were due to increased sales and marketing and research and 
development expenses resulting primarily from increased headcount, increased cloud SaaS and PaaS expenses to support the increase in our 
cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues, and increased acquisition related and other expenses.  
Excluding the effects of unfavorable foreign currency rate fluctuations of 6 percentage points, our fiscal 2015 operating margin was flat in 
comparison to the prior year, while our operating margin as a percentage of revenues decreased during fiscal 2015 as our total operating 
expenses increased at a faster rate than our total revenues.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013 :     On a constant currency basis, our total revenues increased in fiscal 2014 due to increases in our 
software and cloud business revenues and our hardware systems business revenues, partially offset by a decrease in our services business 
revenues. The constant currency revenue growth in our  
   
55 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   Actual    Constant    
2014 
   Actual    Constant    
2013 
 
Total Revenues by Geography: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
  $    21,107      4%      
6%     $    20,323      3%      
4%    $    19,719   
EMEA 
   
11,380      -5%      
4%      
11,946      7%      
4%     
11,158   
Asia Pacific 
   
5,739      -4%      
1%      
6,006      -5%      
2%     
6,303   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total revenues 
   
38,226      0%      
4%      
38,275      3%      
4%     
37,180   
Total Operating Expenses 
   
24,355      4%      
7%      
23,516      5%      
6%     
22,496   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Operating Margin 
  $ 13,871      -6%      
0%     $ 14,759      1%      
1%    $ 14,684   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Operating Margin % 
   
36%     
  
   
39%     
  
   
39%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
   
55%     
  
   
53%     
  
   
53%   
EMEA 
   
30%     
  
   
31%     
  
   
30%   
Asia Pacific 
   
15%     
  
   
16%     
  
   
17%   
Total Revenues by Business: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Software and Cloud 
  $ 29,475      1%      
5%     $ 29,199      5%      
5%    $ 27,920   
Hardware Systems 
   
5,205      -3%      
2%      
5,372      0%      
2%     
5,346   
Services 
   
3,546      -4%      
0%      
3,704      -5%      -4%     
3,914   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total revenues 
  $ 38,226      0%      
4%     $ 38,275      3%      
4%    $ 37,180   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
% Revenues by Business: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Software and Cloud 
   
77%     
  
   
76%     
  
   
75%   
Hardware Systems 
   
14%     
  
   
14%     
  
   
14%   
Services 
   
9%     
  
   
10%     
  
   
11%   
 Comprised of Europe, the Middle East and Africa 
 Asia Pacific includes Japan 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
software and cloud business was substantially attributable to growth in our software license updates and product support revenues and, to a lesser 
extent, growth in our cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues due to incremental revenues from our acquisitions. The constant currency revenue growth in 
our hardware business was due to an increase in our hardware systems support revenues due substantially to incremental revenues from our 
acquisitions and due to increases in our hardware revenues attributable to our Oracle Engineered Systems. On a constant currency basis, the 
Americas contributed 61%, EMEA contributed 30% and Asia Pacific contributed 9% to our total revenues growth during fiscal 2014.  
Total constant currency operating expenses increased during fiscal 2014 primarily due to an increase in sales and marketing and research and 
development expenses resulting from increased headcount, increased sales-based variable compensation expenses due to revenues growth, and 
increased cloud SaaS and PaaS expenses to support the increase in our cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues. These expense increases in fiscal 2014 
were partially offset by lower constant currency expenses in fiscal 2014 from our hardware systems support and services segments due to 
decreased headcount, lower restructuring expenses, and lower intangible assets amortization. In fiscal 2013, we recognized a $387 million 
acquisition related benefit related to changes in estimates for contingent consideration payable (refer to Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information) and a $306 million benefit relating to certain litigation 
(refer to Note 18 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information), both of 
which decreased our acquisition related and other expenses during this period.  
Excluding the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations, our operating margin increased during fiscal 2014 due to our revenues growth, while 
our operating margin as a percentage of revenues was flat.  
Supplemental Disclosure Related to Certain Charges  
To supplement our consolidated financial information, we believe the following information is helpful to an overall understanding of our past 
financial performance and prospects for the future. You should review the introduction under “Impact of Acquisitions” (above) for a discussion 
of the inherent limitations in comparing pre- and post-acquisition information.  
Our operating results included the following business combination accounting adjustments and expenses related to acquisitions, as well as 
certain other significant expense and income items:  
   
   
   
56 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
   2015      
   2014       
   2013     
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service deferred revenues 
  
$ 
12    
$
17    
$ 
45   
Software license updates and product support deferred revenues 
  
 
11    
 
3    
 
14   
Hardware systems support deferred revenues 
  
 
4    
 
11    
 
14   
Amortization of intangible assets 
  
 2,149    
 2,300    
 2,385   
Acquisition related and other 
  
 
211    
 
41    
 (604)  
Restructuring 
  
 
207    
 
183    
 
352   
Stock-based compensation 
  
 
928    
 
795    
 
722   
Income tax effects 
  
 (971)   
 (1,091 )   
 (896)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
$ 2,551    
$ 2,259    
$ 2,032   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  In connection with our acquisitions, we have estimated the fair values of the cloud SaaS and PaaS subscriptions, software support and hardware systems support obligations assumed. Due 
to our application of business combination accounting rules, we did not recognize cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues related to subscription contracts that would have otherwise been 
recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $12 million, $17 million and $45 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. We also did not 
recognize software license updates and product support revenues related to software support contracts that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent 
entities in the amounts of $11 million, $3 million and $14 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In addition, we did not recognize hardware systems support revenues 
related to hardware systems support contracts that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $4 million, $11 million and 
$14 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. 
     
Approximately $4 million of estimated cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues related to contracts assumed will not be recognized during fiscal 2016 that would have otherwise been recognized 
as revenues by the acquired businesses as independent entities due to the application of the aforementioned business combination accounting rules. Approximately $2 million of estimated 
software license updates and product support revenues related to software support contracts assumed will not be recognized during fiscal 2016 that would have otherwise been recognized 
as revenues by the acquired businesses as independent entities due to the application of the aforementioned business combination accounting rules. Approximately $1 million of estimated 
hardware systems support revenues related to hardware 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3)(5) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
57 
  
systems support contracts assumed will not be recognized during fiscal 2016 that would have otherwise been recognized by certain acquired companies as independent entities due to the 
application of the aforementioned business combination accounting rules. To the extent customers renew these contracts with us, we expect to recognize revenues for the full contracts’ 
values over the respective contracts’ renewal periods. 
  Represents the amortization of intangible assets substantially all of which were acquired in connection with our acquisitions. As of May 31, 2015, estimated future amortization expenses 
related to intangible assets were as follows (in millions): 
Fiscal 2016 
  
$ 1,624   
Fiscal 2017 
  
 
995   
Fiscal 2018 
  
 
848   
Fiscal 2019 
  
 
742   
Fiscal 2020 
  
 
598   
Thereafter 
  
 
1,599   
   
   
   
  
Total intangible assets, net 
  
$    6,406   
   
   
   
  
  Acquisition related and other expenses primarily consist of personnel related costs for transitional and certain other employees, stock-based compensation expenses, integration related 
professional services, certain business combination adjustments including certain adjustments after the measurement period has ended and certain other operating items, net. Included in 
acquisition related and other expenses for fiscal 2015 was a goodwill impairment loss of $186 million (refer to Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere 
in this Annual Report for additional information). Included in acquisition related and other expenses for fiscal 2015 and 2013 were benefits of $53 million and $306 million, respectively, 
related to certain litigation (refer to Note 18 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information). Also included in 
acquisition related and other expenses for fiscal 2013 were changes in estimates for contingent consideration payable, which reduced acquisition related and other expenses by $387 
million during fiscal 2013 (refer to Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information). 
  The significant majority of restructuring expenses during fiscal 2015 primarily related to employee severance in connection with our Fiscal 2015 Oracle Restructuring Plan (2015 
Restructuring Plan) and our Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan (2013 Restructuring Plan). Restructuring expenses during fiscal 2014 and 2013 primarily related to costs incurred 
pursuant to our 2013 Restructuring Plan. Additional information regarding certain of our restructuring plans is provided in Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included 
elsewhere in this Annual Report. 
 Stock-based compensation was included in the following operating expense line items of our consolidated statements of operations (in millions): 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
   2015       
   2014       
   2013      
Sales and marketing 
  
$ 
180     
$ 
165     
$ 
137   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
  
 
10     
 
8     
 
10   
Cloud infrastructure as a service 
  
 
5     
 
4     
 
8   
Software license updates and product support 
  
 
21     
 
22     
 
20   
Hardware systems products 
  
 
6     
 
5     
 
3   
Hardware systems support 
  
 
6     
 
6     
 
5   
Services 
  
 
30     
 
29     
 
23   
Research and development 
  
 
522     
 
385     
 
352   
General and administrative 
  
 
148     
 
171     
 
164   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Subtotal 
  
 
928     
 
795     
 
722   
Acquisition related and other 
  
 
5     
 
10     
 
33   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total stock-based compensation 
  
$        933     
$        805     
$        755   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
     
Stock-based compensation included in acquisition related and other expenses resulted from unvested stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed from acquisitions whose 
vesting was accelerated upon termination of the employees pursuant to the terms of those stock options and restricted stock-based awards. 
  The income tax effects presented were calculated as if the above described charges were not included in our results of operations for each of the respective periods presented. Income tax 
effects for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013 were calculated based on the applicable jurisdictional tax rates applied to the items within the table above and resulted in effective tax rates of 
23.6%, 22.5% and 23.0%, respectively, instead of 22.6%, 20.1% and 21.4%, respectively, which represented our effective tax rates as derived per our consolidated statements of 
operations, due to the net tax effects of acquisition related items, primarily the tax effects of amortization of intangible assets. 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 

Table of Contents  
Software and Cloud Business  
Our software and cloud business consists of our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions segment, our cloud infrastructure as a 
service segment and our software license updates and product support segment.  
New Software Licenses and Cloud Software Subscriptions:     New software licenses revenues represent fees earned from granting customers 
licenses to use our database and middleware and our application software products. Cloud software subscriptions include revenues from our 
cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings, which grant customers access to a broad range of our software offerings on a subscription basis in a secure, 
standards-based, cloud computing environment that includes access, hosting, infrastructure management, the use of software updates, and 
support. We continue to place significant emphasis, both domestically and internationally, on direct sales through our own sales force. We also 
continue to market our products through indirect channels. Costs associated with our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions 
segment are included in sales and marketing expenses, cloud SaaS and PaaS expenses and amortization of intangible assets. These costs are 
largely personnel related and include commissions earned by our sales force for the sale of our software offerings, marketing program costs, the 
cost of providing our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings and amortization of intangible assets.  
   
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations of 5 percentage points, total new 
software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues remained flat during fiscal 2015 as growth in our cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues and 
contributions from our recent acquisitions were offset by a decline in our new software licenses revenues. In constant currency, fiscal 2015 
revenue growth in the Americas region was offset by revenue declines in the EMEA and Asia Pacific regions.  
As a result of our acquisitions, we recorded adjustments to reduce assumed cloud SaaS and PaaS obligations to their estimated fair values at the 
acquisition dates. Due to our application of business combination accounting rules, cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues in the amounts of $12 million, 
$17 million and $45 million that would have  
   
58 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
 
 
  
Percent Change 
  
 
  
Percent Change 
  
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
2015 
  
Actual   
Constant   
2014 
  
Actual   
Constant   
2013 
 
New Software Licenses and Cloud Software Subscriptions Revenues: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Americas 
 
$ 5,742    
 
4%    
 
6%    
$ 5,544    
 
1%    
 
3%    
$ 5,465   
EMEA 
 
 
2,715    
 -16%    
 
-8%    
 
3,249    
 10%    
 
6%    
 
2,959   
Asia Pacific 
 
 
1,563    
 -10%    
 
-5%    
 
1,744    
 -8%    
 
-2%    
 
1,897   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total revenues 
 
 10,020    
 -5%    
 
0%    
 10,537    
 
2%    
 
3%    
 10,321   
Expenses: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
 
 
763    
 71%    
 
76%    
 
447    
 41%    
 
42%    
 
317   
Sales and marketing 
 
 
6,474    
 
2%    
 
6%    
 
6,350    
 
7%    
 
8%    
 
5,935   
Stock-based compensation 
 
 
179    
 
8%    
 
8%    
 
166    
 17%    
 
17%    
 
142   
Amortization of intangible assets 
 
 
1,008    
 
3%    
 
3%    
 
977    
 -1%    
 
-1%    
 
986   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total expenses 
 
 
8,424    
 
6%    
 
10%    
 
7,940    
 
8%    
 
8%    
 
7,380   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total Margin 
 
$ 1,596    
 -39%    
 
-31%    
$ 2,597    
 -12%    
 
-11%    
$ 2,941   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total Margin % 
 
 
16%    
 
 
 
25%    
 
 
 
28%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Americas 
 
 
57%    
 
 
 
53%    
 
 
 
53%   
EMEA 
 
 
27%    
 
 
 
31%    
 
 
 
29%   
Asia Pacific 
 
 
16%    
 
 
 
16%    
 
 
 
18%   
Revenues by Software Offerings: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New software licenses 
 
$ 8,535    
 -9%    
 
-4%    
$ 9,416    
 
0%    
 
1%    
$ 9,411   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
 
 
1,485    
 32%    
 
35%    
 
1,121    
 23%    
 
24%    
 
910   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues 
 
$  10,020    
 -5%    
 
0%    
$  10,537    
 
2%    
 
3%    
$  10,321   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
% Revenues by Software Offerings: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New software licenses 
 
 
85%    
 
 
 
89%    
 
 
 
91%   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
 
 
15%    
 
 
 
11%    
 
 
 
9%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 Included as a component of ‘Amortization of Intangible Assets’ in our consolidated statements of operations 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
been otherwise recorded by our acquired businesses as independent entities were not recognized in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. To 
the extent underlying cloud SaaS and PaaS contracts are renewed with us following an acquisition, we will recognize the revenues for the full 
values of the cloud SaaS and PaaS contracts over the respective contractual periods.  
In reported currency, new software licenses revenues earned from transactions of $3 million or greater decreased by 15% in fiscal 2015 and 
represented 31% of our new software licenses revenues in fiscal 2015 in comparison to 33% in fiscal 2014.  
Excluding the effects of favorable currency rate fluctuations of 4 percentage points, total new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions 
expenses increased in fiscal 2015 primarily due to higher employee related expenses from increased headcount, higher variable compensation 
expenses, and higher cloud SaaS and PaaS expenses incurred to support the related revenues increase.  
Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations, total new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions margin and margin 
as a percentage of revenues decreased in fiscal 2015 due to the growth in total expenses for this operating segment.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations, total new software licenses and cloud 
software subscriptions revenues increased during fiscal 2014 primarily due to incremental revenues from our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings 
resulting from our recent acquisitions. In constant currency, total new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues growth in 
fiscal 2014 in the Americas and EMEA region was partially offset by a decline in revenues in the Asia Pacific region.  
As described above, the amount of new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues that we recognized in fiscal 2014 and fiscal 
2013 were affected by business combination accounting rules. In reported currency, new software licenses revenues earned from transactions of 
$3 million or greater increased by 3% in fiscal 2014 and represented 33% of our new software licenses revenues in fiscal 2014 in comparison to 
32% in fiscal 2013.  
Excluding the effects of favorable currency rate fluctuations, total new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions expenses increased in 
fiscal 2014 primarily due to higher employee related expenses from increased headcount, higher variable compensation expenses due to revenues 
growth, and higher cloud SaaS and PaaS expenses incurred to support the related revenues increase.  
Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations, total new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions margin and margin 
as a percentage of revenues decreased in fiscal 2014 as our total expenses increased at a faster rate than our total revenues for this operating 
segment.  
Cloud Infrastructure as a Service:    Our cloud infrastructure as a service segment provides comprehensive software and hardware management 
and maintenance services for customer IT infrastructure for a fee for a stated term that is hosted at our Oracle data center facilities, select partner 
data centers or physically on-premises at customer facilities; virtual machine instance services that are subscription-based in which we deploy, 
secure, provision, manage and maintain certain of our hardware products for our customers to provide them with a set of cloud-based core 
infrastructure capabilities like elastic compute and storage services to run workloads in the cloud; and hardware and related support offerings for 
certain of our Oracle Engineered Systems that are deployed in our customers’ data centers for a monthly fee. Cloud infrastructure as a service 
expenses consist primarily of personnel related expenditures, technology infrastructure expenditures and facilities costs. For all periods 
presented, our cloud-infrastructure as a service segment’s revenues and expenses were substantially attributable to our comprehensive software 
and hardware management, maintenance and hosting services.  
   
59 

Table of Contents  
   
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     On a constant currency basis, total cloud IaaS revenues increased during fiscal 2015 primarily due to 
growth in our comprehensive software and hardware management, maintenance and hosting services and due to revenue contributions from our 
recent acquisitions. Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, the Americas contributed 70%, EMEA contributed 24% and Asia Pacific 
contributed 6% to the increase in IaaS revenues during fiscal 2015.  
On a constant currency basis, total cloud IaaS expenses increased in fiscal 2015 primarily due to increased employee related expenses associated 
with increased headcount and increased infrastructure expenses to support our increase in IaaS revenues.  
Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency exchange variances, total margin and margin as a percentage of revenues increased during fiscal 
2015 as total revenues increased at a faster rate than our total expenses for this operating segment.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     On a constant currency basis, total cloud IaaS revenues increased slightly in fiscal 2014 primarily due 
to incremental revenues from our on-premises Oracle Engineered Systems subscription offerings. In constant currency, total cloud IaaS revenues 
growth in the EMEA and Asia Pacific regions were partially offset by a decline in revenues in the Americas region.  
On a constant currency basis, total cloud IaaS expenses increased during fiscal 2014 primarily due to increased employee related expenses 
associated with increased headcount, which reduced the total margin and margin as a percentage of revenues for this segment in comparison to 
fiscal 2013.  
   
60 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   Actual    Constant    
2014 
   
Actual    Constant    
2013 
 
Cloud Infastructure as a Service Revenues: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
  $    444     33%      35%     $    335      -6%      -5%     $    355   
EMEA 
   
129     37%      41%      
94      32%      27%      
72   
Asia Pacific 
   
35     28%      39%      
27      -12%      
3%      
30   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total revenues 
   
608     33%      36%      
456      0%      
1%      
457   
Expenses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Cloud infastructure as a service 
   
339     12%      14%      
304      3%      
5%      
296   
Sales and marketing 
   
90     46%      50%      
61      0%      
1%      
61   
Stock-based compensation 
   
5     27%      27%      
4      -52%      -52%      
8   
Amortization of intangible assets 
   
4     *      
* 
     
—      * 
     
* 
     
—   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total expenses 
   
438     19%      21%      
369      1%      
3%      
365   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Margin 
  $
170     97%      103%     $ 
87      -6%      -9%     $ 
92   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Margin % 
   28%    
  
   19%     
  
   20%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
   73%    
  
   73%     
  
   77%   
EMEA 
   21%    
  
   21%     
  
   16%   
Asia Pacific 
   
6%    
  
   
6%     
  
   
7%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 Included as a component of ‘Amortization of Intangible Assets’ in our consolidated statements of operations 
 
Not meaningful 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
* 

Table of Contents  
Software License Updates and Product Support:     Software license updates grant customers rights to unspecified software product upgrades 
and maintenance releases and patches released during the support period. Product support includes internet access to technical content as well as 
internet and telephone access to technical support personnel in our global support centers. Expenses associated with our software license updates 
and product support line of business include the cost of providing the support services, largely personnel related expenses, and the amortization 
of our intangible assets associated with software support contracts and customer relationships obtained from acquisitions.  
   
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency variations of 4 percentage points, software license 
updates and product support revenues increased by 8% in fiscal 2015 as a result of new software licenses sold with substantially all of these 
customers electing to purchase software support contracts during the trailing 4-quarter period, the renewal of substantially all of the software 
support customer base eligible for renewal during the trailing 4-quarter period and incremental revenues from our recent acquisitions. Excluding 
the effects of currency rate fluctuations, the Americas contributed 50%, EMEA contributed 36% and Asia Pacific contributed 14% to the 
increase in software license updates and product support revenues during fiscal 2015.  
As a result of our acquisitions, we recorded adjustments to reduce assumed software support obligations to their estimated fair values at the 
acquisition dates. Due to our application of business combination accounting rules, software license updates and product support revenues 
related to software support contracts in the amounts of $11 million, $3 million and $14 million that would have been otherwise recorded by our 
acquired businesses as independent entities were not recognized in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Historically, substantially all of our 
software license customers, including customers from acquired companies, renew their software support contracts when such contracts are 
eligible for renewal. To the extent these underlying support contracts are renewed, we will recognize the revenues for the full values of these 
contracts over the support periods, the substantial majority of which are one year in duration.  
   
61 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
  
Percent Change    
  
Percent Change    
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
2015 
  Actual   Constant   
2014 
  Actual   Constant   
2013 
 
Software License Updates and Product Support Revenues: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Americas 
 $    10,418    6%     
7%   $    9,858     6%    
7%   $    9,322   
EMEA 
  
5,920    0%     
9%    
5,906     10%    
7%    
5,363   
Asia Pacific 
  
2,509    3%     
8%    
2,442     -1%    
8%    
2,457   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total revenues 
  
18,847    4%     
8%    18,206     6%    
7%    17,142   
Expenses: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Software license updates and product support 
  
1,178    3%     
8%    
1,140     -1%    
0%    
1,155   
Stock-based compensation 
  
21    -7%     -7%    
22     10%    10%    
20   
Amortization of intangible assets 
  
741    -7%     -7%    
801     -4%    -4%    
836   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total expenses 
  
1,940    -1%     
2%    
1,963     -2%    -1%    
2,011   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total Margin 
 $ 16,907    4%     
9%   $ 16,243     7%    
8%   $ 15,131   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total Margin % 
  
90%   
 
  
89%    
 
  
88%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Americas 
  
55%   
 
  
54%    
 
  
55%   
EMEA 
  
32%   
 
  
33%    
 
  
31%   
Asia Pacific 
  
13%   
 
  
13%    
 
  
14%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 Included as a component of ‘Amortization of Intangible Assets’ in our consolidated statements of operations 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
Excluding the effects of favorable foreign currency rate fluctuations, total software license updates and product support expenses increased 
during fiscal 2015 due to higher employee related expenses and facilities costs associated with increased headcount that was primarily 
attributable to our recent acquisitions, and also increased due to higher bad debt expenses. These fiscal 2015 expense increases were partially 
offset by fiscal 2015 expense decreases related to lower statutory obligation expenses in the jurisdictions in which we operate and lower 
amortization of intangible assets.  
In constant currency, total margin and margin as a percentage of revenues for this segment increased during fiscal 2015 as our total revenues for 
this segment increased at a faster rate than our total expenses for this segment, each during fiscal 2015 and in comparison to fiscal 2014.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations, software license updates and product 
support revenues increased in fiscal 2014 for reasons similar to those noted above for our fiscal 2015 revenues increase. Excluding the effects of 
currency rate fluctuations, the Americas contributed 55%, EMEA contributed 30% and Asia Pacific contributed 15% to the increase in software 
license updates and product support revenues during fiscal 2014.  
As described above, the amounts of software license updates and product support revenues that we recognized in fiscal 2014 and 2013 were 
affected by business combination accounting rules.  
Excluding the effects of favorable foreign currency rate fluctuations, total software license updates and product support expenses during fiscal 
2014 decreased slightly due to a modest decrease in headcount and a decrease in amortization of intangible assets. Total margin and total margin 
as a percentage of revenues increased during fiscal 2014 as our total revenues for this segment increased while our total expenses slightly 
decreased, each during fiscal 2014 and in comparison to fiscal 2013.  
Hardware Systems Business  
Our hardware systems business consists of our hardware systems products segment and hardware systems support segment.  
Hardware Systems Products:     Hardware systems products revenues are primarily generated from the sales of our Oracle Engineered Systems, 
computer server, storage, networking, workstations and related devices and industry specific hardware products. We market and sell our 
hardware systems products through our direct sales force and indirect channels such as independent distributors and value added resellers. 
Operating expenses associated with our hardware systems products include the cost of hardware systems products, which consists of expenses 
for materials and labor used to produce these products by our internal manufacturing operations or by third party manufacturers, warranty 
expenses and the impact of periodic changes in inventory valuation, including the impact of inventory determined to be excess and obsolete. 
Operating expenses associated with our hardware systems products also include sales and marketing expenses, which are largely personnel 
related and include variable compensation earned by our sales force for the sales of our hardware products, and amortization of intangible assets. 
   
62 

Table of Contents  
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations of 5 percentage points, total hardware 
systems products revenues were flat in fiscal 2015 in comparison to the prior year as revenues from our recently acquired companies, including 
MICROS, and increases in hardware revenues attributable to our Oracle Engineered Systems products were offset by reductions in the sales 
volumes of certain of our other hardware product offerings. On a constant currency basis, revenue increases in the Americas region and EMEA 
region were offset by declines in the Asia Pacific region.  
Excluding the effects of favorable currency rate fluctuations of 5 percentage points, total hardware systems products expenses decreased in fiscal 
2015 primarily due to lower bad debt expenses and a reduction in amortization of intangible assets. These fiscal 2015 expense decreases were 
partially offset by higher fiscal 2015 employee related expenses due to increased headcount from our recent acquisitions and higher direct 
product costs that were primarily attributable to higher revenues from recently acquired companies.  
In constant currency, total margin and margin as a percentage of revenues increased in fiscal 2015 due to the decrease in total expenses for this 
segment.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, total hardware systems products revenues modestly 
decreased in fiscal 2014. The decrease in revenues during fiscal 2014, which was attributable to reductions in the sales volumes of certain of our 
product lines, was partially offset by incremental revenues from our acquired companies and increases in hardware revenues attributable to the 
sales of our Oracle Engineered Systems.  
In constant currency, total hardware systems products expenses increased in fiscal 2014 primarily due to an increase in employee related 
expenses due primarily to an increase in sales and marketing headcount, partially offset by a decrease in amortization of intangible assets.  
   
63 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
 
 
  
Percent Change 
   
 
  
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
   2015       
Actual   
Constant    
   2014       
Actual   
Constant    
   2013      
Hardware Systems Products Revenues: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Americas 
 $ 1,492    
 -1%    
 
1%     $ 1,507   
 1%   
 
2%     $ 1,495   
EMEA 
 
 
797    
 -5%    
 
7%      
834   
 -1%   
 -3%      
842   
Asia Pacific 
 
 
536    
 -16%    
 -12%      
635   
 -9%   
 -5%      
696   
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
Total revenues 
 
 2,825    
 -5%    
 
0%      2,976   
 -2%   
 -1%      3,033   
Expenses: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Hardware systems products 
 
 1,465    
 -3%    
 
3%      1,516   
 1%   
 
3%      1,498   
Sales and marketing 
 
 
911    
 -8%    
 -3%      
991   
 7%   
 
7%      
929   
Stock-based compensation 
 
 
17    
 47%    
 47%      
12   
 49%   
 49%      
8   
Amortization of intangible assets 
 
 
223    
 -19%    
 -19%      
274   
 -16%   
 -16%      
327   
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
Total expenses 
 
 2,616    
 -6%    
 -1%      2,793   
 1%   
 
2%      2,762   
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
Total Margin 
 $ 209    
 14%    
 19%     $ 183   
 -33%   
 -30%     $ 271   
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
Total Margin % 
 
 
7%    
 
   
6%   
 
   
9%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Americas 
 
 53%    
 
   51%   
 
   49%   
EMEA 
 
 28%    
 
   28%   
 
   28%   
Asia Pacific 
 
 19%    
 
   21%   
 
   23%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 Included as a component of ‘Amortization of Intangible Assets’ in our consolidated statements of operations 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, total margin and margin as a percentage of revenues decreased in fiscal 2014 due to a 
decrease in our total revenues and increase in our total expenses for this segment.  
Hardware Systems Support:     Our hardware systems support offerings provide customers with software updates for software components that 
are essential to the functionality of our hardware products, such as Oracle Solaris and certain other software products, and can include product 
repairs, maintenance services and technical support services. Expenses associated with our hardware systems support operating segment include 
the cost of materials used to repair customer products, the cost of providing support services, largely personnel related expenses, and the 
amortization of our intangible assets primarily associated with hardware systems support contracts and customer relationships obtained from our 
acquisitions.  
   
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations of 5 percentage points, hardware 
systems support revenues increased in fiscal 2015 primarily due to incremental revenues from our recently acquired companies, including 
MICROS. The Americas region contributed 42%, EMEA contributed 52% and Asia Pacific contributed 6%, to our constant currency growth in 
hardware systems support revenues during fiscal 2015.  
As a result of our acquisitions, we recorded adjustments to reduce assumed hardware systems support obligations to their estimated fair values at 
the acquisition dates. Due to our application of business combination accounting rules, hardware systems support revenues related to hardware 
systems support contracts in the amounts of $4 million, $11 million and $14 million were not recognized in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively. To the extent these underlying hardware systems support contracts are renewed, we will recognize the revenues for the full values 
of these contracts over the future support periods.  
In constant currency, total hardware systems support expenses decreased in fiscal 2015 primarily due to reduced service delivery costs due to 
operational initiatives and a decrease in amortization of intangible assets, partially offset by higher employee related expenses resulting from 
increased headcount from our recent acquisitions, higher external contractor expenses and higher bad debt expenses.  
In constant currency, total hardware systems support margin and margin as a percentage of total revenues increased in fiscal 2015 due to the 
increase in total revenues and decrease in total expenses for this operating segment.  
   
64 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   Actual    Constant    
2014 
   Actual    Constant    
2013 
 
Hardware Systems Support Revenues: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
  $    1,245    
1%    
 
3%     $    1,229     11%     12%     $    1,109   
EMEA 
   
722    
-2%    
 
6%      
738     -2%     -4%      
752   
Asia Pacific 
   
413    
-4%    
 
1%      
429     -5%     
2%      
452   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total revenues 
   
2,380    
-1%    
 
4%      
2,396     4%     
5%      
2,313   
Expenses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Hardware systems support 
   
810    
-2%    
 
2%      
830     -6%     -5%      
885   
Stock-based compensation 
   
6    
3%    
 
3%      
6     26%     26%      
5   
Amortization of intangible assets 
   
158    
-
32%    
 -32%      
231     8%     
8%      
213   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total expenses 
   
974    
-9%    
 -6%      
1,067     -3%     -3%      
1,103   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Margin 
  $ 1,406    
6%    
 11%     $ 1,329     10%     12%     $
1,210   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Margin % 
   
59%    
  
   
55%    
  
   
52%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
   
52%    
  
   
51%    
  
   
48%   
EMEA 
   
30%    
  
   
31%    
  
   
32%   
Asia Pacific 
   
18%    
  
   
18%    
  
   
20%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 Included as a component of ‘Amortization of Intangible Assets’ in our consolidated statements of operations 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Excluding the impacts of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations, hardware systems support revenues 
increased in fiscal 2014 primarily due to incremental revenues from our acquisitions. In constant currency, hardware systems support revenues 
growth in the Americas and Asia Pacific region was partially offset by a decline in revenues in the EMEA region.  
As described above, the amounts of hardware systems support revenues that we recognized in fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2013 were affected by 
business combination accounting rules.  
In constant currency, total hardware systems support expenses decreased in fiscal 2014 primarily due to a reduction in employee related 
expenses attributable to operational initiatives including decreased headcount and reduced service delivery costs, partially offset by an increase 
in amortization of intangible assets.  
Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, total hardware systems support margin and margin as a percentage of total revenues increased 
in fiscal 2014 as our total revenues for this segment increased while our total expenses for this segment decreased.  
Services Business  
Our services business consists of consulting, advanced customer support services and education services. Consulting revenues are earned by 
providing services to customers in business and IT strategy alignment, enterprise architecture planning and design, initial product 
implementation and integration, and ongoing product enhancements and upgrades. Advanced customer support services are provided on-
premises and remotely to our customers to enable increased performance and higher availability of their Oracle products and services. Education 
revenues are earned by providing instructor-led, live virtual training, self-paced online training, private events and custom training in the use of 
our software and hardware offerings. The cost of providing our services consists primarily of personnel related expenses, technology 
infrastructure expenditures, facilities expenses and external contractor expenses.  
   
   
   
65 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   Actual    
Constant    
2014 
   Actual    
Constant    
2013 
 
Services Revenues: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
  $ 1,766     
 -5%    
 -2%     $ 1,850     
 -6%    
 -5%     $ 1,973   
EMEA 
  
 1,097     
 -2%    
 
6%     
 1,125     
 -4%    
 -7%     
 1,170   
Asia Pacific 
  
 
683     
 -6%    
 -1%     
 
729     
 -5%    
 
2%     
 
771   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total revenues 
  
 3,546     
 -4%    
 
0%     
 3,704     
 -5%    
 -4%     
 3,914   
Expenses: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Services 
  
 2,899     
 -1%    
 
4%     
 2,925     
 -7%    
 -6%     
 3,159   
Stock-based compensation 
  
 
30     
 2%    
 
2%     
 
29     
 25%    
 25%     
 
23   
Amortization of intangible assets 
  
 
15     
 
-
12%    
 -12%     
 
17     
 
-
26%    
 -26%     
 
23   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total expenses 
  
 2,944     
 -1%    
 
4%     
 2,971     
 -7%    
 -6%     
 3,205   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Margin 
  $    602     
 
-
18%    
 -13%     $    733     
 3%    
 
5%     $    709   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total Margin % 
  
 17%     
  
  
 20%     
  
  
 18%   
% Revenues by Geography: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Americas 
  
 50%     
  
  
 50%     
  
  
 50%   
EMEA 
  
 31%     
  
  
 30%     
  
  
 30%   
Asia Pacific 
  
 19%     
  
  
 20%     
  
  
 20%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 Included as a component of ‘Amortization of Intangible Assets’ in our consolidated statements of operations 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Excluding the effects of unfavorable currency rate fluctuations of 4 percentage points, our total 
services revenues were flat in fiscal 2015 as incremental revenues from our recently acquired companies, including MICROS, and an increase in 
fiscal 2015 advanced customer services revenues were offset by declines in our fiscal 2015 consulting and education revenues. In constant 
currency, revenues growth in the EMEA region was offset by revenue declines in the Americas region and Asia Pacific region during fiscal 
2015.  
Excluding the effects of favorable currency rate fluctuations of 5 percentage points, our total services expenses increased during fiscal 2015 due 
to higher employee related expenses resulting from increased headcount from our recent acquisitions and were partially offset by lower variable 
compensation and lower external contractor costs, each in comparison to fiscal 2014.  
In constant currency, total margin and margin as a percentage of total revenues decreased during fiscal 2015 due to the increase in total expenses 
for this business.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:    Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, our total services revenues decreased in fiscal 2014 
due to revenue decreases in each of our services business’ segments. The largest services revenues decrease was to our consulting segment’s 
revenues.  
Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, our total services expenses decreased during fiscal 2014 primarily due to expense decreases 
in our consulting services segment primarily due to decreased headcount, lower external contractor costs and lower intangible asset amortization. 
In constant currency, total margin and margin as a percentage of total revenues increased during fiscal 2014 due to our expense reductions for 
this business.  
Research and Development Expenses:     Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel related expenditures. We intend to 
continue to invest significantly in our research and development efforts because, in our judgment, they are essential to maintaining our 
competitive position.  
   
On a constant currency basis, total research and development expenses increased during fiscal 2015 and 2014, each relative to the respective 
prior year period, primarily due to increased employee related expenses resulting from increased headcount, including additional headcount from 
our recent acquisitions.  
General and Administrative Expenses:     General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel related expenditures for 
information technology, finance, legal and human resources support functions.  
   
   
66 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   Actual    Constant    
2014 
   Actual    Constant    
2013 
 
Research and development 
  $    5,002    
 5%    
 
6%     $    4,766     6%     
7%     $    4,498   
Stock-based compensation 
   
522    
 36%    
 36%      
385     9%     
9%      
352   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total expenses 
  $ 5,524    
 7%    
 
8%     $ 5,151     6%     
7%     $
4,850   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
% of Total Revenues 
   
14%    
  
   
13%    
  
   
13%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   
Actual    
Constant    
2014 
   
Actual    
Constant    
2013 
 
General and administrative 
  $ 
929     
 7%    
 10%     $ 
867     
 -4%     
 -3%     $
908   
Stock-based compensation 
  
 
148     
 
-
14%    
 -14%     
 
171     
 4%     
 
4%     
 
164   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
Total expenses 
  $    1,077     
 4%    
 
7%     $    1,038     
 -3%     
 -2%     $    1,072   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
% of Total Revenues 
  
 
3%     
  
  
 
3%     
  
  
 
3%   
 Excluding stock-based compensation 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     On a constant currency basis, total general and administrative expenses increased during fiscal 2015 
primarily due to higher employee related expenses resulting from increased headcount and higher professional fees.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     On a constant currency basis, total general and administrative expenses decreased during fiscal 2014 
primarily due to lower professional fees and lower variable compensation expenses, partially offset by slightly increased salaries and benefits 
expenses due to an increase in headcount.  
Amortization of Intangible Assets:  
   
Amortization of intangible assets decreased during fiscal 2015 and 2014, each relative to the respective prior year period, due to a reduction in 
expenses associated with certain of our intangible assets that became fully amortized. These decreases were partially offset by additional 
amortization from intangible assets that we acquired in connection with our acquisitions of MICROS in fiscal 2015 and Responsys in fiscal 
2014, among others. Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report has additional information 
regarding our intangible assets and related amortization.  
Acquisition Related and Other Expenses:    Acquisition related and other expenses consist of personnel related costs for transitional and certain 
other employees, stock-based compensation expenses, integration related professional services, certain business combination adjustments 
including certain adjustments after the measurement period has ended and certain other operating items, net. Stock-based compensation expenses 
included in acquisition related and other expenses result from unvested stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed from 
acquisitions whereby vesting was accelerated upon termination of the employees pursuant to the original terms of those stock options and 
restricted stock-based awards.  
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     On a constant currency basis, acquisition related and other expenses increased during fiscal 2015 
primarily due to a $186 million goodwill impairment loss (refer to Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in 
this Annual Report for additional information) and an increase in certain transitional employee related costs, primarily related to our acquisition 
of MICROS. These fiscal 2015 expense increases were partially offset by a $53 million benefit recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2015 
related to certain litigation (refer to Note 18 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for 
additional information).  
   
67 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
 
 
  
Percent Change 
  
 
  
Percent Change 
  
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
 2015     
 Actual     
 Constant    
 2014     
 Actual     
 Constant     
 2013    
Software support agreements and related relationships 
 $ 
531    
 
-7%    
 
-7%    $ 
571    
 
-2%    
 
-2%    $ 
582   
Hardware systems support agreements and related relationships 
 
 
144    
 
1%    
 
1%    
 
143    
 
18%    
 
18%    
 
121   
Developed technology 
 
 
700    
 
-1%    
 
-1%    
 
706    
 
-15%    
 
-15%    
 
826   
Core technology 
 
 
182    
 
-43%    
 
-43%    
 
318    
 
-3%    
 
-3%    
 
329   
Customer relationships and contract backlog 
 
 
312    
 
-7%    
 
-7%    
 
334    
 
-5%    
 
-5%    
 
350   
SaaS, PaaS and IaaS agreements and related relationships and other 
 
 
203    
 
35%    
 
35%    
 
150    
 
33%    
 
33%    
 
113   
Trademarks 
 
 
77    
 
-1%    
 
-1%    
 
78    
 
22%    
 
22%    
 
64   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total amortization of intangible assets 
 $    2,149    
 
-7%    
 
-7%    $    2,300    
 
-4%    
 
-4%    $    2,385   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
  
Percent Change 
   
  
Percent Change 
   
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
2015 
  
Actual   Constant   
2014   Actual   Constant   
2013 
 
Transitional and other employee related costs 
 $ 
57     112%    120%    $    27     1%     
2%    $     27   
Stock-based compensation 
  
5     -48%    -48%     
10     -69%     -69%     
33   
Professional fees and other, net 
  
(35 )    274%    279%     
20     107%     107%     (276)  
Business combination adjustments, net 
  
184     1,235%    1,239%     (16 )    96%     96%     (388)  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total acquisition related and other expenses 
 $    211     412%    411%    $ 41     107%     107%    $ (604)  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     On a constant currency basis, the increase in our acquisition related and other expenses in fiscal 2014 
was primarily due to certain benefits that we recorded during fiscal 2013, which reduced our expenses during this period. We recorded a net 
benefit of $387 million during fiscal 2013 related to the change in fair value of contingent consideration payable in connection with an 
acquisition (refer to Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information). 
We also recorded a $306 million benefit in fiscal 2013 to professional fees and other, net related to certain litigation (refer to Note 18 of Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information).  
Restructuring Expenses:     Restructuring expenses result from the execution of management approved restructuring plans that were generally 
developed to improve our cost structure and/or operations, often in conjunction with our acquisition integration strategies. Restructuring 
expenses consist of employee severance costs and may also include charges for duplicate facilities and other contract termination costs to 
improve our cost structure prospectively. For additional information regarding our restructuring plans, see Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
   
Restructuring expenses in fiscal 2015 primarily related to our 2015 Restructuring Plan and our 2013 Restructuring Plan. Restructuring expenses 
in fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2013 primarily related to our 2013 Restructuring Plan. Our management approved, committed to and initiated these 
plans in order to restructure and further improve efficiencies in our operations. The total estimated restructuring costs associated with the 2015 
Restructuring Plan are up to $626 million and will be recorded to the restructuring expense line item within our consolidated statements of 
operations as they are incurred. The total estimated remaining restructuring costs associated with the 2015 Restructuring Plan were 
approximately $526 million as of May 31, 2015 and the majority of the remaining costs are expected to be incurred through the end of fiscal 
2016. Actions pursuant to the 2013 Restructuring Plan were substantially complete as of May 31, 2015 (refer to Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information pertaining to our 2013 Restructuring Plan). Our 
estimated costs are subject to change in future periods.  
Interest Expense:  
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Interest expense increased in fiscal 2015 primarily due to higher average borrowings resulting from 
our issuance of $10.0 billion of senior notes in May 2015 and $10.0 billion of senior notes in July 2014. The increase in interest expense in fiscal 
2015 was partially offset by a reduction in interest expense during fiscal 2015 resulting from the maturity and repayment of $1.5 billion of senior 
notes and the related fixed to variable interest rate swap agreements in July 2014. See Recent Financing Activities below and Note 8 of Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our fiscal 2015 borrowings.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Interest expense increased in fiscal 2014 primarily due to higher average borrowings resulting from 
our issuance of $3.0 billion and €2.0 billion of senior notes in July 2013 and our issuance of $5.0 billion of senior notes in October 2012, 
partially offset by a reduction in interest expense resulting from the maturity and repayment of $1.25 billion of senior notes in April 2013.  
   
68 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
 2015      Actual    Constant    
2014    Actual    Constant    
2013  
Restructuring expenses 
  $    207    
 14%     
 22%     $  183     
 
-
48%    
 -49%    $  352   
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
 2015      
 Actual      
 Constant      
 2014     
 Actual      
 Constant      
 2013    
Interest expense 
  
$  1,143    
 25%    
 
25%     
$ 914     
 15%     
 
15%    
$ 797   

Table of Contents  
Non-Operating Income (Expense), net:     Non-operating income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income, net foreign currency 
exchange gains (losses), the noncontrolling interests in the net profits of our majority-owned subsidiaries (primarily Oracle Financial Services 
Software Limited and Oracle Japan) and net other income (losses) including net realized gains and losses related to all of our investments and net 
unrealized gains and losses related to the small portion of our investment portfolio that we classify as trading.  
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:      On a constant currency basis, our non-operating income, net in fiscal 2015 increased due to lower net 
foreign currency losses and due to higher interest income resulting from higher cash, cash equivalent and short-term investment balances. 
Included in foreign currency losses, net in fiscal 2015 was a remeasurement loss of $23 million related to our Venezuelan subsidiary. We 
recorded non-operating expense, net in fiscal 2014 primarily due to a foreign currency remeasurement loss of $213 million that also related to 
our Venezuelan subsidiary. Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report contains additional 
information regarding the foreign currency remeasurement losses we incurred in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013 related to our Venezuelan 
subsidiary.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     We recorded non-operating expense, net in fiscal 2014 in comparison to non-operating income, net in 
fiscal 2013 primarily due to an increase in foreign currency losses, net that were incurred in fiscal 2014 including foreign currency 
remeasurement losses of $213 million that related to our Venezuelan subsidiary (see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information).  
Provision for Income Taxes:     Our effective tax rate in all periods is the result of the mix of income earned in various tax jurisdictions that 
apply a broad range of income tax rates. The provision for income taxes differs from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax 
rate due primarily to earnings considered as indefinitely reinvested in foreign operations, state taxes, the U.S. research and development tax 
credit and the U.S. domestic production activity deduction. Future effective tax rates could be adversely affected if earnings are lower than 
anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory tax rates, by unfavorable changes in tax laws and regulations or by adverse rulings in tax 
related litigation.  
   
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Provision for income taxes in fiscal 2015 increased, relative to the provision for income taxes in fiscal 
2014, due in substantial part to an unfavorable change in the jurisdictional mix of our fiscal 2015 earnings, and due to the effects of acquisition 
related settlements with tax authorities in fiscal 2014 that were not present in fiscal 2015, which together were partially offset by lower fiscal 
2015 income before provision for income taxes.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:    Provision for income taxes in fiscal 2014 decreased, relative to the provision for income taxes in fiscal 
2013, due to a tax favorable change in the jurisdictional mix of our fiscal 2014 earnings and the effects of acquisition related settlements with tax 
authorities during fiscal 2014.  
   
69 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
  
Percent Change 
   
  
Percent Change 
   
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
2015 
  Actual   Constant   
2014 
  
Actual   Constant   
2013 
 
Interest income 
 $      349     33%    33%    $      263     
10%     
17%    $      237   
Foreign currency losses, net 
  
(157 )    -58%    -59%     
(375 )    131%     127%     
(162)  
Noncontrolling interests in income 
  
(113 )    15%    15%     
(98 )    -12%     -12%     
(112)  
Other income, net 
  
27     -60%    -60%     
69     
44%     
44%     
48   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
Total non-operating income (expense), net 
 $ 
106     175%    187%    $ 
(141 )    1,343%     1,749%    $
11   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
   
Percent Change 
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   Actual    Constant    
2014 
   Actual    Constant    
2013 
 
Provision for income taxes 
  $    2,896    
 5%    
 13%     $    2,749     -7%     -6%     $    2,973   
Effective tax rate 
   22.6%    
  
   20.1%    
  
   21.4%   

Table of Contents  
Liquidity and Capital Resources  
   
Working capital:     The increase in working capital as of May 31, 2015 in comparison to May 31, 2014 was primarily due to our issuance of 
$20.0 billion of long-term senior notes during fiscal 2015, the favorable impact to our net current assets resulting from our net income during 
fiscal 2015, and, to a lesser extent, cash proceeds from stock option exercises. These working capital increases were partially offset by $6.2 
billion of net cash used for our acquisitions of MICROS and others, $8.1 billion of cash used for repurchases of our common stock, the 
reclassification of $2.0 billion of senior notes due January 2016 from long-term to current, and $2.3 billion of cash used to pay dividends to our 
stockholders, all of which occurred during fiscal 2015. Our working capital may be impacted by some or all of the aforementioned factors in 
future periods, the amounts and timing of which are variable.  
The increase in working capital as of May 31, 2014 in comparison to May 31, 2013 was primarily due to our issuance of €2.0 billion and $3.0 
billion of long-term senior notes in July 2013, the favorable impact to our net current assets resulting from our net income during fiscal 2014, 
and, to a lesser extent, cash proceeds from stock option exercises. These working capital increases were partially offset by the reclassification of 
$1.5 billion of senior notes due July 2014 from long-term to current, $9.8 billion of cash used for repurchases of our common stock, cash used to 
pay dividends to our stockholders, and cash used for acquisitions.  
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities:     Cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of deposits held at major banks, Tier-1 
commercial paper and other securities with original maturities of 90 days or less. Marketable securities primarily consist of time deposits held at 
major banks, Tier-1 commercial paper, corporate notes and certain other securities. The increase in cash, cash equivalents and marketable 
securities at May 31, 2015 in comparison to May 31, 2014 was due to an increase in cash generated from our operating activities, our issuance of 
$20.0 billion of senior notes in fiscal 2015, and to a lesser extent, cash proceeds from stock option exercises. These increases were partially 
offset by $6.2 billion of net cash paid for our acquisitions of MICROS and others, $8.1 billion of repurchases of our common stock, the 
repayment of $1.5 billion of senior notes and $2.3 billion used for the payment of cash dividends to our stockholders. Cash, cash equivalents and 
marketable securities included $42.7 billion held by our foreign subsidiaries as of May 31, 2015. We consider $38.0 billion of our undistributed 
earnings as indefinitely reinvested in our foreign operations outside the United States. These undistributed earnings would be subject to U.S. 
income tax if repatriated to the United States. Assuming a full utilization of the foreign tax credits, the potential deferred tax liability associated 
with these undistributed earnings would be approximately $11.8 billion as of May 31, 2015 should the amounts be repatriated to the United 
States. The amount of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities that we report in U.S. Dollars for a significant portion of the cash, cash 
equivalents and marketable securities balances held by our foreign subsidiaries is subject to translation adjustments caused by changes in foreign 
currency exchange rates as of the end of each respective reporting period (the offset to which is substantially recorded to accumulated other 
comprehensive loss in our consolidated balance sheets and is also presented as a line item in our consolidated statements of comprehensive 
income included elsewhere in this Annual Report). As the U.S. Dollar generally strengthened against certain major international currencies 
during fiscal 2015, the amount of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities that we reported in U.S. Dollars for these subsidiaries 
decreased on a net basis as of May 31, 2015 relative to what we would have reported using constant currency rates from our May 31, 2014 
balance sheet date.  
The increase in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at May 31, 2014 in comparison to May 31, 2013 was due to an increase in cash 
generated from our operating activities, our issuance of €2.0 billion and $3.0 billion of senior notes in July 2013, and to a lesser extent, cash 
proceeds from stock option exercises. These increases were partially offset by $9.8 billion of repurchases of our common stock, $3.5 billion of 
net cash paid for acquisitions and $2.2 billion used for the payment of cash dividends to our stockholders. Additionally, our reported cash, cash 
equivalents and marketable securities balances as of May 31, 2014 decreased on a net basis in comparison to May 31, 2013 due to the modest 
strengthening of the U.S. Dollar in comparison to certain major international currencies during fiscal 2014.  
   
70 
 
  
As of May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   
Change    
2014 
   
Change    
2013 
 
Working capital 
  $    47,892     
 42%     $    33,739     
 17%     $    28,813   
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities 
  $
54,368     
 40%     $ 38,819     
 20%     $ 32,216   

Table of Contents  
Days sales outstanding, which we calculate by dividing period end accounts receivable by average daily sales for the quarter, was 47 days at 
May 31, 2015 compared with 48 days at May 31, 2014. The days sales outstanding calculation excludes the impact of revenue adjustments 
resulting from business combinations that reduced our acquired cloud SaaS and PaaS obligations, software license updates and product support 
obligations and hardware systems support obligations to fair value.  
   
Cash flows from operating activities:     Our largest source of operating cash flows is cash collections from our customers following the 
purchase and renewal of their software license updates and product support agreements. Payments from customers for these support agreements 
are generally received near the beginning of the contracts’ terms, which are generally one year in length. Over the course of a fiscal year, we also 
have historically generated cash from the sales of new software licenses, cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings, hardware systems products, hardware 
systems support arrangements, and services. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee related expenditures, material 
and manufacturing costs related to the production of our hardware systems products, taxes and leased facilities.  
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Net cash provided by operating activities decreased in fiscal 2015 in comparison to fiscal 2014 
primarily due to the cash unfavorable effects of foreign currency exchange rate variances on our fiscal 2015 net income of 7 percentage points.  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Net cash provided by operating activities increased in fiscal 2014 in comparison to fiscal 2013 
primarily due to the following: the fiscal 2013 non-recurring impacts of a $387 million reduction of contingent consideration payable in 
connection with an acquisition (refer to Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for 
additional information) and the impact of a $306 million non-current receivable related to certain litigation (refer to Note 18 of Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information), both of which increased our net income 
in fiscal 2013 without the corresponding operating cash flow benefits. These items did not recur during fiscal 2014.  
Cash flows from investing activities:     The changes in cash flows from investing activities primarily relate to acquisitions and the timing of 
purchases, maturities and sales of our investments in marketable debt securities. We also use cash to invest in capital and other assets, including 
certain intangible assets, to support our growth.  
Net cash used for investing activities increased in fiscal 2015 and 2014, each relative to the respective prior year period, primarily due to an 
increase in cash used for acquisitions, net of cash acquired, and an increase in net cash used to purchase marketable securities (net of proceeds 
received from sales and maturities).  
Cash flows from financing activities:     The changes in cash flows from financing activities primarily relate to borrowings and repayments 
related to our debt instruments as well as stock repurchases, dividend payments and proceeds from stock option exercises.  
Fiscal 2015 Compared to Fiscal 2014:     Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2015 increased in comparison to net cash used by 
financing activities in fiscal 2014 primarily due to a net increase in borrowings in fiscal 2015 (we issued $20.0 billion of senior notes during 
fiscal 2015 in comparison to €2.0 billion and $3.0 billion of senior notes during fiscal 2014) as well as lower stock repurchase activity during 
fiscal 2015. These favorable impacts to our financing cash flows during fiscal 2015 were partially offset by the repayment of $1.5 billion of 
borrowings pursuant to senior notes maturities during fiscal 2015 (no repayments during fiscal 2014).  
Fiscal 2014 Compared to Fiscal 2013:     Net cash used for financing activities in fiscal 2014 decreased in comparison to fiscal 2013 primarily 
due to the repayment of $3.0 billion of borrowings pursuant to senior notes maturities and certain expired revolving credit facilities in fiscal 
2013 (no repayments during fiscal 2014), a net increase in borrowings during fiscal 2014 (we issued €2.0 billion and $3.0 billion of senior notes 
during fiscal  
   
71 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
  
Change    
2014 
  
Change    
2013 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities 
  $
14,336    
-4%     $
14,921    
 5%     $ 14,224   
Net cash used for investing activities 
  $    (19,047 )  
153%     $    (7,539 )   
 27%     $    (5,956)  
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities 
  $
9,850    
342%     $
(4,068)   
 52%     $ (8,500)  

Table of Contents  
2014 in comparison to $5.0 billion of senior notes issued during fiscal 2013), lower stock repurchase activity during fiscal 2014 and higher 
proceeds from stock option exercises during fiscal 2014. These fiscal 2014 cash favorable variances were partially offset by an increase in 
payments of cash dividends to stockholders in fiscal 2014 in comparison to fiscal 2013.  
Free cash flow:     To supplement our statements of cash flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use non-GAAP measures of cash flows on a 
trailing 4-quarter basis to analyze cash flows generated from our operations. We believe free cash flow is also useful as one of the bases for 
comparing our performance with our competitors. The presentation of non-GAAP free cash flow is not meant to be considered in isolation or as 
an alternative to net income as an indicator of our performance, or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of 
liquidity. We calculate free cash flows as follows:  
   
Long-Term Customer Financing:     We offer certain of our customers the option to acquire our software products, hardware systems products 
and services offerings through separate long-term payment contracts. We generally sell these contracts that we have financed for our customers 
on a non-recourse basis to financial institutions within 90 days of the contracts’ dates of execution. We record the transfers of amounts due from 
customers to financial institutions as sales of financial assets because we are considered to have surrendered control of these financial assets. We 
financed $1.6 billion in each of fiscal 2015 and 2014, and $1.8 billion in fiscal 2013, or approximately 19%, 17% and 19%, respectively, of our 
new software licenses revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013. We financed $172 million, $168 million and $161 million of our hardware 
systems products revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, or approximately 6% in each of fiscal 2015 and 2014 and 5% in fiscal 
2013 of our hardware systems products revenues.  
Recent Financing Activities:  
Senior Notes :    As of May 31, 2015, we had $42.0 billion of senior notes outstanding ($24.1 billion outstanding as of May 31, 2014). In fiscal 
2015, we issued $20.0 billion of senior notes comprised of $1.0 billion of floating rate notes due July 2017 (2017 Notes), $750 million of 
floating rate notes due October 2019 (2019 Floating Rate Notes), $2.0 billion of 2.25% notes due October 2019 (2019 Notes), $1.5 billion of 
2.80% notes due July 2021 (2021 Notes), $2.5 billion of 2.50% notes due May 2022 (2022 Notes), $2.0 billion of 3.40% notes due July 2024 
(2024 Notes), $2.5 billion of 2.95% notes due May 2025 (2025 Notes), $500 million of 3.25% notes due May 2030 (2030 Notes), $1.75 billion 
of 4.30% notes due July 2034 (2034 Notes), $1.25 billion of 3.90% notes due May 2035 (2035 Notes), $1.0 billion of 4.50% notes due July 2044 
(2044 Notes), $2.0 billion of 4.125% notes due May 2045 (2045 Notes) and $1.25 billion of 4.375% notes due May 2055 (2055 Notes, and 
together with the 2017 Notes, 2019 Floating Rate Notes, 2019 Notes, 2021 Notes, 2022 Notes, 2024 Notes, 2025 Notes, 2030 Notes, 2034 
Notes, 2035 Notes, 2044 Notes and 2045 Notes, the Senior Notes).  
We issued the Senior Notes for general corporate purposes, which may include stock repurchases, payment of cash dividends on our common 
stock, future acquisitions and repayment of indebtedness. Additional details regarding our Senior Notes and related interest rate swap agreements 
are included in Notes 8 and 11 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
In July 2014, our 3.75% senior notes due July 2014 for $1.5 billion matured and were repaid, and we settled the fixed to variable interest rate 
swap agreements associated with such fixed rate senior notes.  
   
72 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
  
Change    
2014 
  
Change    
2013 
 
Net cash provided by operating activities 
  $        14,336    
 -4%     $        14,921    
 5%     $        14,224   
Capital expenditures 
  
 
(1,391 )   
 140%     
 
(580)   
 -11%     
 
(650)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
Free cash flow 
  $ 
12,945    
 -10%     $
14,341    
 6%     $
13,574   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
Net income 
  $ 
9,938    
  $
10,955    
  $
10,925   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
Free cash flow as percent of net income 
  
 
130%    
  
 
131%    
  
 
124%   
 Derived from capital expenditures as reported in cash flows from investing activities as per our consolidated statements of cash flows presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. 
(1) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
Interest Rate Swap Agreements :    In July 2014, we entered into certain interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of 
modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with our 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes so that the interest payable on these notes effectively 
became variable based on LIBOR. As of May 31, 2015, our 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes had effective interest rates of 0.76% and 0.91%, 
respectively, after considering the effects of the aforementioned interest rate swap arrangements. We are accounting for these interest rate swap 
agreements as fair value hedges pursuant to ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging . Additional details regarding our Senior Notes and related 
interest rate swap agreements are included in Notes 8 and 11 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual 
Report.  
Cash Dividends :    In fiscal 2015, we declared and paid cash dividends of $0.51 per share that totaled $2.3 billion, an increase of $0.03 per share 
over the cash dividends declared and paid in fiscal 2014. In June 2015, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.15 per 
share of outstanding common stock payable on July 29, 2015 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on July 8, 2015. Future 
declarations of dividends and the establishment of future record and payment dates are subject to the final determination of our Board of 
Directors.  
Common Stock Repurchases :    Our Board of Directors has approved a program for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. On 
September 18, 2014, we announced that our Board of Directors approved an expansion of our stock repurchase program by an additional $13.0 
billion. As of May 31, 2015, approximately $9.2 billion remained available for stock repurchases under the stock repurchase program. We 
repurchased 193.7 million shares for $8.1 billion, 280.4 million shares for $9.8 billion, and 346.1 million shares for $11.0 billion in fiscal 2015, 
2014 and 2013, respectively. Our stock repurchase authorization does not have an expiration date and the pace of our repurchase activity will 
depend on factors such as our working capital needs, our cash requirements for acquisitions and dividend payments, our debt repayment 
obligations (described further below), our stock price and economic and market conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to 
time through open market purchases or pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan. Our stock repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or 
discontinued at any time.  
Contractual Obligations:     The contractual obligations presented in the table below represent our estimates of future payments under fixed 
contractual obligations and commitments. Changes in our business needs, cancellation provisions, changing interest rates and other factors may 
result in actual payments differing from these estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of payments. We have 
presented below a summary of the most significant assumptions used in preparing this information within the context of our consolidated 
financial position, results of operations and cash flows. The following is a summary of certain of our contractual obligations as of May 31, 2015: 
   
   
   
   
73 
 
 
 
  
Year Ending May 31, 
  
 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
Total 
  
2016 
  
2017 
  
2018 
  
2019 
  
2020 
  
Thereafter  
Principal payments on borrowings 
 $    42,466    $    2,000    $ 
—    $    6,000    $    2,000    $    4,500   $    27,966   
Interest payments on borrowings 
 
 
20,166    
 
1,439    
 
1,334    
 
1,315    
 
1,154    
 
1,083   
 
13,841   
Operating leases 
 
 
1,247    
 
330    
 
270    
 
209    
 
156    
 
107   
 
175   
Purchase obligations and other 
 
 
1,181    
 
713    
 
195    
 
124    
 
85    
 
64   
 
—   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total contractual obligations 
 $ 65,060    $
4,482    $    1,799    $ 7,648    $ 3,395    $ 5,754   $ 41,982   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  Represents the principal balances and interest payments to be paid in connection with our senior notes outstanding as of May 31, 2015. Refer to Note 8 of Notes to Consolidated Financial 
Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information related to our notes payable. 
     
We have entered into certain interest rate swap agreements related to our 2.375% senior notes due January 2019 (January 2019 Notes), our 2019 Notes and our 2021 Notes that have the 
economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with these senior notes so that the interest obligations effectively became variable pursuant to a LIBOR-based 
index. Interest payments on the January 2019 Notes, 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes presented in the contractual obligations table above have been estimated using interest rates of 0.93%, 
0.76% and 0.91%, respectively, which represented our effective interest rates for these senior notes as of May 31, 2015 after consideration of these fixed to variable interest rate swap 
agreements, and are subject to change in future periods. 
     
Our 2017 Notes, our floating rate senior notes due January 2019 and our 2019 Floating Rate Notes bore interest at a rate of 0.47%, 0.86% and 0.78%, respectively, as of May 31, 2015 
and interest payments on these notes presented in the contractual obligations table above have been estimated using this rate. 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
   
   
As of May 31, 2015, we had $4.8 billion of gross unrecognized income tax benefits, including related interest and penalties, recorded on our 
consolidated balance sheet and all such obligations have been excluded from the table above due to the uncertainty as to when they might be 
settled. We cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate of the period in which the remainder of our unrecognized income tax benefits will be 
settled or released with the relevant tax authorities, although we believe it is reasonably possible that certain of these liabilities could be settled 
or released during fiscal 2016.  
We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our 
working capital, capital expenditures and contractual obligation requirements. In addition, we believe we could fund any future acquisitions, 
dividend payments and repurchases of common stock or debt with our internally available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, cash 
generated from operations, additional borrowings or from the issuance of additional securities.  
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements:     We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or 
future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures 
or capital resources that is material to investors.  
Selected Quarterly Financial Data  
Quarterly revenues, expenses and operating income have historically been affected by a variety of seasonal factors, including sales force 
incentive compensation plans. In addition, our European operations generally provide lower revenues in our first fiscal quarter because of the 
reduced economic activity in Europe during the summer. These seasonal factors are common in the high technology industry. These factors have 
caused a decrease in our first quarter revenues as compared to revenues in the immediately preceding fourth quarter, which historically has been 
our highest revenue quarter within a particular fiscal year. Similarly, the operating income of our business is affected by seasonal factors in a 
consistent manner as our revenues (in particular, our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions segment) as certain expenses within 
our cost structure are relatively fixed in the short-term. We expect these trends to continue in fiscal 2016.  
   
74 
     
Our 2.25% senior notes due January 2021 (January 2021 Notes) and our 3.125% senior notes due July 2025 (July 2025 Notes) are denominated in Euro. In connection with the issuance 
of the January 2021 Notes, we entered into certain cross-currency swap agreements that have the economic effect of converting our fixed rate, Euro denominated debt, including annual 
interest payments and the payment of principal at maturity, to a fixed rate, U.S. Dollar denominated debt of $1.6 billion with a fixed annual interest rate of 3.53%. Principal and interest 
payments for the January 2021 Notes presented in the contractual obligations table above were calculated based on the terms of the aforementioned cross-currency swap agreements. 
Principal and interest payments for the July 2025 Notes presented in the contractual obligations table above were estimated using foreign currency exchange rates as of May 31, 2015. 
  Primarily represents leases of facilities and includes future minimum rent payments for facilities that we have vacated pursuant to our restructuring and merger integration activities. We 
have approximately $61 million in facility obligations, net of estimated sublease income, for certain vacated locations in accrued restructuring on our consolidated balance sheet at 
May 31, 2015. 
  Primarily represents amounts associated with agreements that are enforceable, legally binding and specify terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum 
or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the payment. We utilize several external manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for our hardware products and to 
perform final assembly and testing of finished hardware products. We also obtain individual hardware components for our products from a variety of individual suppliers based on 
projected demand information. Such purchase commitments are based on our forecasted component and manufacturing requirements and typically provide for fulfillment within agreed 
upon lead-times and/or commercially standard lead-times for the particular part or product and have been included in the amount presented in the above contractual obligations table. 
Routine arrangements for other materials and goods that are not related to our external manufacturers and certain other suppliers and that are entered into in the ordinary course of 
business are not included in the amounts presented above as they are generally entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms and are difficult to quantify in a 
meaningful way. 
(2) 
(3) 

Table of Contents  
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly information for our last eight fiscal quarters. We believe that all necessary 
adjustments, which consisted only of normal recurring adjustments, have been included in the amounts stated below to present fairly the results 
of such periods when read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. 
The sum of the quarterly financial information may vary from the annual data due to rounding.  
   
   
Stock Options and Restricted Stock-Based Awards  
Our stock-based compensation program is a key component of the compensation package we provide to attract and retain certain of our talented 
employees and align their interests with the interests of existing stockholders.  
We recognize that stock options and restricted stock-based awards dilute existing stockholders and have sought to control the number of stock 
options and restricted stock-based awards granted while providing competitive compensation packages. Consistent with these dual goals, our 
cumulative potential dilution since June 1, 2012 has been a weighted average annualized rate of 1.9% per year. The potential dilution percentage 
is calculated as the average annualized new stock options or restricted stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of stock options and 
restricted stock-based awards forfeited by employees leaving the company, divided by the weighted average outstanding shares during the 
calculation period. This maximum potential dilution will only result if all stock options are exercised and restricted stock-based awards vest. Of 
the outstanding stock options at May 31, 2015, which generally have a 10-year exercise period, less than 1.0% have exercise prices higher than 
the market price of our common stock on such date. In recent years, our stock repurchase program has more than offset the dilutive effect of our 
stock-based compensation program; however, we may reduce the level of our stock repurchases in the future as we may use our available cash 
for acquisitions, to pay dividends, to repay or repurchase indebtedness or for other purposes. At May 31, 2015, the maximum potential dilution 
from all outstanding and unexercised stock options and restricted stock-based awards, regardless of when granted and regardless of whether 
vested or unvested and including stock options where the strike price is higher than the market price as of such date, was 10.2%.  
   
75 
 
  
Fiscal 2015 Quarter Ended (Unaudited) 
 
(in millions, except per share amounts) 
  
August 31    
November 30    
February 28    
May 31 
 
Revenues 
  
$ 8,596    
$ 
9,598    
$ 
9,327     
$  10,706   
Gross profit 
  
$ 6,878    
$ 
7,657    
$ 
7,394     
$
8,611   
Operating income 
  
$ 2,963    
$ 
3,542    
$ 
3,383     
$
3,982   
Net income 
  
$ 2,184    
$ 
2,502    
$ 
2,495     
$
2,758   
Earnings per share—basic 
  
$ 0.49    
$ 
0.57    
$ 
0.57     
$
0.63   
Earnings per share—diluted 
  
$ 0.48    
$ 
0.56    
$ 
0.56     
$
0.62   
 
  
Fiscal 2014 Quarter Ended (Unaudited) 
 
(in millions, except per share amounts) 
  
August 31    
November 30    
February 28    
May 31 
 
Revenues 
  
$ 8,372    
$ 
9,275    
$ 
9,307     
$  11,320   
Gross profit 
  
$ 6,607    
$ 
7,420    
$ 
7,490     
$
9,340   
Operating income 
  
$ 2,873    
$ 
3,410    
$ 
3,567     
$
4,909   
Net income 
  
$ 2,191    
$ 
2,553    
$ 
2,565     
$
3,646   
Earnings per share—basic 
  
$ 0.48    
$ 
0.56    
$ 
0.57     
$
0.81   
Earnings per share—diluted 
  
$ 0.47    
$ 
0.56    
$ 
0.56     
$
0.80   

Table of Contents  
The Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors reviews and approves the organization-wide stock-based award grants to selected 
employees, all stock-based award grants to executive officers and any individual grant of stock-based awards in excess of 100,000 stock option 
equivalent shares. A separate Plan Committee, which is an executive officer committee, approves individual stock-based award grants of up to 
100,000 stock option equivalent shares to non-executive officers and employees. Stock option and restricted stock-based award activity from 
June 1, 2012 through May 31, 2015 is summarized as follows (shares in millions):  
   
Our Compensation Committee approves the annual organization-wide stock-based award grants to certain employees. These annual stock-based 
award grants are generally made during the ten business day period following the second trading day after the announcement of our fiscal fourth 
quarter earnings report.  
Recent Accounting Pronouncements  
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial 
statements, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
Item 7A.    Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk  
Cash, Cash Equivalents, Marketable Securities and Interest Income Risk  
Our bank deposits and time deposits are generally held with large, diverse financial institutions worldwide with high investment grade credit 
ratings or financial institutions that meet investment grade ratings criteria, which we believe mitigates credit risk and certain other risks. In 
addition, as of May 31, 2015, substantially all of our marketable securities are high quality with approximately 28% having maturity dates within 
one year and 72% having maturity dates within one to six years (see a description of our marketable securities held in Note 3 and Note 4 of 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” above). We hold a 
mix of both fixed and floating rate debt securities. Our floating rate debt securities serve to lower the overall risk to our investments portfolio 
associated with the risk of rising interest rates. The fair values of our fixed rate debt securities are impacted by interest rate movements and if 
interest rates increased by 50 basis points as of May 31, 2015, we estimate the change would decrease the fair  
   
76 
Stock options and restricted stock-based awards outstanding at May 31, 2012 
  
 
425   
Stock options and restricted stock-based awards granted 
  
 
312   
Stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed 
  
 
20   
Stock options exercised and restricted stock-based awards vested 
  
 (250)  
Forfeitures, cancellations and other, net 
  
 
(66 )  
   
   
   
  
Stock options and restricted stock-based awards outstanding at May 31, 2015 
  
 
441   
   
   
   
  
Weighted average annualized stock options and restricted stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of forfeitures and 
cancellations 
  
 
89   
Weighted average annualized stock repurchases 
  
 (274)  
Shares outstanding at May 31, 2015 
  
 4,343   
Basic weighted average shares outstanding from June 1, 2012 through May 31, 2015 
  
 4,567   
Stock options and restricted stock-based awards outstanding as a percent of shares outstanding at May 31, 2015 
  
 10.2%   
In the money stock options and total restricted stock-based awards outstanding (based on the closing price of our common stock on 
the last trading day of our fiscal period presented) as a percent of shares outstanding at May 31, 2015 
  
 10.1%   
Weighted average annualized stock options and restricted stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of forfeitures and 
cancellations and before stock repurchases, as a percent of weighted average shares outstanding from June 1, 2012 through 
May 31, 2015 
  
 1.9%   
Weighted average annualized stock options and restricted stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of forfeitures and 
cancellations and after stock repurchases, as a percent of weighted average shares outstanding from June 1, 2012 through May 31, 
2015 
  
 -4.0%   

Table of Contents  
values of our marketable securities holdings by $191 million. Substantially all of our marketable securities are designated as available-for-sale. 
We generally do not use our investments for trading purposes.  
Changes in the overall level of interest rates affect the interest income that is generated from our cash, cash equivalents and marketable 
securities. For fiscal 2015, total interest income was $349 million with our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities investments yielding 
an average 0.79% on a worldwide basis. The table below presents the approximate fair values of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable 
securities and the related weighted average interest rates for our investment portfolio at May 31, 2015 and 2014.  
   
Interest Expense Risk  
Interest Expense Risk — Fixed to Variable Interest Rate Swap Agreements  
Our total borrowings were $42.0 billion as of May 31, 2015, consisting of $39.7 billion of fixed rate borrowings and $2.3 billion of floating rate 
borrowings (Floating Rate Notes). During fiscal 2015, we issued $20.0 billion of senior notes comprised of $1.75 billion of floating rate notes 
and $18.25 billion of fixed rate notes as described in the “Recent Financing Activities” section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of 
Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Item 7) in this Annual Report.  
In July 2014, we entered into certain interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations 
associated with our $2.0 billion of 2.25% senior notes due October 2019 (2019 Notes) and our $1.5 billion of 2.80% senior notes due July 2021 
(2021 Notes) so that the interest payable on the 2019 Notes and the 2021 Notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR. In July 2013, we 
entered into certain interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with our 
$1.5 billion of 2.375% senior notes due January 2019 (January 2019 Notes) so that the interest payable on the January 2019 Notes effectively 
became variable based on LIBOR. The critical terms of the interest rate swap agreements match the critical terms of the 2019 Notes, 2021 Notes 
and the January 2019 Notes that the interest rate swap agreements pertain to, including the notional amounts and maturity dates. We do not use 
these interest rate swap arrangements or our fixed rate borrowings for trading purposes. We are accounting for these interest rate swap 
agreements as fair value hedges pursuant to ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging . The total fair value gain of these fixed to variable interest rate 
swap agreements as of May 31, 2015 was $74 million. If LIBOR-based interest rates increased by 100 basis points as of May 31, 2015, the 
change would decrease the fair values of the fixed to variable swap agreements by $221 million. Additional details regarding our senior notes 
and related interest rate swap agreements are included in Notes 8 and 11 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in 
this Annual Report.  
By issuing the Floating Rate Notes and entering into the aforementioned interest rate swap arrangements, we have assumed risks associated with 
variable interest rates based upon LIBOR. As of May 31, 2015, the weighted average interest rate associated with our Floating Rate Notes and 
January 2019 Notes, 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes, after considering the effects of the aforementioned interest rate swap arrangements, was 
0.79%. Changes in the overall level of interest rates affect the interest expense that we recognize in our statements of operations. An interest rate 
risk sensitivity analysis is used to measure interest rate risk by computing estimated changes in cash flows as a result of assumed changes in 
market interest rates. As of May 31, 2015, if LIBOR-based interest rates increased by 100 basis points, the change would increase our interest 
expense annually by approximately $73 million as it relates to our fixed to variable interest rate swap agreements and floating rate borrowings.  
   
77 
 
  
May 31, 
 
 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
Fair Value    
Weighted 
 
Average 
Interest 
Rate 
   
Fair Value    
Weighted
 
Average 
Interest 
Rate 
 
Cash and cash equivalents 
  
$    21,716     
 0.36%     
$    17,769     
 0.37%   
Marketable securities 
  
 
32,652     
 1.07%     
 
21,050     
 1.14%   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
   
Total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities 
  
$ 54,368     
 0.79%     
$
38,819     
 0.79%   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
   

Table of Contents  
In July 2014, our 3.75% senior notes due July 2014 for $1.5 billion matured and were repaid, and we settled the fixed to variable interest rate 
swap agreements associated with such fixed rate senior notes.  
Currency Risk  
Foreign Currency Transaction and Translation Risks — Foreign Currency Borrowings and Related Hedges  
In July 2013, we issued €1.25 billion of 2.25% notes due January 2021 (January 2021 Notes) and we entered into certain cross-currency swap 
agreements to manage the related foreign exchange risk by effectively converting the fixed-rate Euro denominated debt, including the annual 
interest payments and the payment of principal at maturity, to a fixed-rate, U.S. Dollar denominated debt. The economic effect of the swap 
agreements was to eliminate the uncertainty of the cash flows in U.S. Dollars associated with the January 2021 Notes by fixing the principal 
amount of the January 2021 Notes at $1.6 billion with an annual interest rate of 3.53%. The critical terms of the cross-currency swap agreements 
match the critical terms of January 2021 Notes, including the notional amounts and maturity dates. We do not use these cross-currency swap 
arrangements for trading purposes. We are accounting for these interest rate swap agreements as cash flow hedges pursuant to ASC 815. The fair 
values of these cross-currency swap agreements as of May 31, 2015 and 2014 were a $(244) million loss and a $74 million gain, respectively. 
The changes in the fair values of the cross-currency swap agreements during fiscal 2015 were primarily attributable to the decline in the value of 
the Euro relative to the U.S. Dollar. If the Euro weakened by 10% as of May 31, 2015, we estimate the change would decrease the fair values of 
the cross-currency swap agreements by $174 million. If interest rates that correspond to the remaining term of the January 2021 Notes decreased 
by 100 basis points as of May 31, 2015, we estimate the change would decrease the fair values of the cross-currency swap agreements by $91 
million. Additional details regarding our senior notes and related cross-currency swap agreements are included in Notes 8 and 11 of Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.  
In July 2013, we also issued €750 million of 3.125% notes due July 2025 (2025 Notes). We designated the 2025 Notes as a net investment hedge 
of our investments in certain of our international subsidiaries that use the Euro as their functional currency in order to reduce the volatility in 
stockholders’ equity caused by the changes in foreign currency exchange rates of the Euro with respect to the U.S. Dollar. As a result, the change 
in the carrying value of the Euro denominated 2025 Notes due to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates on the effective portion is 
recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss on our consolidated balance sheet and is also presented as a line item in our consolidated 
statements of comprehensive income included elsewhere in this Annual Report and totaled $208 million of net other comprehensive gains for 
fiscal 2015. Any remaining change in the carrying value of the 2025 Notes representing the ineffective portion of the net investment hedge is 
recognized in non-operating income (expense), net. We did not record any ineffectiveness during fiscal 2015.  
Fluctuations in the exchange rates between the Euro and the U.S. Dollar will impact the amount of U.S. Dollars that we will require to settle the 
2025 Notes at maturity. If the U.S. Dollar weakened by 10% in comparison to the Euro as of May 31, 2015, we estimate our obligation to cash 
settle the principal portion of the 2025 Notes in U.S. Dollars would increase by approximately $81 million.  
Foreign Currency Transaction Risk — Foreign Currency Forward Contracts  
We transact business in various foreign currencies and have established a program that primarily utilizes foreign currency forward contracts to 
offset the risks associated with the effects of certain foreign currency exposures. Under this program, our strategy is to enter into foreign 
currency forward contracts so that increases or decreases in our foreign currency exposures are offset by gains or losses on the foreign currency 
forward contracts in order to mitigate the risks and volatility associated with our foreign currency transactions. We may suspend this program 
from time to time. Our foreign currency exposures typically arise from intercompany sublicense fees, intercompany loans and other 
intercompany transactions. Our foreign currency forward contracts are generally short-term in duration.  
We neither use these foreign currency forward contracts for trading purposes nor do we designate these forward contracts as hedging instruments 
pursuant to ASC 815. Accordingly, we record the fair values of these contracts as of the end of our reporting period to our consolidated balance 
sheet with changes in fair values recorded to our consolidated statement of operations. Given the short duration of the forward contracts, the 
amount recorded is  
   
78 

Table of Contents  
not significant. The balance sheet classification for the fair values of these forward contracts is prepaid expenses and other current assets for a 
net unrealized gain position and other current liabilities for a net unrealized loss position. The statement of operations classification for changes 
in fair values of these forward contracts is non-operating income (expense), net for both realized and unrealized gains and losses.  
We expect that we will continue to realize gains or losses with respect to our foreign currency exposures, net of gains or losses from our foreign 
currency forward contracts. Our ultimate realized gain or loss with respect to foreign currency exposures will generally depend on the size and 
type of cross-currency transactions that we enter into, the currency exchange rates associated with these exposures and changes in those rates, the
net realized gain or loss on our foreign currency forward contracts and other factors. As of May 31, 2015 and 2014, the notional amounts of the 
forward contracts we held to purchase U.S. Dollars in exchange for other major international currencies were $2.2 billion and $3.6 billion, 
respectively. As of May 31, 2015 and 2014, the notional amounts of forward contracts we held to sell U.S. Dollars in exchange for other major 
international currencies were $1.2 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. The fair values of our outstanding foreign currency forward contracts 
were nominal at May 31, 2015 and 2014. Net foreign exchange transaction losses included in non-operating income (expense), net in the 
accompanying consolidated statements of operations were $157 million, $375 million and $162 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively. Included in the net foreign exchange transaction losses for fiscal 2015, fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2013 were foreign currency 
remeasurement losses relating to our Venezuelan subsidiary’s operations of $23 million, $213 million and $64 million, respectively (see Note 1 
of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information). As a large portion of our 
consolidated operations are international, we could experience additional foreign currency volatility in the future, the amounts and timing of 
which are unknown.  
Foreign Currency Translation Risk—Impact on Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities  
Fluctuations in foreign currencies impact the amount of total assets and liabilities that we report for our foreign subsidiaries upon the translation 
of these amounts into U.S. Dollars. In particular, the amount of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities that we report in U.S. Dollars 
for a significant portion of the cash held by these subsidiaries is subject to translation variance caused by changes in foreign currency exchange 
rates as of the end of each respective reporting period (the offset to which is substantially recorded to accumulated other comprehensive loss on 
our consolidated balance sheet and is also presented as a line item in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income included elsewhere 
in this Annual Report).  
As the U.S. Dollar fluctuated against certain international currencies as of the end of fiscal 2015, the amount of cash, cash equivalents and 
marketable securities that we reported in U.S. Dollars for foreign subsidiaries that hold international currencies as of May 31, 2015 decreased 
relative to what we would have reported using a constant currency rate as of May 31, 2014. As reported in our consolidated statements of cash 
flows, the estimated effects of exchange rate changes on our reported cash and cash equivalents balances in U.S. Dollars for fiscal 2015, 2014 
and 2013 were decreases of $1.2 billion, $158 million and $110 million, respectively. The following table includes estimates of the U.S. Dollar 
equivalent of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities denominated in certain major foreign currencies that we held as of May 31, 2015:  
   
   
79 
(in millions) 
  
U.S. Dollar 
Equivalent at
 
May 31, 2015  
Euro 
  
$ 
2,190   
Japanese Yen 
  
 
1,143   
Indian Rupee 
  
 
674   
Saudi Arabian Riyal 
  
 
445   
Chinese Renminbi 
  
 
427   
Australian Dollar 
  
 
397   
South African Rand 
  
 
344   
Canadian Dollar 
  
 
231   
Other foreign currencies 
  
 
1,802   
   
   
   
  
Total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities denominated in foreign currencies 
  
$ 
7,653   
   
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
If overall foreign currency exchange rates in comparison to the U.S. Dollar uniformly weakened by 10%, the amount of cash, cash equivalents 
and marketable securities we would report in U.S. Dollars would decrease by approximately $765 million, assuming constant foreign currency 
cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances.  
Item 8.    Financial Statements and Supplementary Data  
The response to this item is submitted as a separate section of this Annual Report. See Part IV, Item 15.  
Item 9.     Changes In and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure  
None.  
Item 9A.    Controls and Procedures  
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures  
As of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we carried out an evaluation under the supervision and with the 
participation of our Disclosure Committee and our management, including our Principal Executive Officers and our Principal Financial Officer, 
of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15
(e). Disclosure controls are procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our reports filed under the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or the Exchange Act, such as this Annual Report on Form 10-K, is recorded, processed, summarized and 
reported within the time periods specified by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Disclosure controls are also designed to ensure that 
such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Principal Executive Officers and our Principal Financial 
Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. Our quarterly evaluation of disclosure controls includes an 
evaluation of some components of our internal control over financial reporting. We also perform a separate annual evaluation of internal control 
over financial reporting for the purpose of providing the management report below.  
The evaluation of our disclosure controls included a review of their objectives and design, our implementation of the controls and the effect of 
the controls on the information generated for use in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the course of the controls evaluation, we reviewed data 
errors or control problems identified and sought to confirm that appropriate corrective actions, including process improvements, were being 
undertaken. This type of evaluation is performed on a quarterly basis so that the conclusions of management, including our Principal Executive 
Officers and our Principal Financial Officer, concerning the effectiveness of the disclosure controls can be reported in our periodic reports on 
Form 10-Q and Form 10-K. Many of the components of our disclosure controls are also evaluated on an ongoing basis by both our internal audit 
and finance organizations. The overall goals of these various evaluation activities are to monitor our disclosure controls and to modify them as 
necessary. We intend to maintain our disclosure controls as dynamic processes and procedures that we adjust as circumstances merit.  
Based on our management’s evaluation (with the participation of our Principal Executive Officers and our Principal Financial Officer), as of the 
end of the period covered by this report, our Principal Executive Officers and our Principal Financial Officer have concluded that our disclosure 
controls and procedures were effective.  
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting  
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in 
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f). Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Principal 
Executive Officers and our Principal Financial Officer, we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial 
reporting as of May 31, 2015 based on the guidelines established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission’s 2013 framework. Our internal control over financial reporting includes policies and 
procedures that provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for 
external reporting purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.  
   
80 

Table of Contents  
Based on the results of our evaluation, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of May 31, 
2015. We reviewed the results of management’s assessment with our Finance and Audit Committee.  
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an independent 
registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report.  
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting  
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required by paragraph (d) of 
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 or 15d-15 that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to 
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.  
Inherent Limitations on Effectiveness of Controls  
Our management, including our Principal Executive Officers and our Principal Financial Officer, believes that our disclosure controls and 
procedures and internal control over financial reporting are designed to provide reasonable assurance of achieving their objectives and are 
effective at the reasonable assurance level. However, our management does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal 
control over financial reporting will prevent all errors and all fraud. A control system, no matter how well conceived and operated, can provide 
only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the 
fact that there are resource constraints and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations 
in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been 
detected. These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in decision making can be faulty and that breakdowns can occur because 
of a simple error or mistake. Additionally, controls can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by collusion of two or more 
people or by management override of the controls. The design of any system of controls also is based in part upon certain assumptions about the 
likelihood of future events and there can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals under all potential future 
conditions; over time, controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or the degree of compliance with policies or 
procedures may deteriorate. Because of the inherent limitations in a cost effective control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur 
and not be detected.  
Item 9B.    Other Information  
None.  
   
81 

Table of Contents  
PART III  
Item 10.     Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance  
Pursuant to General Instruction G(3) of Form 10-K, the information required by this item relating to our executive officers is included under the 
caption “Executive Officers of the Registrant” in Part I of this Annual Report.  
The other information required by this Item 10 is incorporated by reference from the information contained in our Proxy Statement to be filed 
with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with the solicitation of proxies for our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders 
(the “2015 Proxy Statement”) under the sections entitled “Board of Directors—Nominees for Directors,” “Board of Directors—Committees, 
Membership and Meetings—Committee Memberships,” “Board of Directors—Committees, Membership and Meetings—The Finance and Audit 
Committee,” “Corporate Governance—Employee Matters—Code of Conduct,” and “Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting 
Compliance”.  
Item 11.     Executive Compensation  
The information required by this Item 11 is incorporated by reference from the information to be contained in our 2015 Proxy Statement under 
the sections entitled “Board of Directors—Committees, Membership and Meetings—The Compensation Committee—Compensation Committee 
Interlocks and Insider Participation,” “Board of Directors—Director Compensation,” and “Executive Compensation”.  
Item 12.     Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder  
                   Matters  
The information required by this Item 12 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2015 Proxy Statement 
under the sections entitled “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management” and “Executive Compensation—Equity 
Compensation Plan Information”.  
Item 13.     Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence  
The information required by this Item 13 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2015 Proxy Statement 
under the sections entitled “Corporate Governance—Board of Directors and Director Independence” and “Transactions with Related Persons”.  
Item 14.     Principal Accountant Fees and Services  
The information required by this Item 14 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2015 Proxy Statement 
under the section entitled “Ratification of Selection of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm”.  
   
82 

Table of Contents  
PART IV  
Item 15.     Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules  
(a) 1. Financial Statements  
The following financial statements are filed as a part of this report:  
   
All other schedules are omitted because they are not required or the required information is shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.  
(b) Exhibits  
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index of Exhibits that follows the signature page of this Annual Report.  
   
83 
 
 Page  
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
  84   
Consolidated Financial Statements: 
 
Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2015 and 2014 
  86   
Statements of Operations for the years ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 
  87   
Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 
  88   
Statements of Equity for the years ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 
  89   
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 
  90   
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
  91   
     2. Financial Statement Schedules 
 
The following financial statement schedule is filed as a part of this report: 
 
 
 Page  
Schedule II. Valuation and Qualifying Accounts 
  136   

Table of Contents  
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  
The Board of Directors and Stockholders of Oracle Corporation  
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Oracle Corporation as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, and the related 
consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended May 31, 
2015. Our audits also included the financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item 15(a) 2. These financial statements and schedule are 
the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements and schedule based on 
our audits.  
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material 
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit 
also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial 
statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.  
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of Oracle 
Corporation at May 31, 2015 and 2014, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period 
ended May 31, 2015, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also, in our opinion, the related financial statement 
schedule, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken as a whole, presents fairly in all material respects the information 
set forth therein.  
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), Oracle 
Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated 
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated June 25, 
2015 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.  
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
San Jose, California  
June 25, 2015  
   
84 

Table of Contents  
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  
The Board of Directors and Stockholders of Oracle Corporation  
We have audited Oracle Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the 
COSO criteria). Oracle Corporation’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its 
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal 
Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the company’s internal control over financial reporting based 
on our audit.  
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was 
maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk 
that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and 
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our 
opinion.  
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A 
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in 
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance 
that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and 
directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or 
disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any 
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that 
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  
In our opinion, Oracle Corporation maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2015, 
based on the COSO criteria.  
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated 
balance sheets of Oracle Corporation as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive 
income, equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended May 31, 2015 of Oracle Corporation and our report dated June 25, 
2015 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.  
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
San Jose, California  
June 25, 2015  
   
85 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS  
As of May 31, 2015 and 2014  
   
See notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
86 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(in millions, except per share data) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
 
ASSETS 
  
 
Current assets: 
  
 
Cash and cash equivalents 
  
$ 
21,716    
$    17,769   
Marketable securities 
  
 
32,652    
 
21,050   
Trade receivables, net of allowances for doubtful accounts of $285 and $306 as of May 31, 2015 and 
2014, respectively 
  
 
5,618    
 
6,087   
Inventories 
  
 
314    
 
189   
Deferred tax assets 
  
 
663    
 
914   
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
  
 
2,220    
 
2,119   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total current assets 
  
 
63,183    
 
48,128   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Non-current assets: 
  
 
Property, plant and equipment, net 
  
 
3,686    
 
3,061   
Intangible assets, net 
  
 
6,406    
 
6,137   
Goodwill, net 
  
 
34,087    
 
29,652   
Deferred tax assets 
  
 
795    
 
837   
Other assets 
  
 
2,746    
 
2,451   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total non-current assets 
  
 
47,720    
 
42,138   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total assets 
  
$ 110,903    
$ 90,266   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 
  
 
Current liabilities: 
  
 
Notes payable, current 
  
$ 
1,999    
$ 
1,508   
Accounts payable 
  
 
806    
 
471   
Accrued compensation and related benefits 
  
 
1,839    
 
1,940   
Income taxes payable 
  
 
532    
 
416   
Deferred revenues 
  
 
7,245    
 
7,269   
Other current liabilities 
  
 
2,870    
 
2,785   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total current liabilities 
  
 
15,291    
 
14,389   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Non-current liabilities: 
  
 
Notes payable, non-current 
  
 
39,959    
 
22,589   
Income taxes payable 
  
 
4,386    
 
4,184   
Other non-current liabilities 
  
 
2,169    
 
1,657   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total non-current liabilities 
  
 
46,514    
 
28,430   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Commitments and contingencies 
  
 
Oracle Corporation stockholders’ equity: 
  
 
Preferred stock, $0.01 par value—authorized: 1.0 shares; outstanding: none 
  
 
—    
 
—   
Common stock, $0.01 par value and additional paid in capital—authorized: 11,000 shares; outstanding: 
4,343 shares and 4,464 shares as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
23,156    
 
21,077   
Retained earnings 
  
 
26,503    
 
25,965   
Accumulated other comprehensive loss 
  
 
(996 )  
 
(164)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total Oracle Corporation stockholders’ equity 
  
 
48,663    
 
46,878   
Noncontrolling interests 
  
 
435    
 
569   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total equity 
  
 
49,098    
 
47,447   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total liabilities and equity 
  
$    110,903    
$ 90,266   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS  
For the Years Ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013  
   
See notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
87 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions, except per share data) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Revenues: 
  
 
 
New software licenses 
  
$ 
8,535    
$ 
9,416    
$ 
9,411   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
  
 
1,485    
 
1,121    
 
910   
Cloud infrastructure as a service 
  
 
608    
 
456    
 
457   
Software license updates and product support 
  
 
18,847    
 
18,206    
 
17,142   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Software and cloud revenues 
  
 
29,475    
 
29,199    
 
27,920   
Hardware systems products 
  
 
2,825    
 
2,976    
 
3,033   
Hardware systems support 
  
 
2,380    
 
2,396    
 
2,313   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Hardware systems revenues 
  
 
5,205    
 
5,372    
 
5,346   
Services revenues 
  
 
3,546    
 
3,704    
 
3,914   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total revenues 
  
 
38,226    
 
38,275    
 
37,180   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Operating expenses: 
  
 
 
Sales and marketing 
  
 
7,655    
 
7,567    
 
7,062   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
  
 
773    
 
455    
 
327   
Cloud infrastructure as a service 
  
 
344    
 
308    
 
304   
Software license updates and product support 
  
 
1,199    
 
1,162    
 
1,175   
Hardware systems products 
  
 
1,471    
 
1,521    
 
1,501   
Hardware systems support 
  
 
816    
 
836    
 
890   
Services 
  
 
2,929    
 
2,954    
 
3,182   
Research and development 
  
 
5,524    
 
5,151    
 
4,850   
General and administrative 
  
 
1,077    
 
1,038    
 
1,072   
Amortization of intangible assets 
  
 
2,149    
 
2,300    
 
2,385   
Acquisition related and other 
  
 
211    
 
41    
 
(604)  
Restructuring 
  
 
207    
 
183    
 
352   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total operating expenses 
  
    24,355    
    23,516    
    22,496   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Operating income 
  
 
13,871    
 
14,759    
 
14,684   
Interest expense 
  
 
(1,143)   
 
(914)   
 
(797)  
Non-operating income (expense), net 
  
 
106    
 
(141)   
 
11   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Income before provision for income taxes 
  
 
12,834    
 
13,704    
 
13,898   
Provision for income taxes 
  
 
2,896    
 
2,749    
 
2,973   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net income 
  
$ 
9,938    
$ 10,955    
$ 10,925   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Earnings per share: 
  
 
 
Basic 
  
$ 
2.26    
$ 
2.42    
$ 
2.29   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Diluted 
  
$ 
2.21    
$ 
2.38    
$ 
2.26   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Weighted average common shares outstanding: 
  
 
 
Basic 
  
 
4,404    
 
4,528    
 
4,769   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Diluted 
  
 
4,503    
 
4,604    
 
4,844   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Dividends declared per common share 
  
$ 
0.51    
$ 
0.48    
$ 
0.30   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Exclusive of amortization of intangible assets, which is shown separately. 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME  
For the Years Ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013  
   
See notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
88 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Net income 
  $ 9,938    $ 10,955    $ 10,925   
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax: 
  
 
 
Net foreign currency translation losses 
  
 
(770)   
 
(78)   
 
(123)  
Net unrealized (losses) gains on defined benefit plans 
  
 
(151)   
 
23    
 
(68)  
Net unrealized gains (losses) on marketable securities 
  
 
59    
 
(15)   
 
(20)  
Net unrealized gains on cash flow hedges 
  
 
30    
 
5    
 
—   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total other comprehensive loss, net 
  
 
(832)   
 
(65)   
 
(211)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Comprehensive income 
  $    9,106    $    10,890    $    10,714   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY  
For the Years Ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013  
   
See notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
89 
 
 
Common Stock and 
Additional Paid in 
Capital 
  
Retained 
 
Earnings  
 
Accumulated 
Other  
Comprehensive 
 
(Loss) Income  
 
Total 
Oracle  
Corporation 
Stockholders’
 
Equity 
 
 
Noncontrolling 
 
Interests 
 
 
Total 
Equity  
(in millions) 
 
Number of
 
Shares 
  Amount   
 
 
 
 
Balances as of May 31, 2012 
 
 
4,905    $ 17,489    $ 26,087    $ 
112    $ 
43,688    $ 
399    $ 44,087   
Common stock issued under stock-based compensation plans 
 
 
84    
 1,417    
 
—    
 
—    
 
1,417    
 
—    
 
1,417   
Common stock issued under stock purchase plans 
 
 
3    
 
110    
 
—    
 
—    
 
110    
 
—    
 
110   
Assumption of stock-based compensation plan awards in connection with 
acquisitions 
 
 
—    
 
15    
 
—    
 
—    
 
15    
 
—    
 
15   
Stock-based compensation 
 
 
—    
 
755    
 
—    
 
—    
 
755    
 
—    
 
755   
Repurchase of common stock 
 
 
(346)   
 (1,269 )   
 (9,725 )  
 
—    
 
(10,994 )   
 
—    
 (10,994 )  
Cash dividends declared ($0.30 per share) 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 (1,433 )  
 
—    
 
(1,433 )   
 
—    
 (1,433)  
Tax benefit from stock plans 
 
 
—    
 
257    
 
—    
 
—    
 
257    
 
—    
 
257   
Other, net 
 
 
—    
 
119    
 
—    
 
—    
 
119    
 
66    
 
185   
Distributions to noncontrolling interests 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(31 )  
 
(31 )  
Other comprehensive loss, net 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(211)   
 
(211)   
 
(49 )  
 
(260 )  
Net income 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 10,925    
 
—    
 
10,925    
 
112    
 11,037   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Balances as of May 31, 2013 
 
 
4,646    
 18,893    
 25,854    
 
(99 )   
 
44,648    
 
497    
 45,145   
Common stock issued under stock-based compensation plans 
 
 
95    
 2,026    
 
—    
 
—    
 
2,026    
 
—    
 
2,026   
Common stock issued under stock purchase plans 
 
 
3    
 
109    
 
—    
 
—    
 
109    
 
—    
 
109   
Assumption of stock-based compensation plan awards in connection with 
acquisitions 
 
 
—    
 
148    
 
—    
 
—    
 
148    
 
—    
 
148   
Stock-based compensation 
 
 
—    
 
805    
 
—    
 
—    
 
805    
 
—    
 
805   
Repurchase of common stock 
 
 
(280)   
 (1,160 )   
 (8,638 )  
 
—    
 
(9,798 )   
 
—    
 (9,798)  
Cash dividends declared ($0.48 per share) 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 (2,178 )  
 
—    
 
(2,178 )   
 
—    
 (2,178)  
Tax benefit from stock plans 
 
 
—    
 
254    
 
—    
 
—    
 
254    
 
—    
 
254   
Other, net 
 
 
—    
 
2    
 
(28 )  
 
—    
 
(26 )   
 
12    
 
(14 )  
Distributions to noncontrolling interests 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(28 )  
 
(28 )  
Other comprehensive loss, net 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(65 )   
 
(65 )   
 
(10 )  
 
(75 )  
Net income 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 10,955    
 
—    
 
10,955    
 
98    
 11,053   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Balances as of May 31, 2014 
 
 
4,464    
 21,077    
 25,965    
 
(164)   
 
46,878    
 
569    
 47,447   
Common stock issued under stock-based compensation plans 
 
 
70    
 1,688    
 
—    
 
—    
 
1,688    
 
—    
 
1,688   
Common stock issued under stock purchase plans 
 
 
3    
 
114    
 
—    
 
—    
 
114    
 
—    
 
114   
Assumption of stock-based compensation plan awards in connection with 
acquisitions 
 
 
—    
 
12    
 
—    
 
—    
 
12    
 
—    
 
12   
Stock-based compensation 
 
 
—    
 
933    
 
—    
 
—    
 
933    
 
—    
 
933   
Repurchase of common stock 
 
 
(194)   
 
(943 )   
 (7,145 )  
 
—    
 
(8,088 )   
 
—    
 (8,088)  
Cash dividends declared ($0.51 per share) 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 (2,255 )  
 
—    
 
(2,255 )   
 
—    
 (2,255)  
Tax benefit from stock plans 
 
 
—    
 
267    
 
—    
 
—    
 
267    
 
—    
 
267   
Other, net 
 
 
—    
 
8    
 
—    
 
—    
 
8    
 
15    
 
23   
Distributions to noncontrolling interests 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(196 )  
 
(196 )  
Other comprehensive loss, net 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(832)   
 
(832)   
 
(66 )  
 
(898 )  
Net income 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
9,938    
 
—    
 
9,938    
 
113    
 10,051   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Balances as of May 31, 2015 
 
 
4,343    $ 23,156    $ 26,503    $ 
(996)   $ 
48,663    $ 
435    $ 49,098   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS  
For the Years Ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013  
   
See notes to consolidated financial statements.  
   
90 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
 
2015   
2014   
2013  
Cash flows from operating activities: 
 
 
 
Net income 
 $ 9,938    $ 10,955    $ 10,925   
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities: 
 
 
 
Depreciation 
  
712     
608     
546   
Amortization of intangible assets 
  
2,149     
2,300     
2,385   
Allowances for doubtful accounts receivable 
  
56     
122     
118   
Deferred income taxes 
  
(548 )    
(248 )    
(117 )  
Stock-based compensation 
  
933     
805     
755   
Tax benefits on the exercise of stock options and vesting of restricted stock-based awards 
  
396     
480     
410   
Excess tax benefits on the exercise of stock options and vesting of restricted stock-based awards 
  
(244 )    
(250 )    
(241 )  
Other, net 
  
327     
311     
155   
Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions: 
 
 
 
Decrease in trade receivables 
  
208     
24     
267   
(Increase) decrease in inventories 
  
(96)    
57     
(66 )  
Increase in prepaid expenses and other assets 
  
(387 )    
(143 )    
(555 )  
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and other liabilities 
  
247     
48     
(541 )  
(Decrease) increase in income taxes payable 
  
(10)    
(320 )    
35   
Increase in deferred revenues 
  
655     
172     
148   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net cash provided by operating activities 
  14,336     14,921     14,224   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash flows from investing activities: 
 
 
 
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments 
  (31,421 )    (32,316 )    (32,160 )  
Proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities and other investments 
  20,004     28,845     30,159   
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired 
  (6,239)    (3,488)    (3,305)  
Capital expenditures 
  (1,391)    
(580 )    
(650 )  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net cash used for investing activities 
  (19,047 )    (7,539)    (5,956)  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash flows from financing activities: 
 
 
 
Payments for repurchases of common stock 
  (8,087)    (9,813)    (11,021 )  
Proceeds from issuances of common stock 
  
1,802     
2,135     
1,527   
Payments of dividends to stockholders 
  (2,255)    (2,178)    (1,433)  
Proceeds from borrowings, net of issuance costs 
  19,842     
5,566     
4,974   
Repayments of borrowings 
  (1,500)    
—     (2,950)  
Excess tax benefits on the exercise of stock options and vesting of restricted stock-based awards 
  
244     
250     
241   
Distributions to noncontrolling interests 
  
(196 )    
(28 )    
(31 )  
Other, net 
  
—     
—     
193   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities 
  
9,850     (4,068)    (8,500)  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 
  (1,192)    
(158 )    
(110 )  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
  
3,947     
3,156     
(342 )  
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 
  17,769     14,613     14,955   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period 
 $ 21,716    $ 17,769    $ 14,613   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Non-cash investing and financing transactions: 
 
 
 
Fair value of stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed in connection with acquisitions 
 $ 
12    $ 
148    $ 
15   
Increase (decrease) in unsettled repurchases of common stock 
 $ 
1    $ 
(15 )   $ 
(27 )  
Increase in unsettled investment purchases 
 $ 
264    $ 
78    $ 
—   
Supplemental schedule of cash flow data: 
 
 
 
Cash paid for income taxes 
 $ 3,055    $ 2,841    $ 2,644   
Cash paid for interest 
 $ 1,022    $ 
827    $ 
781   

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
May 31, 2015  
   
Oracle Corporation develops, manufactures, markets, sells, hosts and supports database and middleware software, application software, cloud 
infrastructure, hardware systems—including Oracle Engineered Systems, computer server, storage, networking and industry specific hardware 
products—and related services that are engineered to work together in cloud-based and on-premises information technology (IT) environments. 
We offer our customers the option to purchase our software and hardware systems products and related services to manage their own cloud-
based or on-premises IT environments, or to deploy our comprehensive set of cloud service offerings including Oracle Software as a Service 
(SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Customers that purchase our software products may elect to purchase 
software license updates and product support contracts, which provide our customers with rights to unspecified product upgrades and 
maintenance releases issued during the support period as well as technical support assistance. Customers that purchase our hardware products 
may elect to purchase hardware systems support contracts, which provide customers with software updates for software components that are 
essential to the functionality of our hardware products, such as Oracle Solaris and certain other software products, and can include product 
repairs, maintenance services, and technical support services. We also offer customers a broad set of services offerings including consulting 
services, advanced customer support services and education services.  
Oracle Corporation conducts business globally and was incorporated in 2005 as a Delaware corporation and is the successor to operations 
originally begun in June 1977.  
Basis of Financial Statements  
The consolidated financial statements included our accounts and the accounts of our wholly- and majority-owned subsidiaries. Noncontrolling 
interest positions of certain of our consolidated entities are reported as a separate component of consolidated equity from the equity attributable 
to Oracle’s stockholders for all periods presented. The noncontrolling interests in our net income were not significant to our consolidated results 
for the periods presented and therefore have been included as a component of non-operating income (expense), net in our consolidated 
statements of operations. Intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. Certain other prior year balances have been reclassified 
to conform to the current year presentation. Such reclassifications did not affect total revenues, operating income or net income.  
Acquisition related and other expenses as presented in our consolidated statements of operations for fiscal 2015 included $186 million related to 
a goodwill impairment loss (refer to Note 7 below for additional information) and for fiscal 2015 and 2013 included benefits of $53 million and 
$306 million, respectively, related to certain litigation (refer to Note 18 below for additional information). Further, acquisition related and other 
expenses for fiscal 2013 included a change in fair value of contingent consideration payable, which resulted in a net benefit of $387 million in 
fiscal 2013 (refer to Note 2 below for additional information).  
In fiscal 2015, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2015-03, Interest—Imputation of Interest (Subtopic 835-30): Simplifying 
the Presentation of Debt Issuance Costs (ASU 2015-03). In connection with the adoption of ASU 2015-03, we reclassified debt issuance costs 
related to our senior notes from other assets to notes payable, non-current as a deduction to the carrying amounts of our senior notes in our 
May 31, 2015 and 2014 consolidated balance sheets. The adoption of ASU 2015-03 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial 
statements.  
In fiscal 2015, we also adopted ASU 2015-02, Amendments to the Consolidation Analysis , ASU 2015-01, Simplifying Income Statement 
Presentation by Eliminating the Concept of Extraordinary Items , ASU 2014-15, Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to 
Continue as a Going Concern , ASU 2014-12, Accounting for Share-Based Payments When the Terms of an Award Provide That a Performance 
Target Could Be Achieved after the Requisite Service Period , and ASU 2014-08, Reporting Discontinued Operations and Disclosures of 
Disposals of Components of an Entity , none of which had an impact on our reported financial position or results of operations and cash flows.  
   
91 
1. 
ORGANIZATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Use of Estimates  
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as set forth in the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) and we consider the various staff accounting 
bulletins and other applicable guidance issued by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). These accounting principles require us 
to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are 
reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, 
judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the 
reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. To the extent there are differences between these estimates, judgments 
or assumptions and actual results, our consolidated financial statements will be affected. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular 
transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which 
management’s judgment in selecting among available alternatives would not produce a materially different result.  
Revenue Recognition  
Our sources of revenues include: (1) software and cloud revenues, including new software licenses revenues earned from granting licenses to use 
our software products and industry specific software; cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues generated from fees for granting customers access to a 
broad range of our software and related support offerings on a subscription basis in a secure, standards-based cloud computing environment; 
cloud IaaS revenues generated from fees for deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT infrastructure 
generally on a subscription basis; and software license updates and product support revenues (described further below); (2) hardware systems 
revenues, which include the sale of hardware systems products including Oracle Engineered Systems, computer servers, storage products, 
networking and data center fabric products, and industry specific hardware; and hardware systems support revenues; and (3) services, which 
include software and hardware related services including consulting, advanced customer support and education revenues. Revenues generally are 
recognized net of any taxes collected from customers and subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.  
Revenue Recognition for Software Products and Software Related Services (Software Elements)  
New software licenses revenues primarily represent fees earned from granting customers licenses to use our database, middleware and 
application software and exclude cloud SaaS and PaaS revenues and revenues derived from software license updates, which are included in 
software license updates and product support revenues. The basis for our new software licenses revenue recognition is substantially governed by 
the accounting guidance contained in ASC 985-605, Software-Revenue Recognition . We exercise judgment and use estimates in connection with 
the determination of the amount of software and software related services revenues to be recognized in each accounting period.  
For software license arrangements that do not require significant modification or customization of the underlying software, we recognize new 
software licenses revenues when: (1) we enter into a legally binding arrangement with a customer for the license of software; (2) we deliver the 
products; (3) the sale price is fixed or determinable and free of contingencies or significant uncertainties; and (4) collection is probable. 
Revenues that are not recognized at the time of sale because the foregoing conditions are not met, are recognized when those conditions are 
subsequently met.  
Substantially all of our software license arrangements do not include acceptance provisions. However, if acceptance provisions exist as part of 
public policy, for example, in agreements with government entities where acceptance periods are required by law, or within previously executed 
terms and conditions that are referenced in the current agreement and are short-term in nature, we generally recognize revenues upon delivery 
provided the  
   
92 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
acceptance terms are perfunctory and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. If acceptance provisions are not perfunctory (for 
example, acceptance provisions that are long-term in nature or are not included as standard terms of an arrangement), revenues are recognized 
upon the earlier of receipt of written customer acceptance or expiration of the acceptance period.  
The vast majority of our software license arrangements include software license updates and product support contracts, which are entered into at 
the customer’s option and are recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, typically one year. Software license updates provide 
customers with rights to unspecified software product upgrades, maintenance releases and patches released during the term of the support period. 
Product support includes internet access to technical content, as well as internet and telephone access to technical support personnel. Software 
license updates and product support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net new software licenses fees. Substantially all of our 
customers renew their software license updates and product support contracts annually.  
Revenue Recognition for Multiple-Element Arrangements—Software Products and Software Related Services (Software Arrangements)  
We often enter into arrangements with customers that purchase both software related products and software related services from us at the same 
time, or within close proximity of one another (referred to as software related multiple-element arrangements). Such software related multiple-
element arrangements include the sale of our software products, software license updates and product support contracts and other software 
related services whereby software license delivery is followed by the subsequent or contemporaneous delivery of the other elements. For those 
software related multiple-element arrangements, we have applied the residual method to determine the amount of new software license revenues 
to be recognized pursuant to ASC 985-605. Under the residual method, if fair value exists for undelivered elements in a multiple-element 
arrangement, such fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred with the remaining portion of the arrangement consideration generally 
recognized upon delivery of the software license. We allocate the fair value of each element of a software related multiple-element arrangement 
based upon its fair value as determined by our vendor specific objective evidence (VSOE—described further below), with any remaining amount 
allocated to the software license.  
Revenue Recognition for Cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS Offerings, Hardware Systems Products, Hardware Systems Support and Related 
Services (Nonsoftware Elements)  
Our revenue recognition policy for nonsoftware deliverables including cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS offerings, hardware systems products, support 
and related services is based upon the accounting guidance contained in ASC 605-25, Revenue Recognition , Multiple-Element Arrangements, 
and we exercise judgment and use estimates in connection with the determination of the amount of cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS revenues, 
hardware systems products revenues, support and related services revenues to be recognized in each accounting period.  
Revenues from the sales of our nonsoftware elements are recognized when: (1) persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; (2) we deliver the 
products and passage of the title to the buyer occurs; (3) the sale price is fixed or determinable; and (4) collection is reasonably assured. 
Revenues that are not recognized at the time of sale because the foregoing conditions are not met are recognized when those conditions are 
subsequently met. When applicable, we reduce revenues for estimated returns or certain other incentive programs where we have the ability to 
sufficiently estimate the effects of these items. Where an arrangement is subject to acceptance criteria and the acceptance provisions are not 
perfunctory (for example, acceptance provisions that are long-term in nature or are not included as standard terms of an arrangement), revenues 
are recognized upon the earlier of receipt of written customer acceptance or expiration of the acceptance period.  
Our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings generally provide customers access to certain of our software within a cloud-based IT environment that we 
manage, host and support and offer to customers on a subscription basis. Revenues for our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings are generally 
recognized ratably over the contract term commencing with the date the service is made available to customers and all other revenue recognition 
criteria have been satisfied.  
   
93 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Our cloud IaaS offerings provide deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT infrastructure including 
comprehensive software and hardware management and maintenance services arrangements for customer IT infrastructure for a stated term that 
is hosted at our data center facilities, select partner data centers or physically on-premises at customer facilities generally for a term-based fee; 
and virtual machine instances that are subscription-based and designed for computing and reliable and secure object storage. Revenues for these 
cloud IaaS offerings are generally recognized ratably over the contract term commencing with the date the service is made available to customers
and all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied.  
Revenues from the sale of hardware systems products represent amounts earned primarily from the sale of our Oracle Engineered Systems, 
computer servers, storage, networking and industry specific hardware.  
Our hardware systems support offerings generally provide customers with software updates for the software components that are essential to the 
functionality of our hardware products and can also include product repairs, maintenance services and technical support services. Hardware 
systems support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net hardware systems products fees. Hardware systems support contracts 
are entered into at the customer’s option and are recognized ratably over the contractual term of the arrangements, which are typically one year.  
Revenue Recognition for Multiple-Element Arrangements—Cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS Offerings, Hardware Systems Products, Hardware 
Systems Support and Related Services (Nonsoftware Arrangements)  
We enter into arrangements with customers that purchase both nonsoftware related products and services from us at the same time, or within 
close proximity of one another (referred to as nonsoftware multiple-element arrangements). Each element within a nonsoftware multiple-element 
arrangement is accounted for as a separate unit of accounting provided the following criteria are met: the delivered products or services have 
value to the customer on a standalone basis; and for an arrangement that includes a general right of return relative to the delivered products or 
services, delivery or performance of the undelivered product or service is considered probable and is substantially controlled by us. We consider 
a deliverable to have standalone value if the product or service is sold separately by us or another vendor or could be resold by the customer. 
Further, our revenue arrangements generally do not include a general right of return relative to the delivered products. Where the aforementioned 
criteria for a separate unit of accounting are not met, the deliverable is combined with the undelivered element(s) and treated as a single unit of 
accounting for the purposes of allocation of the arrangement consideration and revenue recognition. For those units of accounting that include 
more than one deliverable but are treated as a single unit of accounting, we generally recognize revenues over the contractual period of the 
arrangement or in the case of our cloud offerings, we generally recognize revenues over the contractual term of the cloud software subscription. 
For the purposes of revenue classification of the elements that are accounted for as a single unit of accounting, we allocate revenue to the 
respective revenue line items within our consolidated statements of operations based on a rational and consistent methodology utilizing our best 
estimate of relative selling prices of such elements.  
For our nonsoftware multiple-element arrangements, we allocate revenue to each element based on a selling price hierarchy at the arrangement’s 
inception. The selling price for each element is based upon the following selling price hierarchy: VSOE if available, third party evidence (TPE) 
if VSOE is not available, or estimated selling price (ESP) if neither VSOE nor TPE are available (a description as to how we determine VSOE, 
TPE and ESP is provided below). If a tangible hardware systems product includes software, we determine whether the tangible hardware 
systems product and the software work together to deliver the product’s essential functionality and, if so, the entire product is treated as a 
nonsoftware deliverable. The total arrangement consideration is allocated to each separate unit of accounting for each of the nonsoftware 
deliverables using the relative selling prices of each unit based on the aforementioned selling price hierarchy. We limit the amount of revenue 
recognized for delivered elements to an amount that is not contingent upon future delivery of additional products or services or meeting of any 
specified performance conditions.  
   
94 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
When possible, we establish VSOE of selling price for deliverables in software and nonsoftware multiple-element arrangements using the price 
charged for a deliverable when sold separately and for software license updates and product support and hardware systems support, based on the 
renewal rates offered to customers. TPE is established by evaluating similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone 
arrangements with similarly situated customers. If we are unable to determine the selling price because VSOE or TPE does not exist, we 
determine ESP for the purposes of allocating the arrangement by reviewing historical transactions, including transactions whereby the 
deliverable was sold on a standalone basis and considering several other external and internal factors including, but not limited to, pricing 
practices including discounting, margin objectives, competition, contractually stated prices, the geographies in which we offer our products and 
services, the type of customer (i.e., distributor, value added reseller, government agency and direct end user, among others) and the stage of the 
product lifecycle. The determination of ESP is made through consultation with and approval by our management, taking into consideration our 
pricing model and go-to-market strategy. As our, or our competitors’, pricing and go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing 
practices in the future, which could result in changes to our determination of VSOE, TPE and ESP. As a result, our future revenue recognition 
for multiple-element arrangements could differ materially from our results in the current period. Selling prices are analyzed on an annual basis or 
more frequently if we experience significant changes in our selling prices.  
Revenue Recognition Policies Applicable to both Software and Nonsoftware Elements  
Revenue Recognition for Multiple-Element Arrangements—Arrangements with Software and Nonsoftware Elements  
We also enter into multiple-element arrangements that may include a combination of our various software related and nonsoftware related 
products and services offerings including new software licenses, software license updates and product support, cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS 
offerings, hardware systems products, hardware systems support, consulting, advanced customer support services and education. In such 
arrangements, we first allocate the total arrangement consideration based on the relative selling prices of the software group of elements as a 
whole and to the nonsoftware elements. We then further allocate consideration within the software group to the respective elements within that 
group following the guidance in ASC 985-605 and our policies as described above. After the arrangement consideration has been allocated to the 
elements, we account for each respective element in the arrangement as described above.  
Other Revenue Recognition Policies Applicable to Software and Nonsoftware Elements  
Many of our software arrangements include consulting implementation services sold separately under consulting engagement contracts and are 
included as a part of our services business. Consulting revenues from these arrangements are generally accounted for separately from new 
software licenses revenues because the arrangements qualify as services transactions as defined in ASC 985-605. The more significant factors 
considered in determining whether the revenues should be accounted for separately include the nature of services (i.e., consideration of whether 
the services are essential to the functionality of the licensed product), degree of risk, availability of services from other vendors, timing of 
payments and impact of milestones or acceptance criteria on the realizability of the software license fee. Revenues for consulting services are 
generally recognized as the services are performed. If there is a significant uncertainty about the project completion or receipt of payment for the 
consulting services, revenues are deferred until the uncertainty is sufficiently resolved. We estimate the proportional performance on contracts 
with fixed or “not to exceed” fees on a monthly basis utilizing hours incurred to date as a percentage of total estimated hours to complete the 
project. If we do not have a sufficient basis to measure progress towards completion, revenues are recognized when we receive final acceptance 
from the customer that the services have been completed. When total cost estimates exceed revenues, we accrue for the estimated losses 
immediately using cost estimates that are based upon an average fully  
   
95 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
burdened daily rate applicable to the consulting organization delivering the services. The complexity of the estimation process and factors 
relating to the assumptions, risks and uncertainties inherent with the application of the proportional performance method of accounting affects 
the amounts of revenues and related expenses reported in our consolidated financial statements. A number of internal and external factors can 
affect our estimates, including labor rates, utilization and efficiency variances and specification and testing requirement changes.  
Our advanced customer support services are offered as standalone arrangements or as a part of arrangements to customers buying other software 
and non-software products and services. We offer these advanced support services, both on-premises and remote, to Oracle customers to enable 
increased performance and higher availability of their products and services. Depending upon the nature of the arrangement, revenues from these 
services are recognized as the services are performed or ratably over the term of the service period, which is generally one year or less.  
Education revenues are also a part of our services business and include instructor-led, media-based and internet-based training in the use of our 
software and hardware products. Education revenues are recognized as the classes or other education offerings are delivered.  
If an arrangement contains multiple elements and does not qualify for separate accounting for the product and service transactions, then new 
software licenses revenues and/or hardware systems products revenues, including the costs of hardware systems products, are generally 
recognized together with the services based on contract accounting using either the percentage-of-completion or completed-contract method. 
Contract accounting is applied to any bundled software and cloud, hardware systems and services arrangements: (1) that include milestones or 
customer specific acceptance criteria that may affect collection of the software license or hardware systems product fees; (2) where consulting 
services include significant modification or customization of the software or hardware systems product or are of a specialized nature and 
generally performed only by Oracle; (3) where significant consulting services are provided for in the software license contract or hardware 
systems product contract without additional charge or are substantially discounted; or (4) where the software license or hardware systems 
product payment is tied to the performance of consulting services. For the purposes of revenue classification of the elements that are accounted 
for as a single unit of accounting, we allocate revenues to software and nonsoftware elements based on a rational and consistent methodology 
utilizing our best estimate of the relative selling price of such elements.  
We also evaluate arrangements with governmental entities containing “fiscal funding” or “termination for convenience” provisions, when such 
provisions are required by law, to determine the probability of possible cancellation. We consider multiple factors, including the history with the 
customer in similar transactions, the “essential use” of the software or hardware systems products and the planning, budgeting and approval 
processes undertaken by the governmental entity. If we determine upon execution of these arrangements that the likelihood of cancellation is 
remote, we then recognize revenues once all of the criteria described above have been met. If such a determination cannot be made, revenues are 
recognized upon the earlier of cash receipt or approval of the applicable funding provision by the governmental entity.  
We assess whether fees are fixed or determinable at the time of sale and recognize revenues if all other revenue recognition requirements are 
met. Our standard payment terms are net 30 days. However, payment terms may vary based on the country in which the agreement is executed. 
Payments that are due within six months are generally deemed to be fixed or determinable based on our successful collection history on such 
arrangements, and thereby satisfy the required criteria for revenue recognition.  
While most of our arrangements for sales within our businesses include short-term payment terms, we have a standard practice of providing 
long-term financing to creditworthy customers primarily through our financing division. Since fiscal 1989, when our financing division was 
formed, we have established a history of collection, without concessions, on these receivables with payment terms that generally extend up to 
five years from the  
   
96 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
contract date. Provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we recognize new software licenses revenues and hardware systems 
products revenues for these arrangements upon delivery, net of any payment discounts from financing transactions. We have generally sold 
receivables financed through our financing division on a non-recourse basis to third party financing institutions within 90 days of the contracts’ 
dates of execution and we classify the proceeds from these sales as cash flows from operating activities in our consolidated statements of cash 
flows. We account for the sales of these receivables as “true sales” as defined in ASC 860, Transfers and Servicing , as we are considered to 
have surrendered control of these financing receivables. During fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, $1.8 billion, $2.0 billion and $2.2 billion of our 
financing receivables were sold to financial institutions, respectively.  
In addition, we enter into arrangements with leasing companies for the sale of our hardware systems products. These leasing companies, in turn, 
lease our products to end-users. The leasing companies generally have no recourse to us in the event of default by the end-user and we recognize 
revenue upon delivery, if all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.  
Our customers include several of our suppliers and, occasionally, we have purchased goods or services for our operations from these vendors at 
or about the same time that we have sold our products to these same companies (Concurrent Transactions). Software license agreements or sales 
of hardware systems that occur within a three-month time period from the date we have purchased goods or services from that same customer are 
reviewed for appropriate accounting treatment and disclosure. When we acquire goods or services from a customer, we negotiate the purchase 
separately from any sales transaction, at terms we consider to be at arm’s length and settle the purchase in cash. We recognize revenues from 
Concurrent Transactions if all of our revenue recognition criteria are met and the goods and services acquired are necessary for our current 
operations.  
Business Combinations  
We apply the provisions of ASC 805, Business Combinations , in the accounting for our acquisitions. It requires us to recognize separately from 
goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed, at the acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the 
excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use 
our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as contingent 
consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, 
which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the 
corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or 
liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.  
Costs to exit or restructure certain activities of an acquired company or our internal operations are accounted for as termination and exit costs 
pursuant to ASC 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations , and are accounted for separately from the business combination. A liability for costs 
associated with an exit or disposal activity is recognized and measured at its fair value in our consolidated statement of operations in the period 
in which the liability is incurred. When estimating the fair value of facility restructuring activities, assumptions are applied regarding estimated 
sub-lease payments to be received, which can differ materially from actual results. This may require us to revise our initial estimates which may 
materially affect our results of operations and financial position in the period the revision is made.  
For a given acquisition, we may identify certain pre-acquisition contingencies as of the acquisition date and may extend our review and 
evaluation of these pre-acquisition contingencies throughout the measurement period in order to obtain sufficient information to assess whether 
we include these contingencies as a part of the fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and, if so, to determine their 
estimated amounts.  
   
97 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
If we cannot reasonably determine the fair value of a pre-acquisition contingency (non-income tax related) by the end of the measurement 
period, which is generally the case given the nature of such matters, we will recognize an asset or a liability for such pre-acquisition contingency 
if: (i) it is probable that an asset existed or a liability had been incurred at the acquisition date and (ii) the amount of the asset or liability can be 
reasonably estimated. Subsequent to the measurement period, changes in our estimates of such contingencies will affect earnings and could have 
a material effect on our results of operations and financial position.  
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances assumed in connection with a business combination are initially 
estimated as of the acquisition date. We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition 
date with any adjustments to our preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if identified within the measurement period. Subsequent to 
the measurement period or our final determination of the tax allowance’s or contingency’s estimated value, whichever comes first, changes to 
these uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances will affect our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statement of 
operations and could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.  
Marketable and Non-Marketable Securities  
In accordance with ASC 320, Investments — Debt and Equity Securities, and based on our intentions regarding these instruments, we classify 
substantially all of our marketable debt and equity securities as available-for-sale. Marketable debt and equity securities classified as available-
for-sale are reported at fair value, with all unrealized gains (losses) reflected net of tax in stockholders’ equity on our consolidated balance 
sheets, and as a line item in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. If we determine that an investment has an other than 
temporary decline in fair value, we recognize the investment loss in non-operating income (expense), net in the accompanying consolidated 
statements of operations. We periodically evaluate our investments to determine if impairment charges are required. Substantially all of our 
marketable debt and equity investments are classified as current based on the nature of the investments and their availability for use in current 
operations.  
We hold investments in certain non-marketable equity securities in which we do not have a controlling interest or significant influence. These 
equity securities are recorded at cost and included in other assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. If based on the terms of our 
ownership of these non-marketable securities, we determine that we exercise significant influence on the entity to which these non-marketable 
securities relate, we apply the requirements of ASC 323, Investments — Equity Method and Joint Ventures , to account for such investments . 
Our non-marketable securities are subject to periodic impairment reviews.  
Fair Values of Financial Instruments  
We apply the provisions of ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement (ASC 820), to our assets and liabilities that we are required to measure at fair 
value pursuant to other accounting standards, including our investments in marketable debt and equity securities and our derivative financial 
instruments.  
The additional disclosures regarding our fair value measurements are included in Note 4.  
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts  
We record allowances for doubtful accounts based upon a specific review of all significant outstanding invoices. For those invoices not 
specifically reviewed, provisions are provided at differing rates, based upon the age of the receivable, the collection history associated with the 
geographic region that the receivable was recorded in and current economic trends. We write-off a receivable and charge it against its recorded 
allowance when we have exhausted our collection efforts without success.  
   
98 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Concentrations of Risk  
Financial instruments that are potentially subject to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents, marketable 
securities, derivatives and trade receivables. Our cash and cash equivalents are generally held with large, diverse financial institutions worldwide 
to reduce the amount of exposure to any single financial institution. Investment policies have been implemented that limit purchases of 
marketable debt securities to investment grade securities. Our derivative contracts are transacted with various financial institutions with high 
credit standings. We generally do not require collateral to secure accounts receivable. The risk with respect to trade receivables is mitigated by 
credit evaluations we perform on our customers, the short duration of our payment terms for the significant majority of our customer contracts 
and by the diversification of our customer base. No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues in fiscal 2015, 2014 or 
2013.  
We outsource the design, manufacturing, assembly and delivery of certain of our hardware products to a variety of companies, many of which 
are located outside the United States. Further, we have simplified our supply chain processes by reducing the number of third party 
manufacturing partners and the number of locations where these third party manufacturers build our hardware systems products. The inability of 
these third party manufacturing partners to fulfill orders for our hardware products could adversely impact future operating results of our 
hardware systems business.  
Inventories  
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market value. Cost is computed using standard cost, which approximates actual cost, on a first-in, 
first-out basis. We evaluate our ending inventories for estimated excess quantities and obsolescence. This evaluation includes analysis of sales 
levels by product and projections of future demand within specific time horizons (generally six to nine months). Inventories in excess of future 
demand are written down and charged to hardware systems products expenses. In addition, we assess the impact of changing technology to our 
inventories and we write down inventories that are considered obsolete. At the point of loss recognition, a new, lower-cost basis for that 
inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established 
cost basis.  
Other Receivables  
Other receivables represent value-added tax and sales tax receivables associated with the sale of our products and services to third parties. Other 
receivables are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in our consolidated balance sheets and totaled $817 million and $906 
million at May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.  
Deferred Sales Commissions  
We defer sales commission expenses associated with our cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS offerings, and recognize the related expenses over the non-
cancelable term of the related contracts, which are typically one to three years. Amortization of deferred sales commissions is included as a 
component of sales and marketing expense in our consolidated statements of operations.  
Property, Plant and Equipment  
Property, plant and equipment are stated at the lower of cost or realizable value, net of accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed 
using the straight-line method based on estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from one to fifty years. Leasehold improvements are 
amortized over the lesser of the estimated useful lives of the improvements or the lease terms, as appropriate. Property, plant and equipment are 
periodically reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be 
recoverable. We did not recognize any significant property impairment charges in fiscal 2015, 2014 or 2013.  
   
99 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Impairment Assessments  
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. 
Intangible assets that are not considered to have an indefinite useful life are amortized over their useful lives, which generally range from one to 
ten years. Each period we evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of purchased intangible assets and whether events or changes in 
circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization.  
The carrying amounts of our goodwill and intangible assets are periodically reviewed for impairment (at least annually for goodwill and 
indefinite lived intangible assets) and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be 
recoverable. According to ASC 350, Intangibles—Goodwill and Other , we can opt to perform a qualitative assessment to test a reporting unit’s 
goodwill for impairment or we can directly perform the two step impairment test. Based on our qualitative assessment, if we determine that the 
fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50 percent) to be less than its carrying amount, the two step 
impairment test will be performed. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the 
reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not considered impaired and we are not required to 
perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we 
must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill. If the carrying 
value of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we would record an impairment loss equal to the difference. During fiscal 
2015, we recognized a $186 million goodwill impairment loss (refer to Note 7 below for additional information). We did not recognize any 
goodwill impairment charges in fiscal 2014 or 2013.  
Recoverability of finite lived intangible assets is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash 
flows the asset is expected to generate. Recoverability of indefinite lived intangible assets is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of 
the asset to its fair value. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the 
carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. We did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges in fiscal 2015, 2014 or 
2013.  
Derivative Financial Instruments  
During fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, we used derivative and non-derivative financial instruments to manage foreign currency and interest rate 
risks (see Note 11 below for additional information). We account for these instruments in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging 
(ASC 815), which requires that every derivative instrument be recorded on the balance sheet as either an asset or liability measured at its fair 
value as of the reporting date. ASC 815 also requires that changes in our derivatives’ fair values be recognized in earnings, unless specific hedge 
accounting and documentation criteria are met (i.e., the instruments are accounted for as hedges).  
The accounting for changes in the fair value of a derivative depends on the intended use of the derivative and the resulting designation. For a 
derivative instrument designated as a fair value hedge, the gain or loss is recognized in earnings in the period of change. The loss or gain 
attributable to the risk being hedged is recognized in earnings with an offset recorded to the item for which the risk is being hedged. For a 
derivative instrument designated as a cash flow hedge, each reporting period we record the change in fair value on the effective portion to 
accumulated other comprehensive loss in our consolidated balance sheets and an amount is reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive 
loss into earnings to offset the earnings impact that is attributable to the risk being hedged. For the non-derivative financial instrument 
designated as a net investment hedge of our investments in certain of our international subsidiaries, the change on account of remeasurement of 
the effective portion for each reporting period is recorded to accumulated other comprehensive loss in our consolidated balance sheets.  
   
100 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
We perform the effectiveness testing of our aforementioned designated hedges on a quarterly basis and the changes in ineffective portions, if 
any, are recognized immediately in earnings.  
Legal Contingencies  
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. Quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter and assess our 
potential financial exposure. A description of our accounting policies associated with contingencies assumed as a part of a business combination 
is provided under “Business Combinations” above. For legal and other contingencies that are not a part of a business combination or related to 
income taxes, we accrue a liability for an estimated loss if the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the 
amount can be reasonably estimated. Note 18 below provides additional information regarding certain of our legal contingencies.  
Shipping and Handling Costs  
Our shipping and handling costs for hardware systems products sales are included in hardware systems products expenses for all periods 
presented.  
Foreign Currency  
We transact business in various foreign currencies. In general, the functional currency of a foreign operation is the local country’s currency. 
Consequently, revenues and expenses of operations outside the United States are translated into U.S. Dollars using weighted average exchange 
rates while assets and liabilities of operations outside the United States are translated into U.S. Dollars using exchange rates at the balance sheet 
date. The effects of foreign currency translation adjustments are included in stockholders’ equity as a component of accumulated other 
comprehensive loss in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and related periodic movements are summarized as a line item in our 
consolidated statements of comprehensive income. Net foreign exchange transaction losses included in non-operating income (expense), net in 
the accompanying consolidated statements of operations were $157 million, $375 million and $162 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively.  
Stock-Based Compensation  
We account for share-based payments to employees, including grants of service-based employee stock options, service-based restricted stock 
awards, performance-based restricted stock awards (PSUs) and purchases under employee stock purchase plans, in accordance with ASC 718, 
Compensation — Stock Compensation, which requires that share-based payments (to the extent they are compensatory) be recognized in our 
consolidated statements of operations based on their fair values and the estimated number of shares we ultimately expect will vest. For our 
service-based awards, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the service period of the award, which is 
generally four years. For our PSUs, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the service period for each 
separately vesting tranche, which is generally twelve months, as the performance conditions to evaluate attainment of each tranche for each 
participant are independent of the performance conditions for the other tranches. We update the amount of stock-based compensation expense, 
net of forfeitures, to record as of the end of each reporting period based on the expected attainment of performance targets, which is subject to 
change until a final determination is known. Changes to the target estimates are reflected in the amount of stock-based compensation expense 
that we recognize for each tranche on a cumulative basis during the reporting period in which the target estimates are altered and may cause the 
amount of stock-based compensation expense that we record for such reporting period to vary.  
   
101 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
We record deferred tax assets for stock-based compensation awards that result in deductions on our income tax returns based on the amount of 
stock-based compensation recognized and the fair value attributable to the vested portion of stock awards assumed in connection with a business 
combination, at the statutory tax rate in the jurisdiction in which we will receive a tax deduction.  
Advertising  
All advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Advertising expenses, which are included within sales and marketing expenses, were $55 million, 
$79 million and $85 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.  
Research and Development and Software Development Costs  
All research and development costs are expensed as incurred.  
Software development costs required to be capitalized under ASC 985-20, Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed, and under ASC 
350-40, Internal-Use Software, were not material to our consolidated financial statements in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013.  
Acquisition Related and Other Expenses  
Acquisition related and other expenses consist of personnel related costs for transitional and certain other employees, stock-based compensation 
expenses, integration related professional services, certain business combination adjustments including adjustments after the measurement period 
has ended and certain other operating items, net. Stock-based compensation included in acquisition related and other expenses result from 
unvested options and restricted stock-based awards assumed from acquisitions whereby vesting was accelerated upon termination of the 
employees pursuant to the original terms of those options and restricted stock-based awards.  
   
Included in acquisition related and other expenses for fiscal 2015 was a goodwill impairment loss of $186 million (refer to Note 7 below for 
additional information). Included in acquisition related and other expenses for fiscal 2015 and 2013 were benefits of $53 million and $306 
million, respectively, related to certain litigation (refer to Note 18 below for additional information). Also included in acquisition related and 
other expenses for fiscal 2013 were changes in estimates for contingent consideration payable, which reduced acquisition related and other 
expenses by $387 million during fiscal 2013 (refer to Note 2 below for additional information).  
   
102 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015   
2014 
  
2013  
Transitional and other employee related costs 
  
$    57    
$      27    
$    27   
Stock-based compensation 
  
 
5    
 
10    
 
33   
Professional fees and other, net 
  
 (35 )   
 
20    
 (276)  
Business combination adjustments, net 
  
 184    
 
(16 )   
 (388)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total acquisition related and other expenses 
  
$ 211    
$ 
41    
$ (604)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Non-Operating Income (Expense), net  
Non-operating income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income, net foreign currency exchange gains (losses), the noncontrolling 
interests in the net profits of our majority-owned subsidiaries (primarily Oracle Financial Services Software Limited and Oracle Japan) and net 
other income (losses), including net realized gains and losses related to all of our investments and net unrealized gains and losses related to the 
small portion of our investment portfolio that we classify as trading.  
   
Included in foreign currency losses, net for fiscal 2015 were foreign currency remeasurement losses of $23 million, related to our Venezuelan 
subsidiary due to the continued “highly inflationary” designation of the Venezuelan economy in accordance with ASC 830, Foreign Currency 
Matters ; the introduction of currency exchange legislation in Venezuela in February 2015 to create a new foreign exchange mechanism known 
as SIMADI; and the remeasurement of certain assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiary pursuant to the SIMADI rate, which we 
determined, based upon our specific facts and circumstances, was the most appropriate for the reporting of our Venezuelan subsidiary’s Bolivar 
based transactions and net monetary assets in U.S. Dollars. We incurred losses related to our Venezuelan subsidiary of $213 million and $64 
million during fiscal 2014 and 2013, respectively, for generally similar reasons.  
Income Taxes  
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes . Deferred income taxes are recorded for the expected tax 
consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and amounts recognized for
income tax purposes. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount of future tax benefit that is more likely 
than not to be realized.  
A two-step approach is applied pursuant to ASC 740 in the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken 
in a tax return. The first step is to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will 
be sustained in an audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the 
largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax 
positions in our provision for income taxes line of our consolidated statements of operations.  
A description of our accounting policies associated with tax related contingencies and valuation allowances assumed as a part of a business 
combination is provided under “Business Combinations” above.  
Recent Accounting Pronouncements  
Cloud Computing Arrangements that Include a Software Element:     In April 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-05,  Intangibles—Goodwill 
and Other—Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Fees Paid in a Cloud Computing Arrangement (ASU 2015-
05) .  ASU 2015-05 provides guidance to customers about whether a cloud computing arrangement includes software. If a cloud computing 
arrangement includes a software license, the customer should account for the software license element of the arrangement  
   
103 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Interest income 
  
$    349    
$    263    
$    237   
Foreign currency losses, net 
  
 (157 )  
 (375 )   
 (162 )  
Noncontrolling interests in income 
  
 (113 )  
 
(98 )   
 (112 )  
Other income, net 
  
 
27    
 
69    
 
48   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total non-operating income (expense), net 
  
$
106    
$ (141 )   
$ 
11   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
consistent with the acquisition of other software licenses. If a cloud computing arrangement does not include a software license, the customer 
should account for the arrangement as a service contract. The new guidance does not change the accounting for a customer’s accounting for 
service contracts. ASU 2015-05 is effective for us in our first quarter of fiscal 2017 with early adoption permitted using either of two methods: 
(i) prospective to all arrangements entered into or materially modified after the effective date and represent a change in accounting principle; or 
(ii) retrospectively. We are currently evaluating the impact of our pending adoption of ASU 2015-05 on our consolidated financial statements.  
Revenue Recognition:     In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers: Topic 606 (ASU 2014-09), to 
supersede nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance under U.S. GAAP. The core principle of ASU 2014-09 is to recognize revenues when 
promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received for those 
goods or services. ASU 2014-09 defines a five step process to achieve this core principle and, in doing so, it is possible more judgment and 
estimates may be required within the revenue recognition process than are required under existing U.S. GAAP, including identifying 
performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the 
transaction price to each separate performance obligation. ASU 2014-09 is effective for us in our first quarter of fiscal 2018 using either of two 
methods: (i) retrospective application of ASU 2014-09 to each prior reporting period presented with the option to elect certain practical 
expedients as defined within ASU 2014-09; or (ii) retrospective application of ASU 2014-09 with the cumulative effect of initially applying 
ASU 2014-09 recognized at the date of initial application and providing certain additional disclosures as defined per ASU 2014-09. We are 
currently evaluating the impact of our pending adoption of ASU 2014-09 on our consolidated financial statements.  
   
Acquisition of MICROS Systems, Inc.  
On June 22, 2014, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement) with MICROS Systems, Inc. (MICROS), a provider 
of integrated software, hardware and services solutions to the hospitality and retail industries. On July 3, 2014, pursuant to the Merger 
Agreement, we commenced a tender offer to purchase all of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of MICROS at a purchase price 
of $68.00 per share, net to the holder in cash, without interest thereon, based upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Merger 
Agreement. Between September 3, 2014 and September 8, 2014, pursuant to the terms of the tender offer, we accepted and paid for the 
substantial majority of outstanding shares of MICROS common stock. On September 8, 2014, we effectuated the merger of MICROS with and 
into a wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement and applicable Maryland law and MICROS became an 
indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle. Pursuant to the merger, shares of MICROS common stock that remained outstanding and were not 
acquired by us were converted into, and cancelled in exchange for, the right to receive $68.00 per share in cash. The unvested equity awards to 
acquire MICROS common stock that were outstanding immediately prior to the conclusion of the merger were converted into equity awards 
denominated in shares of Oracle common stock based on formulas contained in the Merger Agreement. We acquired MICROS to, among other 
things, expand our software and cloud, hardware and related services offerings for hotels, food and beverage industries, facilities, and retailers. 
We have included the financial results of MICROS in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition.  
Pursuant to our business combinations accounting policy, we estimated the preliminary fair values of net tangible and intangible assets acquired 
and the excess of the consideration transferred over the aggregate of such fair values was recorded as goodwill. The preliminary fair values of 
net tangible assets and intangible assets acquired were based upon preliminary valuations and our estimates and assumptions are subject to 
change within the measurement period (up to one year from the acquisition date). The primary areas that remain preliminary relate to the fair 
values of intangible assets acquired, certain tangible assets and liabilities acquired, certain legal  
   
104 
2. 
ACQUISITIONS 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
matters, income and non-income based taxes and residual goodwill. We expect to continue to obtain information to assist us in determining the 
fair values of the net assets acquired during the measurement period. The following table summarizes the estimated preliminary fair values of net 
assets acquired from MICROS:  
   
We do not expect the goodwill recognized as a part of the MICROS acquisition to be deductible for income tax purposes.  
Other Fiscal 2015 Acquisitions  
During fiscal 2015, we acquired certain other companies and purchased certain technology and development assets primarily to expand our 
products and services offerings. These acquisitions were not individually significant. We have included the financial results of the acquired 
companies in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates and the results from each of these companies were not 
individually material to our consolidated financial statements. In the aggregate, the total preliminary purchase price for these acquisitions was 
approximately $1.7 billion, which consisted of approximately $1.7 billion in cash and $7 million for the fair values of stock options and 
restricted stock-based awards assumed. We have preliminarily recorded $14 million of net tangible assets and $388 million of identifiable 
intangible assets, based on their estimated fair values, and $1.3 billion of residual goodwill.  
The initial purchase price calculation and related accounting for our acquisitions completed during fiscal 2015 is preliminary. The preliminary 
fair value estimates for the assets acquired and liabilities assumed for our acquisitions completed during fiscal 2015 were based upon preliminary 
calculations and valuations and our estimates and assumptions for these acquisitions are subject to change as we obtain additional information 
during the respective measurement periods (up to one year from the respective acquisition dates). The primary areas of those preliminary 
estimates that are not yet finalized relate to certain tangible assets and liabilities acquired, identifiable intangible assets, certain legal matters and 
income and non-income based taxes.  
Fiscal 2014 Acquisitions  
Acquisition of Responsys, Inc.  
On February 6, 2014, we completed our acquisition of Responsys, Inc. (Responsys), a provider of enterprise-scale cloud-based business-to-
consumer marketing software. We have included the financial results of Responsys in our consolidated financial statements from the date of 
acquisition. The total purchase price for Responsys was approximately $1.6 billion, which consisted of approximately $1.4 billion in cash and 
$147 million for the fair values of stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed. We recorded $32 million of net tangible liabilities, 
related primarily to deferred tax liabilities, $580 million of identifiable intangible assets, and $14 million of in-process research and 
development, based on their estimated fair values, and $1.0 billion of residual goodwill.  
   
105 
(in millions) 
  
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents 
  
$
675   
Trade receivables, net 
  
 
183   
Inventories 
  
 
44   
Goodwill 
  
 
3,277   
Intangible assets 
  
 
2,030   
Other assets 
  
 
149   
Accounts payable and other liabilities 
  
 
(348)  
Deferred tax liabilities, net 
  
 
(633)  
Deferred revenues 
  
 
(130)  
   
   
   
  
Total 
  
$    5,247   
   
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Other Fiscal 2014 Acquisitions  
During fiscal 2014, we acquired certain other companies and purchased certain technology and development assets primarily to expand our 
products and services offerings. These acquisitions were not individually significant. We have included the financial results of these companies 
in our consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates and the results from each of these companies were not 
individually material to our consolidated financial statements. In the aggregate, the total purchase price for these acquisitions was approximately 
$2.3 billion, which consisted primarily of cash consideration, and we recorded $230 million of net tangible liabilities, related primarily to 
deferred tax liabilities, $1.1 billion of identifiable intangible assets, and $99 million of in-process research and development, based on their 
estimated fair values, and $1.3 billion of residual goodwill.  
Fiscal 2013 Acquisitions  
Acquisition of Acme Packet, Inc.  
On March 28, 2013, we completed our acquisition of Acme Packet, Inc. (Acme Packet), a provider of session border control technology. We 
have included the financial results of Acme Packet in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. The total purchase price 
for Acme Packet was approximately $2.1 billion, which consisted of approximately $2.1 billion in cash and $12 million for the fair value of 
stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed. We have recorded $247 million of net tangible assets, $525 million of identifiable 
intangible assets, and $45 million of in-process research and development, based on their estimated fair values, and $1.3 billion of residual 
goodwill.  
Acquisition of Eloqua, Inc.  
On February 8, 2013, we completed our acquisition of Eloqua, Inc. (Eloqua), a provider of cloud-based marketing automation and revenue 
performance management software. We have included the financial results of Eloqua in our consolidated financial statements from the date of 
acquisition. The total purchase price for Eloqua was approximately $935 million, which consisted of approximately $933 million in cash and $2 
million for the fair value of stock options assumed. We have recorded $1 million of net tangible assets and $327 million of identifiable intangible 
assets, based on their estimated fair values, and $607 million of residual goodwill.  
Other Fiscal 2013 Acquisitions  
During fiscal 2013, we acquired certain other companies and purchased certain technology and development assets primarily to expand our 
products and services offerings. These acquisitions were not significant individually or in the aggregate.  
Contingent Consideration Related to the Acquisition of Pillar Data Systems, Inc.  
In fiscal 2012, we acquired Pillar Data Systems, Inc. (Pillar Data), a provider of enterprise storage systems solutions. Pursuant to the agreement 
and plan of merger dated as of June 29, 2011, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Pillar Data from the stockholders 
in exchange for Pillar Data’s former stockholders to have rights to receive contingent cash consideration (Earn-Out), if any, pursuant to an Earn-
Out calculation. During fiscal 2013, we estimated that no amount of contingent consideration was to be payable pursuant to the Earn-Out 
calculation and we recognized a benefit of $387 million. The Earn-Out period ended at the conclusion of our first quarter of fiscal 2015 and no 
amounts were paid to Pillar Data’s former stockholders, including Lawrence J. Ellison, Oracle’s Executive Chairman of the Board and Chief 
Technology Officer and largest stockholder.  
   
106 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Information  
The unaudited pro forma financial information in the table below summarizes the combined results of operations for Oracle, MICROS, 
Responsys, and certain other companies that we acquired since the beginning of fiscal 2014 (which were considered relevant for the purposes of 
unaudited pro forma financial information disclosure) as though the companies were combined as of the beginning of fiscal 2014. The unaudited 
pro forma financial information for all periods presented also included the business combination accounting effects resulting from these 
acquisitions, including our amortization charges from acquired intangible assets (certain of which are preliminary), stock-based compensation 
charges for unvested stock options and restricted stock-based awards assumed, if any, and the related tax effects as though the aforementioned 
companies were combined as of the beginning of fiscal 2014. The unaudited pro forma financial information as presented below is for 
informational purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of the results of operations that would have been achieved if the acquisitions had 
taken place at the beginning of fiscal 2014.  
The unaudited pro forma financial information for fiscal 2015 combined the historical results of Oracle for fiscal 2015, the historical results of 
MICROS for the six months ended June 30, 2014 (adjusted due to differences in reporting periods and considering the date we acquired 
MICROS), the historical results of certain other companies that we acquired since the beginning of fiscal 2015 based upon their respective 
previous reporting periods and the dates these companies were acquired by us, and the effects of the pro forma adjustments listed above.  
The unaudited pro forma financial information for fiscal 2014 combined the historical results of Oracle for fiscal 2014, the historical results of 
MICROS for the year ended June 30, 2014 (due to differences in reporting periods), the historical results of Responsys for the nine months 
ended September 30, 2013 (adjusted due to differences in reporting periods and considering the date we acquired Responsys), the historical 
results of certain other companies that we acquired since the beginning of fiscal 2014 based upon their respective previous reporting periods and 
the dates these companies were acquired by us, and the effects of the pro forma adjustments listed above. The unaudited pro forma financial 
information was as follows for fiscal 2015 and 2014:  
   
   
Cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of deposits held at major banks, Tier-1 commercial paper and other securities with original 
maturities of 90 days or less. Marketable securities primarily consist of time deposits held at major banks, Tier-1 commercial paper, corporate 
notes and certain other securities.  
   
107 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions, except per share data) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
Total revenues 
  
$    38,700     
$    40,007   
Net income 
  
$ 
9,877     
$ 10,770   
Basic earnings per share 
  
$ 
2.24     
$ 
2.38   
Diluted earnings per share 
  
$ 
2.19     
$ 
2.34   
3. 
CASH, CASH EQUIVALENTS AND MARKETABLE SECURITIES 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
The amortized principal amounts of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities approximated their fair values at May 31, 2015 and 
2014. We use the specific identification method to determine any realized gains or losses from the sale of our marketable securities classified as 
available-for-sale. Such realized gains and losses were insignificant for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013. The following table summarizes the 
components of our cash equivalents and marketable securities held, substantially all of which were classified as available-for-sale:  
   
As of May 31, 2015 and 2014, approximately 28% and 45%, respectively, of our marketable securities investments mature within one year and 
72% and 55%, respectively, mature within one to six years. Our investment portfolio is subject to market risk due to changes in interest rates. As 
described above, we limit purchases of marketable debt securities to investment grade securities, which have high credit ratings and also limit the 
amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. As stated in our investment policy, we are averse to principal loss and seek to preserve our invested 
funds by limiting default risk and market risk.  
   
We perform fair value measurements in accordance with ASC 820. ASC 820 defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling 
an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair 
value measurements for assets and liabilities required to be recorded at their fair values, we consider the principal or most advantageous market 
in which we would transact and consider assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the assets or liabilities, such as inherent 
risk, transfer restrictions and risk of nonperformance.  
ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable 
inputs when measuring fair value. An asset’s or a liability’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input 
that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:  
   
   
   
   
108 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
U.S. Treasury securities 
  
$ 
668     
$ 
—   
Commercial paper debt securities 
  
 
9,203     
 
7,969   
Corporate debt securities and other 
  
 
28,844     
 
16,657   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total investments 
  
$    38,715     
$    24,626   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Investments classified as cash equivalents 
  
$ 
6,063     
$ 
3,576   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Investments classified as marketable securities 
  
$ 32,652     
$ 21,050   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
4. 
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS 
  
•   Level 1: quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities; 
  
•   Level 2: inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices in active markets for similar 
assets or liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are 
observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities; or 
  
•   Level 3: unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair values of the assets or 
liabilities. 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis  
Our assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, excluding accrued interest components, consisted of the following (Level 1 
and 2 inputs are defined above):  
   
Our valuation techniques used to measure the fair values of our marketable securities that were classified as Level 1 in the table above were 
derived from quoted market prices and active markets for these instruments exist. Our valuation techniques used to measure the fair values of 
Level 2 instruments listed in the table above, the counterparties to which have high credit ratings, were derived from the following: non-binding 
market consensus prices that are corroborated by observable market data, quoted market prices for similar instruments, or pricing models, such 
as discounted cash flow techniques, with all significant inputs derived from or corroborated by observable market data including LIBOR-based 
yield curves, among others.  
Based on the trading prices of our $42.0 billion and $24.1 billion of borrowings, which consisted of senior notes that were outstanding as of 
May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, the estimated fair values of our borrowings using Level 2 inputs at May 31, 2015 and 2014 were $44.1 
billion and $26.4 billion, respectively.  
   
Inventories consisted of the following:  
   
   
109 
 
 
May 31, 2015 
  
May 31, 2014 
 
 
 
Fair Value Measurements 
Using Input Types 
  
 
  
Fair Value Measurements 
Using Input Types 
  
 
 
(in millions) 
 
   Level 1      
   Level 2       
 Total   
  
   Level 1       
   Level 2       
 Total   
 
Assets: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury securities 
 $ 
668    $ 
—   $ 
668   $ 
—    $ 
—    $
—   
Commercial paper debt securities 
 
 
—    
 
9,203   
 
9,203   
 
—    
 
7,969    
 
7,969   
Corporate debt securities and other 
 
 
190    
 
28,654   
 28,844   
 
119    
 
16,538    
 16,657   
Derivative financial instruments 
 
 
—    
 
74   
 
74   
 
—    
 
97    
 
97   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total assets 
 $ 
 858    $ 
 37,931   $  38,789   $ 
 119    $ 
 24,604    $  24,723   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Liabilities: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Derivative financial instruments 
 $ 
—    $ 
244   $ 
244   $ 
—    $ 
—    $
—   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
5. 
INVENTORIES 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
Raw materials 
  
$ 
112     
$ 
74   
Work-in-process 
  
 
38     
 
28   
Finished goods 
  
 
164     
 
87   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total 
  
$        314     
$        189   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Property, plant and equipment, net consisted of the following:  
   
   
The changes in intangible assets for fiscal 2015 and the net book value of intangible assets at May 31, 2015 and 2014 were as follows:  
   
   
Total amortization expense related to our intangible assets was $2.1 billion, $2.3 billion and $2.4 billion in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively. As of May 31, 2015, estimated future amortization expenses related to intangible assets were as follows (in millions):  
   
   
110 
6. 
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
 
  
Estimated 
Useful Life  
  
May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
  
2015 
  
2014 
 
Computer, network, machinery and equipment 
  
 1-5 years     $ 
3,345    $ 
2,468   
Buildings and improvements 
  
 1-50 years     
 
2,721    
 
2,582   
Furniture, fixtures and other 
  
 3-10 years     
 
547    
 
531   
Land 
  
 
—     
 
589    
 
632   
Construction in progress 
  
 
—     
 
93    
 
26   
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total property, plant and equipment 
  
 1-50 years     
 
7,295    
 
6,239   
Accumulated depreciation 
  
  
 
(3,609 )   
 
(3,178 )  
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total property, plant and equipment, net 
  
  $        3,686    $        3,061   
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
7. 
INTANGIBLE ASSETS AND GOODWILL 
 
 
Intangible Assets, Gross 
  
Accumulated Amortization 
  Intangible Assets, Net   Weighted 
Average  
Useful Life 
(Dollars in millions) 
 
May 31, 
2014 
 Additions 
  Retirements   
May 31, 
2015 
  
May 31, 
2014 
 Expense   Retirements   
May 31, 
2015 
  
May 31, 
2014 
  
May 31, 
2015 
  
Software support agreements and related 
relationships 
 $ 
5,218   $ 
1,206    $ 
(2,234 )   $ 
4,190    $ 
(4,403 )  $ 
(531)   $ 
2,234    $ (2,700 )  $ 
815    $ 
1,490    
13 years 
Hardware systems support agreements and 
related relationships 
  
969    
63     
(20)    
1,012     
(530 )   
(144)    
20     
(654 )   
439     
358    
10 years 
Developed technology 
  
4,387    
736     
(521 )    
4,602     
(2,176 )   
(700)    
521     
(2,355 )   
2,211     
2,247    
7 years 
Core technology 
  
1,617    
—     
(1,065 )    
552     
(1,294 )   
(182)    
1,065     
(411 )   
323     
141    
N.A. 
Customer relationships and contract 
backlog 
  
2,054    
204     
(61)    
2,197     
(1,459 )   
(312)    
61     
(1,710 )   
595     
487    
6 years 
SaaS, PaaS and IaaS agreements and 
related relationships and other. 
  
1,789    
204     
—     
1,993     
(305 )   
(203)    
—     
(508 )   
1,484     
1,485    
10 years 
Trademarks 
  
516    
35     
(50)    
501     
(276 )   
(77)    
50     
(303 )   
240     
198    
10 years 
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
Total intangible assets subject to 
amortization 
  
16,550    
2,448     
(3,951 )    
15,047     
(10,443 )   
(2,149)    
3,951     
(8,641 )   
6,107     
6,406    
10 years 
In-process research and development 
  
30    
(30 )   
—     
—     
—    
—     
—     
—     
30     
—    
N.A. 
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
Total intangible assets, net 
 $    16,580   $ 
2,418    $ 
(3,951 )   $    15,047    $    (10,443 )  $    (2,149)   $ 
3,951    $    (8,641 )  $ 
6,137    $ 
6,406    
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
 The substantial majority of intangible assets acquired during fiscal 2015 related to our acquisition of MICROS. 
 Represents weighted average useful lives of intangible assets acquired during fiscal 2015. 
Fiscal 2016 
  
$    1,624   
Fiscal 2017 
  
 
995   
Fiscal 2018 
  
 
848   
Fiscal 2019 
  
 
742   
Fiscal 2020 
  
 
598   
Thereafter 
  
 
1,599   
   
   
   
  
Total intangible assets, net 
  
$
6,406   
   
   
   
  
(2) 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
The changes in the carrying amounts of goodwill, net, which is generally not deductible for tax purposes, for our operating segments for fiscal 
2015 and 2014 were as follows:  
   
   
   
   
   
111 
(in millions) 
 
New Software 
Licenses and 
Cloud  
Software  
Subscriptions   
Software 
License  
Updates and 
Product 
Support 
  
Hardware 
Systems 
Support   
Consulting   
Other,  net 
  
Total Goodwill, 
net 
 
Balances as of May 31, 2013 
 
$ 
10,533    
$ 12,474    
$ 1,259    
$
1,584    
$ 
1,493    
$ 
27,343   
Allocation of goodwill 
 
 
875    
 
—    
 
380    
 
13    
 
(1,268 )  
 
—   
Goodwill from acquisitions 
 
 
1,721    
 
4    
 
436    
 
134    
 
—    
 
2,295   
Goodwill adjustments, net 
 
 
10    
 
(6 )  
 
7    
 
2    
 
1    
 
14   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Balances as of May 31, 2014 
 
 
13,139    
 
12,472    
 2,082    
 
1,733    
 
226    
 
29,652   
Goodwill from acquisitions 
 
 
2,086    
 
1,991    
 
269    
 
27    
 
240    
 
4,613   
Goodwill adjustments, net 
 
 
(8)   
 
(2 )  
 
19    
 
(1)   
 
—    
 
8   
Goodwill impairment 
 
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
—    
 
(186 )  
 
(186)  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Balances as of May 31, 2015 
 
$ 
15,217    
$ 14,461    
$ 2,370    
$    1,759    
$ 
280    
$ 
34,087   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
 Represents the allocation of goodwill to our operating segments upon completion of our intangible asset valuations. 
  Pursuant to our business combinations accounting policy, we recorded goodwill adjustments for the effect on goodwill of changes to net assets acquired during the measurement period 
(up to one year from the date of an acquisition). Goodwill adjustments were not significant to our previously reported operating results or financial position. 
  During fiscal 2015, we recorded a $186 million goodwill impairment loss to our hardware systems products reporting unit. We considered several approaches to determine the fair value 
of our hardware systems reporting unit as of March 1, 2015 and concluded the most appropriate to be the income approach. The fair value of our hardware systems products reporting unit 
pursuant to the income approach was impacted by lower forecasted operating results for this reporting unit, primarily caused by lower forecasted revenues and our continued investment 
in hardware products research and development activities. We compared the implied fair value of goodwill in our hardware systems products reporting unit to its carrying value, which 
resulted in the $186 million goodwill impairment loss and represented the aggregate amount of goodwill for our hardware systems products reporting unit. The aggregate hardware 
systems reporting unit goodwill that was impaired in fiscal 2015 resulted from our acquisitions of Pillar Data Systems, Inc., Xsigo Systems, Inc., GreenBytes, Inc. and MICROS Systems, 
Inc. Such impairment loss was recorded to acquisition related and other expenses in our fiscal 2015 consolidated statement of operations. We did not recognize any goodwill impairment 
losses in fiscal 2014 or 2013. 
  Represents goodwill allocated to our other operating segments. The balance as of May 31, 2013 included unallocated goodwill for certain of our acquisitions that was subsequently 
allocated based upon the finalization of valuations during fiscal 2014. 
(4) 
(1) 
(2) 
(2) 
(3) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Notes payable consisted of the following:  
   
   
Senior Notes and Other  
In May 2015, we issued $10.0 billion of senior notes comprised of $2.5 billion of 2.50% notes due May 2022 (2022 Notes), $2.5 billion of 
2.95% notes due May 2025 (2025 Notes), $500 million 3.25% notes due May 2030 (2030 Notes), $1.25 billion of 3.90% notes due May 2035 
(2035 Notes), $2.0 billion of 4.125% notes due May 2045 (2045 Notes) and $1.25 billion of 4.375% notes due May 2055 (2055 Notes, and 
together with the 2022 Notes, 2025 Notes, 2030 Notes, 2035 Notes  
   
112 
8. 
NOTES PAYABLE AND OTHER BORROWINGS 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
3.75% senior notes due July 2014, net of fair value adjustment of $8 as of May 31, 2014 
  $ 
—     $ 
1,508   
5.25% senior notes due January 2016, net of discount of $1 and $2 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
1,999     
 
1,998   
Floating rate senior notes due July 2017, net of debt issuance cost of $1 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
999     
 
—   
1.20% senior notes due October 2017, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $6 and $9 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
2,494     
 
2,491   
5.75% senior notes due April 2018, net of debt issuance costs of $7 and $8 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
2,493     
 
2,492   
Floating rate senior notes due January 2019, net of debt issuance costs of $1 each as of May 31, 2015 and 2014 
  
 
499     
 
499   
2.375% senior notes due January 2019, net of fair value losses of $21 and $15 and discount and debt issuance costs of $7 and $9 as of May 31, 2015 and 
May 31, 2014, respectively 
  
 
1,514     
 
1,506   
5.00% senior notes due July 2019, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $11 and $12 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
1,739     
 
1,738   
Floating rate senior notes due October 2019, net of debt issuance cost of $2 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
748     
 
—   
2.25% senior notes due October 2019, net of fair value loss of $22 and discount and debt issuance cost of $7 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
2,015     
 
—   
3.875% senior notes due July 2020, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $4 and $5 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
996     
 
995   
2.25% senior notes due January 2021, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $11 and $14 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
1,341     
 
1,685   
2.80% senior notes due July 2021, net of fair value loss of $31 and discount and debt issuance cost of $6 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
1,525     
 
—   
2.50% senior notes due May 2022, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $17 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
2,483     
 
—   
2.50% senior notes due October 2022, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $10 and $11 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
2,490     
 
2,489   
3.625% senior notes due July 2023, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $11 and $12 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
989     
 
988   
3.40% senior notes due July 2024, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $12 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
1,988     
 
—   
2.95% senior notes due May 2025, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $22 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
2,478     
 
—   
3.125% senior notes due July 2025, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $6 and $9 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
804     
 
1,013   
3.25% senior notes due May 2030, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $6 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
494     
 
—   
4.30% senior notes due July 2034, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $13 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
1,737     
 
—   
3.90% senior notes due May 2035, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $18 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
1,232     
 
—   
6.50% senior notes due April 2038, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $5 and $6 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
1,245     
 
1,244   
6.125% senior notes due July 2039, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $12 and $14 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
1,238     
 
1,236   
5.375% senior notes due July 2040, net of discount and debt issuance costs of $34 and $35 as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively 
  
 
2,216     
 
2,215   
4.50% senior notes due July 2044, net of debt issuance cost of $8 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
992     
 
—   
4.125% senior notes due May 2045, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $24 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
1,976     
 
—   
4.375% senior notes due May 2055, net of discount and debt issuance cost of $16 as of May 31, 2015 
  
 
1,234     
 
—   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total borrowings 
  $ 41,958     $ 24,097   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Notes payable, current 
  $ 
1,999     $ 
1,508   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Notes payable, non-current 
  $    39,959     $    22,589   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
 Refer to Note 11 for a description of our accounting for fair value hedges. 
 Euro based notes valued at May 31, 2015 and May 31, 2014 foreign exchange rates, respectively (see further discussion below). 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
and 2045 Notes, the May 2015 Senior Notes). We issued the May 2015 Senior Notes for general corporate purposes, which may include stock 
repurchases, payment of cash dividends on our common stock and future acquisitions, and repayment of indebtedness.  
In July 2014, we issued $10.0 billion of senior notes comprised of $1.0 billion of floating rate notes due July 2017 (2017 Floating Rate Notes), 
$750 million of floating rate notes due October 2019 (2019 Floating Rate Notes), $2.0 billion of 2.25% notes due October 2019 (2019 Notes), 
$1.5 billion of 2.80% notes due July 2021 (2021 Notes), $2.0 billion of 3.40% notes due July 2024 (2024 Notes), $1.75 billion of 4.30% notes 
due July 2034 (2034 Notes) and $1.0 billion of 4.50% notes due July 2044 (2044 Notes and, together with the 2017 Floating Rate Notes, 2019 
Floating Rate Notes, 2019 Notes, 2021 Notes, 2024 Notes and 2034 Notes, the July 2014 Senior Notes). The floating rate notes bear interest at a 
floating rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus 0.20% for the 2017 Floating Rate Notes and 0.51% for the 2019 Floating Rate Notes (0.47% and 
0.78% as of May 31, 2015, respectively) with interest payable quarterly. We issued the July 2014 Senior Notes for general corporate purposes, 
which may include stock repurchases, payment of cash dividends on our common stock, our acquisition of MICROS and future acquisitions, and 
repayment of indebtedness.  
In July 2013, we issued €2.0 billion ($2.2 billion and $2.7 billion as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively) of fixed rate senior notes 
comprised of €1.25 billion of 2.25% notes due January 2021 (January 2021 Notes) and €750 million of 3.125% notes due July 2025 (July 2025 
Notes, and together with the January 2021 Notes, the Euro Notes). The Euro Notes are registered and trade on the New York Stock Exchange.  
In connection with the issuance of the January 2021 Notes, we entered into certain cross-currency swap agreements that have the economic 
effect of converting our fixed rate, Euro denominated debt, including annual interest payments and the payment of principal at maturity, to a 
fixed rate, U.S. Dollar denominated debt of $1.6 billion with a fixed annual interest rate of 3.53% (see Note 11 for additional information). 
Further, we designated the July 2025 Notes as a net investment hedge of our investments in certain of our international subsidiaries that use the 
Euro as their functional currency in order to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by the changes in foreign currency exchange 
rates of the Euro with respect to the U.S. Dollar (see Note 11 for additional information).  
In July 2013, we also issued $3.0 billion of senior notes comprised of $500 million of floating rate notes due January 2019 (January 2019 
Floating Rate Notes), $1.5 billion of 2.375% notes due January 2019 (January 2019 Notes) and $1.0 billion of 3.625% notes due July 2023 (2023 
Notes). The January 2019 Floating Rate Notes bear interest at a floating rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus 0.58% (0.86% and 0.81% as of 
May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively) with interest payable quarterly.  
In October 2012, we issued $5.0 billion of fixed rate senior notes comprised of $2.5 billion of 1.20% notes due October 2017 (2017 Notes) and 
$2.5 billion of 2.50% notes due October 2022 (October 2022 Notes).  
In July 2010, we issued $3.25 billion of fixed rate senior notes comprised of $1.0 billion of 3.875% notes due July 2020 (2020 Notes) and $2.25 
billion of 5.375% notes due July 2040 (2040 Notes).  
In July 2009, we issued $4.5 billion of fixed rate senior notes of which $1.5 billion of 3.75% notes (2014 Notes) was due and paid in July 2014 
(we also settled the fixed to variable interest rate swap agreements associated with the 2014 Notes) and $1.75 billion of 5.00% notes due July 
2019 (July 2019 Notes) and $1.25 billion of 6.125% notes due July 2039 (2039 Notes) remained outstanding as of May 31, 2015.  
In April 2008, we issued $5.0 billion of fixed rate senior notes, of which $1.25 billion of 4.95% senior notes was due and paid in April 2013, and 
$2.5 billion of 5.75% senior notes due April 2018 (2018 Notes) and $1.25 billion of 6.50% senior notes due April 2038 (2038 Notes) remained 
outstanding as of May 31, 2015.  
In January 2006, we issued $5.75 billion of senior notes, of which $2.0 billion of 5.25% senior notes due January 2016 (2016 Notes) remained 
outstanding as of May 31, 2015.  
   
113 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
The effective interest yields of the 2016 Notes, 2017 Notes, 2018 Notes, January 2019 Notes, July 2019 Notes, 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes, 2021 
Notes, 2022 Notes, October 2022 Notes, 2023 Notes, 2024 Notes, 2025 Notes, July 2025 Notes, 2030 Notes, 2034 Notes, 2035 Notes, 2038 
Notes, 2039 Notes, 2040 Notes, 2044 Notes, 2045 Notes and 2055 Notes (collectively and together with the January 2021 Notes, the Senior 
Notes) at May 31, 2015 were 5.32%, 1.24%, 5.76%, 2.44%, 5.05%, 2.27%, 3.93%, 2.82%, 2.56%, 2.51%, 3.73%, 3.43%, 3.00%, 3.17%, 3.30%, 
4.30%, 3.95%, 6.52%, 6.19%, 5.45%, 4.50%, 4.15%, and 4.40%, respectively. In July 2014 and July 2013, we entered into certain interest rate 
swap agreements that have the economic effects of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with the 2019 Notes, January 2019 Notes 
and 2021 Notes so that the interest payable on these notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR (0.76%, 0.93% and 0.91%, respectively, 
at May 31, 2015; and 0.88% for the January 2019 Notes at May 31, 2014; see Note 11 for additional information). The effective interest yield of 
the January 2021 Notes was 2.33% (3.53% after the economic effects of the cross-currency swap agreements described above and in Note 11). 
Interest is payable semi-annually for the Senior Notes except for the Euro Notes for which interest is payable annually. We may redeem some or 
all of the Senior Notes of each series prior to their maturity, subject to certain restrictions, and the payment of an applicable make-whole 
premium in certain instances. The 2017 Floating Rate Notes, January 2019 Floating Rate Notes and 2019 Floating Rate Notes (collectively the 
Floating Rate Notes) may not be redeemed prior to their maturity.  
The Senior Notes and the Floating Rate Notes rank pari passu with any other notes we may issue in the future pursuant to our commercial paper 
program (see additional discussion regarding our commercial paper program below) and all existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness of 
Oracle Corporation. All existing and future liabilities of the subsidiaries of Oracle Corporation are or will be effectively senior to the Senior 
Notes and the Floating Rate Notes and any future issuances of commercial paper notes. We were in compliance with all debt-related covenants at 
May 31, 2015.  
Future principal payments for all of our borrowings at May 31, 2015 were as follows (in millions):  
   
Commercial Paper Program and Commercial Paper Notes  
On April 22, 2013, pursuant to our existing $3.0 billion commercial paper program which allows us to issue and sell unsecured short-term 
promissory notes pursuant to a private placement exemption from the registration requirements under federal and state securities laws, we 
entered into new dealer agreements with various banks and a new Issuing and Paying Agency Agreement with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. As 
of May 31, 2015 and 2014, we did not have any outstanding commercial paper notes. We intend to back-stop any commercial paper notes that 
we may issue in the future with the 2013 Credit Agreement (see additional details below).  
Revolving Credit Agreements  
In April 2013, we entered into a $3.0 billion Revolving Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., Bank of America, N.A., BNP Paribas, 
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and certain other lenders (the 2013 Credit Agreement). The 2013 Credit Agreement provides for an unsecured 5-
year revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate purposes including back-stopping any commercial paper notes that we may issue. 
Subject to certain conditions stated in the 2013 Credit Agreement, we may borrow, prepay and re-borrow amounts under the  
   
114 
Fiscal 2016 
  
$ 
2,000   
Fiscal 2017 
  
 
—   
Fiscal 2018 
  
 
6,000   
Fiscal 2019 
  
 
2,000   
Fiscal 2020 
  
 
4,500   
Thereafter 
  
 
27,966   
   
   
   
  
Total 
  
$    42,466   
   
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
2013 Credit Agreement at any time during the term of the 2013 Credit Agreement. Interest under the 2013 Credit Agreement is based on either 
(a) a LIBOR-based formula or (b) the Base Rate formula, each as set forth in the 2013 Credit Agreement. Any amounts drawn pursuant to the 
2013 Credit Agreement are due on April 20, 2018. No amounts were outstanding pursuant to the 2013 Credit Agreement as of May 31, 2015 and 
2014.  
The 2013 Credit Agreement contains certain customary representations and warranties, covenants and events of default, including the 
requirement that our total net debt to total capitalization ratio not exceed 45% on a consolidated basis. If any of the events of default occur and 
are not cured within applicable grace periods or waived, any unpaid amounts under the 2013 Credit Agreement may be declared immediately 
due and payable and the 2013 Credit Agreement may be terminated. We were in compliance with the 2013 Credit Agreement’s covenants as of 
May 31, 2015.  
On May 29, 2012, we borrowed $1.7 billion pursuant to a revolving credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as initial lender and 
administrative agent; and J.P. Morgan Securities, LLC, as sole lead arranger and sole bookrunner (the 2012 Credit Agreement). During fiscal 
2013, we repaid the $1.7 billion and the 2012 Credit Agreement expired pursuant to its terms.  
   
Fiscal 2015 Oracle Restructuring Plan  
During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, our management approved, committed to and initiated plans to restructure and further improve 
efficiencies in our operations due to our acquisition of MICROS and certain other operational activities (2015 Restructuring Plan). The total 
estimated restructuring costs associated with the 2015 Restructuring Plan are up to $626 million and will be recorded to the restructuring expense 
line item within our consolidated statements of operations as they are incurred. We recorded $100 million of restructuring expenses in 
connection with the 2015 Restructuring Plan in fiscal 2015 and we expect to incur the majority of the estimated remaining $526 million through 
the end of fiscal 2016. Any changes to the estimates of executing the 2015 Restructuring Plan will be reflected in our future results of operations. 
Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan  
During the first quarter of fiscal 2013, our management approved, committed to and initiated plans to restructure and further improve 
efficiencies in our operations (2013 Restructuring Plan). Restructuring costs associated with the 2013 Restructuring Plan were recorded to the 
restructuring expense line item within our consolidated statements of operations as they were incurred. We recorded $119 million, $174 million 
and $325 million of restructuring expenses in connection with the 2013 Restructuring Plan in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Actions 
pursuant to the 2013 Restructuring Plan were substantially complete as of May 31, 2015.  
   
115 
9. 
RESTRUCTURING ACTIVITIES 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Summary of All Plans  
Fiscal 2015 Activity  
   
Fiscal 2014 Activity  
   
   
116 
 
 
Accrued 
May 31, 
2014 
 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 2015 
  
Accrued 
May 31, 
2015 
 
 
Total 
Costs 
Accrued 
to Date  
 
Total 
Expected 
Program 
Costs 
 
(in millions) 
 
 
Initial 
Costs 
  
Adj.  to 
Cost 
  
Cash 
Payments   
Others 
  
 
 
Fiscal 2015 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New software licenses and cloud software subscriptions 
 
$ 
—    
$ 
26    
$ 
1    
$ 
(16 )   
$ 
—    
$ 
11    
$ 
27    
$ 
110   
Software license updates and product support 
 
 
—    
 
7    
 
—    
 
(2 )   
 
—    
 
5    
 
7    
 
209   
Hardware systems business 
 
 
—    
 
22    
 
(2 )   
 
(13 )   
 
(1)   
 
6    
 
20    
 
65   
Services 
 
 
—    
 
21    
 
—    
 
(12 )   
 
—    
 
9    
 
21    
 
101   
General and administrative and other 
 
 
—    
 
27    
 
(2 )   
 
(20 )   
 
—    
 
5    
 
25    
 
141   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total Fiscal 2015 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 
$ 
—    
$ 
103    
$ 
(3 )   
$ 
(63 )   
$ 
(1)   
$ 
36    
$ 
100    
$ 
626   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 
$ 
61    
$ 
128    
$ 
(9 )   
$ 
(138 )   
$ 
(11 )   
$ 
31    
 
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
Total other restructuring plans 
 
$ 
108    
$ 
7    
$ 
(19 )   
$ 
(43 )   
$ 
—    
$ 
53    
 
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
Total restructuring plans 
 
$ 
169    
$ 
238    
$ 
(31 )   
$ 
(244 )   
$ 
(12 )   
$ 
120    
 
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
 
 
Accrued 
May 31, 
2013 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 2014 
  
Accrued 
May 31, 
2014 
 
(in millions) 
 
 
Initial 
Costs 
  
Adj.  to 
Cost 
  
Cash 
Payments   
Others 
  
Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New software licenses and cloud software subscriptions 
 $ 
16    $ 
57    $ 
(8 )   $ 
(55 )   $ 
2    $ 
12   
Software license updates and product support 
 
 
1    
 
11    
 
—    
 
(10 )   
 
3    
 
5   
Hardware systems business 
 
 
24    
 
48    
 
(3 )   
 
(52 )   
 
1    
 
18   
Services 
 
 
18    
 
39    
 
(7 )   
 
(39 )   
 
—    
 
11   
General and administrative and other 
 
 
12    
 
42    
 
(5 )   
 
(39 )   
 
5    
 
15   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 $ 
71    $ 197    $ (23 )   $ (195 )   $ 
11    $ 
61   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total other restructuring plans 
 $ 179    $ 
24    $ (15 )   $ 
(58 )   $ 
(22 )   $ 108   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total restructuring plans 
 $ 250    $ 221    $ (38 )   $ (253 )   $ 
(11 )   $ 169   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
(2) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(1) 
(6) 
(6) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(1) 
(6) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Fiscal 2013 Activity  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Deferred revenues consisted of the following:  
   
Deferred software license updates and product support revenues and deferred hardware systems support revenues represent customer payments 
made in advance for support contracts that are typically billed on a per annum basis in advance with corresponding revenues being recognized 
ratably over the support periods. Deferred services revenues include prepayments for our services business and revenues for these services are 
generally recognized  
   
117 
 
 
Accrued 
May 31, 
2012 
 
 
Year Ended May 31, 2013 
  
Accrued 
May 31, 
2013 
 
(in millions) 
 
 
Initial 
Costs 
  
Adj.  to 
Cost 
  
Cash 
Payments   
Others 
  
Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New software licenses and cloud software subscriptions 
 $ 
—    $ 
85    $ 
(8 )   $ 
(60 )   $ 
(1)   $ 
16   
Software license updates and product support 
 
 
—    
 
13    
 
(6 )   
 
(11 )   
 
5    
 
1   
Hardware systems business 
 
 
—    
 
99    
 
(5 )   
 
(68 )   
 
(2)   
 
24   
Services 
 
 
—    
 
72    
 
(5 )   
 
(50 )   
 
1    
 
18   
General and administrative and other 
 
 
—    
 
81    
 
(1 )   
 
(52 )   
 
(16 )   
 
12   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total Fiscal 2013 Oracle Restructuring Plan 
 $ 
—    $ 350    $ (25 )   $ (241 )   $ 
(13 )   $ 
71   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total other restructuring plans 
 $ 337    $ 
53    $ (26 )   $ (185 )   $ 
—    $ 179   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total restructuring plans 
 $ 337    $ 403    $ (51 )   $ (426 )   $ 
(13 )   $ 250   
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  Restructuring costs recorded for individual line items primarily related to employee severance costs except for general and administrative and other, which also included $46 million 
recorded during fiscal 2013 for facilities related restructuring, contract termination and other costs. 
  The balances at May 31, 2015 and 2014 included $86 million and $100 million, respectively, recorded in other current liabilities, and $34 million and $69 million, respectively, recorded 
in other non-current liabilities. 
 Costs recorded for the respective restructuring plans during the current period presented. 
 All plan adjustments were changes in estimates whereby increases and decreases in costs were generally recorded to operating expenses in the period of adjustments. 
 Represents foreign currency translation and certain other adjustments. 
  Other restructuring plans presented in the tables above included condensed information for other Oracle-based plans and other plans associated with certain of our acquisitions whereby 
we continued to make cash outlays to settle obligations under these plans during the periods presented but for which the periodic impact to our consolidated statements of operations was 
not significant. 
10. 
DEFERRED REVENUES 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
 
Software license updates and product support 
  $    5,635     $    5,909   
Hardware systems support and other 
  
 
703     
 
664   
Services 
  
 
379     
 
364   
Cloud SaaS, PaaS and IaaS 
  
 
404     
 
248   
New software licenses 
  
 
124     
 
84   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Deferred revenues, current 
  
 
7,245     
 
7,269   
Deferred revenues, non-current (in other non-current liabilities) 
  
 
393     
 
404   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total deferred revenues 
  $ 7,638     $
7,673   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(1) 
(6) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
as the services are performed. Deferred cloud software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS) and infrastructure as a service (IaaS) 
revenues generally result from customer payments made in advance for our cloud-based offerings that are recognized over the corresponding 
contractual term. Deferred new software licenses revenues typically result from undelivered products or specified enhancements, customer 
specific acceptance provisions, customer payments made in advance for time-based license arrangements and software license transactions that 
cannot be separated from undelivered consulting or other services.  
In connection with our acquisitions, we have estimated the fair values of the cloud SaaS and PaaS, software license updates and product support, 
and hardware systems support obligations, among others, assumed from our acquired companies. We generally have estimated the fair values of 
these obligations assumed using a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to 
fulfilling the obligations plus a normal profit margin. The sum of the costs and operating profit approximates, in theory, the amount that we 
would be required to pay a third party to assume these acquired obligations. These aforementioned fair value adjustments recorded for 
obligations assumed from our acquisitions reduced the cloud SaaS and PaaS, software license updates and product support and hardware systems 
support deferred revenues balances that we recorded as liabilities from these acquisitions and also reduced the resulting revenues that we 
recognized or will recognize over the terms of the acquired obligations during the post-combination periods.  
   
Fair Value Hedges — Interest Rate Swap Agreements  
In July 2014, we entered into certain interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations 
associated with our 2019 Notes and 2021 Notes so that the interest payable on these senior notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR. 
In July 2013, we entered into certain interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations 
associated with our January 2019 Notes so that the interest payable on these senior notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR. The 
critical terms of the interest rate swap agreements match the critical terms of the 2019 Notes, 2021 Notes and the January 2019 Notes that the 
interest rate swap agreements pertain to, including the notional amounts and maturity dates.  
We have designated the aforementioned interest rate swap agreements as qualifying hedging instruments and are accounting for them as fair 
value hedges pursuant to ASC 815. These transactions are characterized as fair value hedges for financial accounting purposes because they 
protect us against changes in the fair values of certain of our fixed rate borrowings due to benchmark interest rate movements. The changes in 
fair values of these interest rate swap agreements are recognized as interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations with the 
corresponding amounts included in other assets or other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. The amount of net gain (loss) 
attributable to the risk being hedged is recognized as interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations with the corresponding 
amount included in notes payable, non-current. The periodic interest settlements for the interest rate swap agreements for the 2019 Notes, 2021 
Notes and the January 2019 Notes are recorded as interest expense and are included as a part of cash flows from operating activities.  
In July 2014, we settled the fixed to variable interest rate swap agreements associated with the 2014 Notes. We do not use any interest rate swap 
agreements for trading purposes.  
Cash Flow Hedges — Cross Currency Swap Agreements  
In connection with the issuance of our January 2021 Notes, we entered into certain cross-currency swap agreements to manage the related 
foreign currency exchange risk by effectively converting the fixed-rate, Euro denominated January 2021 Notes, including the annual interest 
payments and the payment of principal at maturity, to fixed-rate, U.S. Dollar denominated debt. The economic effect of the swap agreements 
was to eliminate the uncertainty of the cash flows in U.S. Dollars associated with the January 2021 Notes by fixing the  
   
118 
11. 
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
principal amount of the January 2021 Notes at $1.6 billion with a fixed annual interest rate of 3.53%. We have designated these cross-currency 
swap agreements as qualifying hedging instruments and are accounting for these as cash flow hedges pursuant to ASC 815. The critical terms of 
the cross-currency swap agreements correspond to the January 2021 Notes, including the annual interest payments being hedged, and the cross-
currency swap agreements mature at the same time as the January 2021 Notes.  
We used the hypothetical derivative method to measure the effectiveness of our cross-currency swap agreements. The fair values of these cross-
currency swap agreements are recognized as other assets or other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. The effective 
portions of the changes in fair values of these cross-currency swap agreements are reported in accumulated other comprehensive loss in our 
consolidated balance sheets and an amount is reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive loss into non-operating income (expense), net 
in the same period that the carrying value of the Euro denominated January 2021 Notes is remeasured and the interest expense is recognized. The 
ineffective portion of the unrealized gains and losses on these cross-currency swaps, if any, is recorded immediately to non-operating income 
(expense), net. We evaluate the effectiveness of our cross-currency swap agreements on a quarterly basis. We did not record any ineffectiveness 
for fiscal 2015 or 2014. The cash flows related to the cross-currency swap agreements that pertain to the periodic interest settlements are 
classified as operating activities and the cash flows that pertain to the principal balance are classified as financing activities.  
We do not use any cross-currency swap agreements for trading purposes.  
Net Investment Hedge — Foreign Currency Borrowings  
In July 2013, we designated our July 2025 Notes as a net investment hedge of our investments in certain of our international subsidiaries that use 
the Euro as their functional currency in order to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by the changes in foreign currency exchange 
rates of the Euro with respect to the U.S. Dollar.  
We used the spot method to measure the effectiveness of our net investment hedge. Under this method, for each reporting period, the change in 
the carrying value of the Euro denominated July 2025 Notes due to remeasurement of the effective portion is reported in accumulated other 
comprehensive loss on our consolidated balance sheet and the remaining change in the carrying value of the ineffective portion, if any, is 
recognized in non-operating income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations. We evaluate the effectiveness of our net 
investment hedge at the beginning of every quarter. We did not record any ineffectiveness for fiscal 2015 or 2014.  
Foreign Currency Forward Contracts Not Designated as Hedges  
We transact business in various foreign currencies and have established a program that primarily utilizes foreign currency forward contracts to 
offset the risks associated with the effects of certain foreign currency exposures. Under this program, our strategy is to enter into foreign 
currency forward contracts so that increases or decreases in our foreign currency exposures are offset by gains or losses on the foreign currency 
forward contracts in order to mitigate the risks and volatility associated with our foreign currency transactions. We may suspend this program 
from time to time. Our foreign currency exposures typically arise from intercompany sublicense fees, intercompany loans and other 
intercompany transactions that are generally expected to be cash settled in the near term. Our foreign currency forward contracts are generally 
short-term in duration. Our ultimate realized gain or loss with respect to currency fluctuations will generally depend on the size and type of 
cross-currency exposures that we enter into, the currency exchange rates associated with these exposures and changes in those rates, the net 
realized and unrealized gains or losses on foreign currency forward contracts to offset these exposures and other factors.  
   
119 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
We neither use these foreign currency forward contracts for trading purposes nor do we designate these forward contracts as hedging instruments 
pursuant to ASC 815. Accordingly, we recorded the fair values of these contracts as of the end of our reporting period to our consolidated 
balance sheet with changes in fair values recorded to our consolidated statement of operations. The balance sheet classification for the fair values 
of these forward contracts is prepaid expenses and other current assets for a net unrealized gain position and other current liabilities for a net 
unrealized loss position. The statement of operations classification for changes in fair values of these forward contracts is non-operating income 
(expense), net, for both realized and unrealized gains and losses.  
As of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, the notional amounts of the forward contracts we held to purchase U.S. Dollars in exchange for 
other major international currencies were $2.2 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively, and the notional amounts of forward contracts we held to 
sell U.S. Dollars in exchange for other major international currencies were $1.2 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. The fair values of our 
outstanding foreign currency forward contracts were nominal at May 31, 2015 and 2014.  
Included in our non-operating income (expense), net were $60 million, $(69) million and $(64) million of net gains (losses) related to these 
forward contracts for the years ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The cash flows related to these foreign currency contracts are 
classified as operating activities.  
The effects of derivative and non-derivative instruments designated as hedges on certain of our consolidated financial statements were as follows 
as of or for each of the respective periods presented below (amounts presented exclude any income tax effects):  
Fair Values of Derivative and Non-Derivative Instruments Designated as Hedges in Consolidated Balance Sheets  
   
Effects of Derivative and Non-Derivative Instruments Designated as Hedges on Income and Other Comprehensive Income (OCI) or 
Loss (OCL)  
   
   
120 
 
 
May 31, 2015 
  
May 31, 2014 
 
(in millions) 
 Balance Sheet Location  Fair Value   
Balance Sheet Location 
 Fair Value  
Interest rate swap agreements designated as fair value hedges 
 Other assets 
 $ 
74    Other assets 
 $ 
15   
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
Interest rate swap agreements designated as fair value hedges 
 Not applicable 
 $ 
—    Prepaid expenses and other current assets  $ 
8   
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
Cross-currency swap agreements designated as cash flow hedges 
 
Other non-current 
liabilities 
 $ 
(244)   Other assets 
 $ 
74   
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
Foreign currency borrowings designated as net investment hedge 
 
Notes payable, non-
current 
 $ 
(981)   Notes payable, non-current 
 $ 
(1,116)  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
  
Amount of (Loss) Gain Recognized in 
Accumulated OCI or OCL (Effective Portion)   
Location and Amount of (Loss) Gain Reclassified from 
Accumulated OCI or OCL  into Income (Effective Portion) 
 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
  
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
   2015     
 
 
   2014     
  
 
  
   2015     
 
 
   2014      
Cross-currency swap agreements 
designated as cash flow hedges   
$ 
(318 )  
 
$ 
74    
Non-operating income (expense), net   
$ 
(348 )  
 
$ 
69   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Foreign currency borrowings 
designated as net investment 
hedge 
  
$ 
208   
 
$ 
(34)   
Not applicable 
  
$ 
—   
 
$ 
—   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
   
Lease Commitments  
We lease certain facilities, furniture and equipment under operating leases. As of May 31, 2015, future minimum annual operating lease 
payments and future minimum payments to be received from non-cancelable subleases were as follows:  
   
Lease commitments included future minimum rent payments for facilities that we have vacated pursuant to our restructuring and merger 
integration activities, as discussed in Note 9. We have approximately $61 million in facility obligations, net of estimated sublease income and 
other costs, in accrued restructuring for these locations in our consolidated balance sheet at May 31, 2015.  
Rent expense was $290 million, $278 million and $313 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, net of sublease income of 
approximately $45 million, $55 million and $69 million, respectively. Certain lease agreements contain renewal options providing for extensions 
of the lease terms.  
Unconditional Obligations  
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into certain unconditional purchase obligations with our suppliers, which are agreements that are 
enforceable, legally binding and specify terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price 
provisions; and the approximate timing of the payment. We utilize several external manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for our 
hardware products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished hardware products. We also obtain individual components for our 
hardware systems products from a variety of individual suppliers based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments are based 
on our forecasted component and manufacturing requirements and typically provide for fulfillment within agreed upon lead-times and/or 
commercially standard lead-times for the particular part or product and have been included in the amounts below. Routine arrangements for 
other materials and goods that are not related to our external manufacturers and certain other suppliers and that are entered into in the ordinary 
course of business are not included in the amounts below as they are generally entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms 
and are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way.  
   
121 
 
  
Location and Amount of Gain (Loss) 
Recognized in Income on Derivative 
  
Location and Amount of (Loss) Gain on Hedged Item 
Recognized  in Income Attributable to Risk Being Hedged 
 
 
  
 
   
Year Ended May 31, 
  
 
  
Year Ended May 31,  
 
(in millions) 
  
 
   
   2015       
   2014       
 
  
2015 
 
 
2014  
Interest rate swap agreements designated as fair value hedges   
 Interest expense     
$ 
51     
$ 
(18 )   
Interest expense 
  
$ 
(51 )   
$ 
18   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
12. 
COMMITMENTS AND CERTAIN CONTINGENCIES 
(in millions) 
  
 
 
Fiscal 2016 
  
$
330   
Fiscal 2017 
  
 
270   
Fiscal 2018 
  
 
209   
Fiscal 2019 
  
 
156   
Fiscal 2020 
  
 
107   
Thereafter 
  
 
175   
   
   
   
  
Future minimum operating lease payments 
  
 
1,247   
Less: minimum payments to be received from non-cancelable subleases 
  
 
(71 )  
   
   
   
  
Total future minimum operating lease payments, net 
  
$    1,176   
   
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
As of May 31, 2015, our unconditional purchase and certain other obligations were as follows (in millions):  
   
As described in Note 8 and Note 11 above, as of May 31, 2015 we have senior notes of $42.0 billion that mature at various future dates and 
derivative financial instruments outstanding that we leverage to manage certain risks and exposures.  
Guarantees  
Our software, cloud and hardware systems product sales agreements generally include certain provisions for indemnifying customers against 
liabilities if our products infringe a third party’s intellectual property rights. To date, we have not incurred any material costs as a result of such 
indemnifications and have not accrued any material liabilities related to such obligations in our consolidated financial statements. Certain of our 
product sales agreements also include provisions indemnifying customers against liabilities in the event we breach confidentiality or service 
level requirements. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount under these indemnification agreements due to our limited and 
infrequent history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.  
Our software license and hardware systems products agreements also generally include a warranty that our products will substantially operate as 
described in the applicable program documentation for a period of one year after delivery. Our software as a service, platform as a service and 
infrastructure as a service agreements generally include a warranty that the cloud services will be performed in all material respects as defined in 
the agreement during the service period. We also warrant that services we perform will be provided in a manner consistent with industry 
standards for a period of 90 days from performance of the services.  
We occasionally are required, for various reasons, to enter into financial guarantees with third parties in the ordinary course of our 
business including, among others, guarantees related to foreign exchange trades, taxes, import licenses and letters of credit on behalf of parties 
with whom we conduct business. Such agreements have not had a material effect on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows.  
   
Stock Repurchases  
Our Board of Directors has approved a program for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. On September 18, 2014, we announced that 
our Board of Directors approved an expansion of our stock repurchase program by an additional $13.0 billion. Approximately $9.2 billion 
remained available for stock repurchases as of May 31, 2015, pursuant to our stock repurchase program. We repurchased 193.7 million shares 
for $8.1 billion (including 2.2 million shares for $95 million that were repurchased but not settled), 280.4 million shares for $9.8 billion and 
346.1 million shares for $11.0 billion in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, under the stock repurchase program.  
Our stock repurchase authorization does not have an expiration date and the pace of our repurchase activity will depend on factors such as our 
working capital needs, our cash requirements for acquisitions and dividend payments, our debt repayment obligations or repurchase of our debt, 
our stock price, and economic and market  
   
122 
Fiscal 2016 
  
$
713   
Fiscal 2017 
  
 
195   
Fiscal 2018 
  
 
124   
Fiscal 2019 
  
 
85   
Fiscal 2020 
  
 
64   
Thereafter 
  
 
—   
   
   
   
  
Total 
  
$    1,181   
   
   
   
  
13. 
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to time through open market purchases or pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan. Our 
stock repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.  
Dividends on Common Stock  
During fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, our Board of Directors declared cash dividends of $0.51, $0.48 and $0.30 per share of our outstanding 
common stock, respectively, which we paid during the same period.  
In June 2015, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.15 per share of our outstanding common stock payable on July 29, 
2015 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on July 8, 2015. Future declarations of dividends and the establishment of future record 
and payment dates are subject to the final determination of our Board of Directors.  
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss  
The following table summarizes, as of each balance sheet date, the components of our accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of income 
taxes:  
   
   
Stock-based Compensation Plans  
Stock Plans  
In fiscal 2001, we adopted the 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan, which provides for the issuance of non-qualified stock options and 
incentive stock options, as well as stock purchase rights, stock appreciation rights, and long-term performance awards, including restricted stock-
based awards, to our eligible employees, officers and directors who are also employees or consultants, independent consultants and advisers. In 
fiscal 2011, our stockholders, upon the recommendation of our Board of Directors (the Board), approved the adoption of the Amended and 
Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan (the 2000 Plan), which extended the termination date of the 2000 Plan by ten years and 
increased the number of authorized shares of stock that may be issued by 388,313,015 shares. In fiscal 2014, our stockholders, upon the 
recommendation of our Board, approved a further increase in the number of authorized shares of stock that may be issued under the 2000 Plan 
by 305,000,000 shares.  
Under the terms of the 2000 Plan, options to purchase common stock are granted at not less than fair market value, become exercisable as 
established by the Compensation Committee of the Board (generally 25% annually over four years under our current practice) and generally 
expire no more than ten years from the date of grant. Long-term full value awards are granted in the form of restricted stock units (RSUs) and 
performance stock units (PSUs). The vesting schedule for RSUs is established by the Compensation Committee and generally requires vesting 
25% annually over four years. The vesting schedule for PSUs is also established by the Compensation Committee and currently requires vesting 
over four fiscal years, if at all, based on relative performance. For each share granted as a full value award under the 2000 Plan, an equivalent of 
2.5 shares is deducted from our pool of shares available for grant. As of May 31, 2015, the 2000 Plan had stock options to purchase 401 million 
shares of common stock outstanding of which 215 million shares were vested, 24 million unvested RSUs outstanding and  
   
123 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
 
Foreign currency translation losses and other, net 
  
$ (851 )   
$
(81 )  
Unrealized losses on defined benefit plans, net 
  
    (304 )   
    (153 )  
Unrealized gains on marketable securities, net 
  
 
124    
 
65   
Unrealized gains on cash flow hedges, net 
  
 
35    
 
5   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total accumulated other comprehensive loss 
  
$ (996 )   
$
(164)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
14. 
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
3 million unvested PSUs outstanding. As of May 31, 2015, approximately 409 million shares of common stock were available for future awards 
under the 2000 Plan. To date, we have not issued any stock purchase rights or stock appreciation rights under the 2000 Plan.  
In fiscal 1993, the Board adopted the 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan (the Directors’ Plan), which provides for the issuance of non-qualified stock 
options and other stock-based awards, including RSUs, to non-employee directors. The Directors’ Plan has from time to time been amended and 
restated. Under the terms of the Directors’ Plan, 10 million shares of common stock are reserved for issuance (including a fiscal 2013 
amendment to increase the number of shares of our common stock reserved for issuance by 2 million shares). Options are granted at not less than 
fair market value, vest over four years, and expire no more than ten years from the date of grant. RSUs granted under the Directors’ Plan also 
vest over four years. The Directors’ Plan provides for automatic grants of stock awards to each non-employee director upon first becoming a 
director and thereafter on an annual basis, as well as automatic nondiscretionary grants for chairing or vice chairing certain Board committees. 
The Board will determine the particular terms of any such stock awards at the time of grant, but the terms will be consistent with those of stock 
awards granted under the Directors’ Plan with respect to vesting or forfeiture schedules and treatment on termination of status as a director. As 
of May 31, 2015, options to purchase approximately 4 million shares of common stock (of which approximately 2 million were vested) and 
64,000 unvested RSUs were outstanding under the 1993 Directors’ Plan. As of May 31, 2015, approximately 2 million shares were available for 
future stock awards under this plan.  
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, we assumed certain outstanding stock options and other restricted stock-based awards under each 
acquired company’s respective stock plans. These stock options and other restricted stock-based awards generally retain all of the rights, terms 
and conditions of the respective plans under which they were originally granted. As of May 31, 2015, stock options to purchase 8 million shares 
of common stock and 1 million shares of restricted stock-based awards were outstanding under these plans.  
The following table summarizes stock option activity and includes awards granted pursuant to Oracle-based stock plans and stock plans assumed 
from our acquisitions for our last three fiscal years ended May 31, 2015:  
   
   
124 
 
  
Options Outstanding 
 
(in millions, except exercise price) 
  
Shares Under 
Option 
  
Weighted 
Average  
Exercise Price  
Balance, May 31, 2012 
  
 
422    
$ 
22.66   
Granted 
  
 
119    
$ 
29.90   
Assumed 
  
 
9    
$ 
32.52   
Exercised 
  
 
(83 )   
$ 
17.38   
Canceled 
  
 
(20 )   
$ 
28.94   
   
   
   
  
  
Balance, May 31, 2013 
  
 
447    
$ 
25.48   
Granted 
  
 
131    
$ 
31.02   
Assumed 
  
 
5    
$ 
9.02   
Exercised 
  
 
(95 )   
$ 
21.51   
Canceled 
  
 
(26 )   
$ 
30.60   
   
   
   
  
  
Balance, May 31, 2014 
  
 
462    
$ 
27.37   
Granted 
  
 
34    
$ 
40.54   
Assumed 
  
 
3    
$ 
21.98   
Exercised 
  
 
(70 )   
$ 
24.49   
Canceled 
  
 
(16 )   
$ 
33.76   
   
   
   
  
  
Balance, May 31, 2015 
  
 
413    
$ 
28.64   
   
   
   
  
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Options outstanding that have vested and that are expected to vest as of May 31, 2015 were as follows:  
   
   
Restricted stock-based award activity and the number of restricted stock-based awards outstanding were not significant prior to fiscal 2015. The 
following table summarizes restricted stock-based awards activity, including service-based awards and performance-based awards and including 
awards granted pursuant to Oracle-based stock plans and stock plans assumed from our acquisitions for our fiscal year ended May 31, 2015:  
   
The total grant date fair value of restricted stock-based awards that vested in fiscal 2015 was $28 million. As of May 31, 2015, total 
unrecognized stock compensation expense related to non-vested restricted stock-based awards was $774 million and is expected to be recognized 
over the remaining weighted-average vesting period of 3.22 years.  
In fiscal 2015, 3 million PSUs were granted which vest upon the attainment of certain performance metrics and service-based vesting. Based 
upon actual attainment relative to the “target” performance metric, certain participants have the ability to be issued up to 150% of the target 
number of PSUs originally granted, or to be issued no PSUs at all. As of May 31, 2015, no PSUs had vested and 3 million remained outstanding. 
   
125 
 
  
Outstanding 
Options 
(in millions)    
Weighted
Average 
Exercise 
Price 
   
Weighted 
Average  
Remaining 
Contract Term 
(in years) 
   
In-the-Money 
Options as of 
May 31, 2015 
(in millions)    
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value 
(in millions)  
Vested 
  
 
223    
$ 25.53     
 
5.07    
 
222     
$ 
4,034   
Expected to vest 
  
 
175    
$ 32.17     
 
7.77    
 
175     
 
1,986   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total 
  
 
398    
$ 28.45     
 
6.26    
 
397     
$ 
6,020   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  The aggregate intrinsic value was calculated based on the gross difference between our closing stock price on the last trading day of fiscal 2015 of $43.49 and the exercise prices for all 
“in-the-money” options outstanding, excluding tax effects. 
  The unrecognized compensation expense calculated under the fair value method for shares expected to vest (unvested shares net of expected forfeitures) as of May 31, 2015 was 
approximately $804 million and is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.16 years. Approximately 15 million shares outstanding as of May 31, 2015 were not 
expected to vest. 
 
  
Restricted Stock-Based Awards Outstanding 
 
(in millions, except fair value) 
  
     Number of      
Shares 
  
     Weighted Average       
Grant Date  
Fair Value 
 
Balance, May 31, 2014 
  
 
1    
$ 
35.29   
Granted 
  
 
28    
$ 
40.73   
Canceled 
  
 
(1 )  
$ 
39.52   
   
   
   
  
  
Balance, May 31, 2015 
  
 
28    
$ 
40.63   
   
   
   
  
  
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Stock-Based Compensation Expense and Valuation of Stock Awards  
We estimated the fair values of our stock options using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, which was developed for use in 
estimating the fair values of stock options. Option valuation models, including the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, require the input 
of assumptions, including stock price volatility. Changes in the input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimates and ultimately 
how much we recognize as stock-based compensation expense. The fair values of our stock options were estimated at the grant dates or at the 
acquisition dates for options assumed in a business combination. The weighted average input assumptions used and resulting fair values of our 
stock options were as follows for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013:  
   
The expected life input is based on historical exercise patterns and post-vesting termination behavior, the risk-free interest rate input is based on 
U.S. Treasury instruments, the annualized dividend yield input is based on the per share dividend declared by our Board of Directors and the 
volatility input is calculated based on the implied volatility of our publicly traded options.  
We estimated the fair values of our restricted stock-based awards that are solely subject to service-based vesting requirements based upon their 
intrinsic values as of the grant dates.  
The fair values of our PSUs were also measured at their intrinsic values as of their respective grant dates. The vesting conditions and related 
terms of our PSUs were communicated to each participating employee as of their respective grant dates and included attainment metrics that 
were defined, fixed, and based upon consistent U.S. GAAP metrics or internal metrics that are defined, fixed and consistently determined, and 
that require the employee to render service. Therefore, these awards meet the performance-based award classification criteria as defined within 
ASC 718.  
Stock-based compensation is included in the following operating expense line items in our consolidated statements of operations:  
   
   
126 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
   2015        
   2014       
   2013      
Expected life (in years) 
  
 
5.1    
 
4.9     
 
5.0   
Risk-free interest rate 
  
 1.7%    
 1.3%     
 0.7%   
Volatility 
  
 23%    
 27%     
 31%   
Dividend yield 
  
 1.2%    
 1.5%     
 0.8%   
Weighted-average fair value per share 
  
$ 9.62    
$ 7.47     
$ 7.99   
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
   2015       
   2014       
   2013     
Sales and marketing 
  
$ 180    
$ 165    
$ 137   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service 
  
 
10    
 
8    
 
10   
Cloud infrastructure as a service 
  
 
5    
 
4    
 
8   
Software license updates and product support 
  
 
21    
 
22    
 
20   
Hardware systems products 
  
 
6    
 
5    
 
3   
Hardware systems support 
  
 
6    
 
6    
 
5   
Services 
  
 
30    
 
29    
 
23   
Research and development 
  
 
522    
 
385    
 
352   
General and administrative 
  
 
148    
 
171    
 
164   
Acquisition related and other 
  
 
5    
 
10    
 
33   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total stock-based compensation 
  
 
933    
 
805    
 
755   
Estimated income tax benefit included in provision for income taxes 
  
 (294 )  
 (260 )   
 (243)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total stock-based compensation, net of estimated income tax benefit 
  
$ 639    
$ 545    
$ 512   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Tax Benefits from Exercise of Stock Options and Vesting of Restricted Stock-Based Awards  
Total cash received as a result of option exercises was approximately $1.7 billion, $2.0 billion and $1.4 billion for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
respectively. The aggregate intrinsic value of options exercised and vesting of restricted stock-based awards was $1.3 billion, $1.5 billion and 
$1.3 billion for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In connection with these exercises and vesting of restricted stock-based awards, the tax 
benefits realized by us were $396 million, $480 million and $410 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Of the total tax benefits 
received, we classified excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation of $244 million, $250 million and $241 million as cash flows from 
financing activities rather than cash flows from operating activities for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.  
Employee Stock Purchase Plan  
We have an Employee Stock Purchase Plan (Purchase Plan) that allows employees to purchase shares of common stock at a price per share that 
is 95% of the fair market value of Oracle stock as of the end of the semi-annual option period. As of May 31, 2015, 57 million shares were 
reserved for future issuances under the Purchase Plan. We issued 3 million shares under the Purchase Plan in each of fiscal 2015, fiscal 2014 and 
fiscal 2013.  
Defined Contribution and Other Postretirement Plans  
We offer various defined contribution plans for our U.S. and non-U.S. employees. Total defined contribution plan expense was $362 million, 
$357 million and $353 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The number of plan participants in our benefit plans has generally 
increased in recent years primarily as a result of additional eligible employees from our acquisitions.  
In the United States, regular employees can participate in the Oracle Corporation 401(k) Savings and Investment Plan (Oracle 401(k) Plan). 
Participants can generally contribute up to 40% of their eligible compensation on a per-pay-period basis as defined by the Oracle 401(k) Plan 
document or by the section 402(g) limit as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS). We match a portion of employee 
contributions, currently 50% up to 6% of compensation each pay period, subject to maximum aggregate matching amounts. Our contributions to 
the Oracle 401(k) Plan, net of forfeitures, were $144 million, $134 million and $129 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.  
We also offer non-qualified deferred compensation plans to certain key employees whereby they may defer a portion of their annual base and/or 
variable compensation until retirement or a date specified by the employee in accordance with the plans. Deferred compensation plan assets and 
liabilities were each approximately $408 million as of May 31, 2015 and were each approximately $367 million as of May 31, 2014 and were 
presented in other assets and other non-current liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.  
We sponsor certain defined benefit pension plans that are offered primarily by certain of our foreign subsidiaries. Many of these plans were 
assumed through our acquisitions or are required by local regulatory requirements. We may deposit funds for these plans with insurance 
companies, third party trustees, or into government-managed accounts consistent with local regulatory requirements, as applicable. Our total 
defined benefit plan pension expenses were $69 million, $64 million and $81 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The aggregate 
projected benefit obligation and aggregate net liability (funded status) of our defined benefit plans as of May 31, 2015 was $1.0 billion and $599 
million, respectively, and as of May 31, 2014 was $853 million and $436 million, respectively.  
   
127 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
The following is a geographical breakdown of income before the provision for income taxes:  
   
The provision for income taxes consisted of the following:  
   
The provision for income taxes differed from the amount computed by applying the federal statutory rate to our income before provision for 
income taxes as follows:  
   
   
128 
15. 
INCOME TAXES 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Domestic 
  $ 
5,136    $ 
5,397     $ 
6,614   
Foreign 
   
7,698     
8,307      
7,284   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Income before provision for income taxes 
  $    12,834    $    13,704     $    13,898   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Current provision: 
  
 
 
Federal 
  $    2,153    $    1,613    $    1,720   
State 
  
 
310    
 
337    
 
254   
Foreign 
  
 
981    
 
1,047    
 
1,116   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total current provision 
  $ 3,444    $ 2,997    $
3,090   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Deferred benefit: 
  
 
 
Federal 
  $ 
(408 )  $ 
(68 )   $
(179)  
State 
  
 
(46 )  
 
(100)   
 
82   
Foreign 
  
 
(94 )  
 
(80 )   
 
(20 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total deferred benefit 
  $ 
(548 )  $ 
(248)   $
(117)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total provision for income taxes 
  $ 2,896    $ 2,749    $
2,973   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Effective income tax rate 
  
 22.6%    
 20.1%    
 21.4%   
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Tax provision at statutory rate 
  $    4,492    $    4,796    $    4,865   
Foreign earnings at other than United States rates 
  
 (1,627 )  
 (1,790 )   
 (1,637 )  
State tax expense, net of federal benefit 
  
 
176    
 
154    
 
299   
Settlements and releases from judicial decisions and statute expirations, net 
  
 
(85 )  
 
(168)   
 
(144)  
Domestic production activity deduction 
  
 
(188 )  
 
(174)   
 
(155)  
Other, net 
  
 
128    
 
(69 )   
 
(255)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total provision for income taxes 
  $ 2,896    $ 2,749    $
2,973   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
The components of our deferred tax liabilities and assets were as follows:  
   
We provide for United States income taxes on the undistributed earnings and the other outside basis temporary differences of foreign 
subsidiaries unless they are considered indefinitely reinvested outside the United States. At May 31, 2015, the amount of temporary differences 
related to undistributed earnings and other outside basis temporary differences of investments in foreign subsidiaries upon which United States 
income taxes have not been provided was approximately $38.0 billion and $8.4 billion, respectively. If these undistributed earnings were 
repatriated to the United States, or if the other outside basis differences were recognized in a taxable transaction, they would generate foreign tax 
credits that would reduce the federal tax liability associated with the foreign dividend or the otherwise taxable transaction. At May 31, 2015, 
assuming a full utilization of the foreign tax credits, the potential net deferred tax liability associated with these temporary differences of 
undistributed earnings and other outside basis temporary differences would be approximately $11.8 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively.  
Our net deferred tax assets were $993 million and $1.4 billion as of May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. We believe it is more likely than not 
that the net deferred tax assets will be realized in the foreseeable future. Realization of our net deferred tax assets is dependent upon our 
generation of sufficient taxable income in future years in appropriate tax jurisdictions to obtain benefit from the reversal of temporary 
differences, net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards. The amount of net deferred tax assets considered realizable is subject 
to adjustment in future periods if estimates of future taxable income change.  
   
129 
 
  
May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
 
Deferred tax liabilities: 
  
 
Unrealized gain on stock 
  
$ 
(130 )  
$
(130)  
Acquired intangible assets 
  
 (1,879 )  
 (1,804 )  
Unremitted earnings 
  
 
(646 )  
 
(510)  
Other 
  
 
(11 )  
 
—   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total deferred tax liabilities 
  
$ (2,666 )  
$ (2,444 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Deferred tax assets: 
  
 
Accruals and allowances 
  
$ 
421    
$
440   
Employee compensation and benefits 
  
    1,123    
 
1,062   
Differences in timing of revenue recognition 
  
 
335    
 
210   
Depreciation and amortization 
  
 
155    
 
243   
Tax credit and net operating loss carryforwards 
  
 
2,649    
    2,810   
Other 
  
 
—    
 
96   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total deferred tax assets 
  
$ 4,683    
$
4,861   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Valuation allowance 
  
$ (1,024 )  
$ (1,053 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net deferred tax assets 
  
$ 
993    
$
1,364   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Recorded as: 
  
 
Current deferred tax assets 
  
$ 
663    
$
914   
Non-current deferred tax assets 
  
 
795    
 
837   
Current deferred tax liabilities (in other current liabilities) 
  
 
(85 )  
 
(129)  
Non-current deferred tax liabilities (in other non-current liabilities) 
  
 
(380 )  
 
(258)  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Net deferred tax assets 
  
$ 
993    
$
1,364   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
The valuation allowance was $1.0 billion and $1.1 billion at May 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. Substantially all of the valuation allowances 
as of May 31, 2015 and 2014 relate to tax assets established in purchase accounting. Any subsequent reduction of that portion of the valuation 
allowance and the recognition of the associated tax benefits associated with our acquisitions will be recorded to our provision for income taxes 
subsequent to our final determination of the valuation allowance or the conclusion of the measurement period (as defined above), whichever 
comes first.  
At May 31, 2015, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $958 million. These losses expire in various years between 
fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2034, and are subject to limitations on their utilization. We had state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately 
$2.9 billion at May 31, 2015, which expire between fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2034, and are subject to limitations on their utilization. We had total 
foreign net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $1.6 billion at May 31, 2015, which are subject to limitations on their utilization. 
Approximately $1.4 billion of these foreign net operating losses are not currently subject to expiration dates. The remainder of the foreign net 
operating losses, approximately $216 million, expire between fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2035. We had tax credit carryforwards of approximately 
$904 million at May 31, 2015, which are subject to limitations on their utilization. Approximately $573 million of these tax credit carryforwards 
are not currently subject to expiration dates. The remainder of the tax credit carryforwards, approximately $331 million, expire in various years 
between fiscal 2016 and fiscal 2034.  
We classify our unrecognized tax benefits as either current or non-current income taxes payable in the accompanying consolidated balance 
sheets. The aggregate changes in the balance of our gross unrecognized tax benefits, including acquisitions, were as follows:  
   
As of May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, $2.8 billion, $2.6 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively, of unrecognized benefits would affect our effective 
tax rate if recognized. We recognized interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in our provision for income taxes line of our 
consolidated statements of operations of $102 million, $24 million and $31 million during fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Interest and 
penalties accrued as of May 31, 2015 and 2014 were $756 million and $693 million, respectively.  
Domestically, U.S. federal and state taxing authorities are currently examining income tax returns of Oracle and various acquired entities for 
years through fiscal 2013. Many issues are at an advanced stage in the examination process, the most significant of which include the 
deductibility of certain royalty payments, transfer pricing, extraterritorial income exemptions, domestic production activity, foreign tax credits, 
and research and development credits taken. Other issues are related to years with expiring statutes of limitation. With all of these domestic audit 
issues considered in the aggregate, we believe it was reasonably possible that, as of May 31, 2015, the gross unrecognized tax benefits related to 
these audits could decrease (whether by payment, release, or a combination of both) in the next 12 months by as much as $426 million ($358 
million net of offsetting tax benefits). Our U.S. federal and, with some exceptions, our state income tax returns have been examined for all years 
prior to fiscal 2003 and we are no longer subject to audit for those periods.  
   
130 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Gross unrecognized tax benefits as of June 1 
  $ 3,838    $ 3,601    $
3,276   
Increases related to tax positions from prior fiscal years 
  
 
119    
 
94    
 
279   
Decreases related to tax positions from prior fiscal years 
  
 
(17 )  
 
(116)   
 
(125)  
Increases related to tax positions taken during current fiscal year 
  
 
316    
 
307    
 
312   
Settlements with tax authorities 
  
 
(30 )  
 
(2)   
 
(71 )  
Lapses of statutes of limitation 
  
 
(54 )  
 
(53 )   
 
(71 )  
Cumulative translation adjustments and other, net 
  
 
(134 )  
 
7    
 
1   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total gross unrecognized tax benefits as of May 31 
  $    4,038    $    3,838    $    3,601   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Internationally, tax authorities for numerous non-U.S. jurisdictions are also examining returns affecting our unrecognized tax benefits. We 
believe it was reasonably possible that, as of May 31, 2015, the gross unrecognized tax benefits, could decrease (whether by payment, release, or 
a combination of both) by as much as $172 million ($86 million net of offsetting tax benefits) in the next 12 months, related primarily to transfer 
pricing. Other issues are related to years with expiring statutes of limitation. With some exceptions, we are generally no longer subject to tax 
examinations in non-U.S. jurisdictions for years prior to fiscal 1997.  
We believe that we have adequately provided under U.S. GAAP for outcomes related to our tax audits. However, there can be no assurances as 
to the possible outcomes or any attendant financial statement effect thereof.  
   
ASC 280, Segment Reporting , establishes standards for reporting information about operating segments. Operating segments are defined as 
components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision 
maker, or decision making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. Our chief operating decision makers are 
our Chief Executive Officers. We are organized geographically and by line of business. While our Chief Executive Officers evaluate results in a 
number of different ways, the line of business management structure is the primary basis for which the allocation of resources and financial 
results are assessed.  
We have three businesses—software and cloud, hardware systems and services—which are further divided into certain operating segments. Our 
software and cloud business is comprised of three operating segments: (1) new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions, which 
includes our cloud SaaS and PaaS offerings, (2) cloud infrastructure as a service and (3) software license updates and product support. Our 
hardware systems business is comprised of two operating segments: (1) hardware systems products and (2) hardware systems support. All other 
operating segments are combined under our services business.  
Our new software licenses and cloud software subscriptions line of business markets, sells and delivers our application and platform 
technologies, including our SaaS and PaaS offerings (our SaaS and PaaS offerings are collectively referred to as cloud software subscriptions), 
which provide customers a choice of software applications and platforms that are delivered via a cloud-based IT environment that we host, 
manage and support, and the licensing of our software products including Oracle Applications, Oracle Database, Oracle Fusion Middleware and 
Java, among others.  
The cloud infrastructure as a service line of business provides comprehensive software and hardware management and maintenance services for 
customer IT infrastructure for a fee for a stated term that is hosted at our Oracle data center facilities, select partner data centers or physically on-
premises at customer facilities; deployment and management offerings for our software and hardware and related IT infrastructure including 
virtual machine instances that are subscription-based and designed for computing and reliable and secure object storage; and certain of our 
Oracle Engineered Systems and related support offerings that are deployed in our customers’ data centers for a monthly fee.  
The software license updates and product support line of business provides customers with rights to software product upgrades and maintenance 
releases, patches released, internet access to technical content, as well as internet and telephone access to technical support personnel during the 
support period.  
The hardware systems products line of business provides Oracle Engineered Systems, servers, storage, networking, industry specific hardware, 
virtualization software, operating systems including the Oracle Solaris Operating System and management software to support diverse IT 
environments, including cloud computing environments.  
Our hardware systems support line of business provides customers with software updates for the software components that are essential to the 
functionality of our hardware products, such as Oracle Solaris and certain other software products, and can include product repairs, maintenance 
services and technical support services.  
   
131 
16. 
SEGMENT INFORMATION 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Our services business is comprised of the remainder of our operating segments and offers consulting, advanced customer support services and 
education services. Our consulting line of business primarily provides services to customers in business and IT strategy alignment, enterprise 
architecture planning and design, initial product implementation and integration and ongoing product enhancements and upgrades. Advanced 
customer support provides support services, both on-premises and remote, to our customers to enable increased performance and higher 
availability of their products and services. Education services provide training to customers, partners and employees as a part of our mission of 
accelerating the adoption and use of our software and hardware products and to create opportunities to grow our product revenues.  
We do not track our assets by operating segments. Consequently, it is not practical to show assets by operating segment.  
The following table presents summary results for each of our three businesses and for the operating segments of our software and cloud and 
hardware systems businesses:  
   
   
132 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
New software licenses and cloud software subscriptions: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 10,025     
$ 10,542     
$ 10,350   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service expenses 
  
 
742     
 
437     
 
313   
Sales and distribution expenses 
  
 
5,812     
 
5,666     
 
5,227   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 3,471     
$ 4,439     
$ 4,810   
Cloud infrastructure as a service: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 
608     
$ 
456     
$ 
457   
Cloud infrastructure as a service expenses 
  
 
329     
 
304     
 
296   
Sales and distribution expenses 
  
 
89     
 
61    
 
61   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 
190     
$ 
91     
$ 
100   
Software license updates and product support: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 18,858     
$ 18,209     
$ 17,156   
Software license updates and product support expenses 
  
 
1,130     
 
1,111     
 
1,120   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 17,728     
$ 17,098     
$ 16,036   
Total software and cloud business: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 29,491     
$ 29,207     
$ 27,963   
Expenses 
  
 
8,102     
 
7,579     
 
7,017   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 21,389     
$ 21,628     
$ 20,946   
Hardware systems products: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 2,825     
$ 2,976     
$ 3,033   
Hardware systems products expenses 
  
 
1,465     
 
1,516     
 
1,498   
Sales and distribution expenses 
  
 
864     
 
940     
 
885   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 
496     
$ 
520     
$ 
650   
Hardware systems support: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 2,384     
$ 2,407     
$ 2,327   
Hardware systems support expenses 
  
 
783     
 
802     
 
857   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 1,601     
$ 1,605     
$ 1,470   
Total hardware systems business: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 5,209     
$ 5,383     
$ 5,360   
Expenses 
  
 
3,112     
 
3,258     
 
3,240   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 2,097     
$ 2,125     
$ 2,120   
Total services business: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 3,553     
$ 3,716     
$ 3,930   
Services expenses 
  
 
2,818     
 
2,822     
 
3,051   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$ 
735     
$ 
894     
$ 
879   
Totals: 
  
  
  
Revenues 
  
$ 38,253     
$ 38,306     
$ 37,253   
Expenses 
  
 14,032     
 13,659     
 13,308   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Margin 
  
$  24,221     
$  24,647     
$  23,945   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
(1) 
(2) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(2) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
   
The following table reconciles total operating segment revenues to total revenues as well as total operating segment margin to income before 
provision for income taxes:  
   
   
133 
  New software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues for management reporting included revenues related to cloud SaaS and PaaS contracts that would have otherwise been 
recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities but were not recognized in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations in the amounts of $12 million, $17 million 
and $45 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Software license updates and product support revenues for management reporting included revenues related to software 
support contracts that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities but were not recognized in the accompanying consolidated statements of 
operations in the amounts of $11 million, $3 million and $14 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In addition, we did not recognize hardware systems support revenues 
related to hardware systems support contracts that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities in the amounts of $4 million, $11 million and 
$14 million for fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. See Note 10 for an explanation of these adjustments and the table below for a reconciliation of our total operating segment 
revenues to our total revenues. Our new software license and services revenues for management reporting also differ from amounts reported per our consolidated statements of operations 
for the periods presented due to certain insignificant reclassifications between these lines for management reporting purposes. 
  The margins reported reflect only the direct controllable costs of each line of business and do not include allocations of product development, marketing and partner programs, and 
corporate, general and administrative and information technology expenses. Additionally, the margins reported do not reflect amortization of intangible assets, acquisition related and 
other expenses, restructuring expenses, stock-based compensation, interest expense or certain other income (expense), net. 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions) 
  
2015 
  
2014 
  
2013 
 
Total revenues for operating segments 
  $ 38,253    $ 38,306    $ 37,253   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service revenues 
  
 
(12 )  
 
(17 )   
 
(45 )  
Software license updates and product support revenues 
  
 
(11 )  
 
(3)   
 
(14 )  
Hardware systems support revenues 
  
 
(4 )  
 
(11 )   
 
(14 )  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total revenues 
  $ 38,226    $ 38,275    $ 37,180   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Total margin for operating segments 
  $ 24,221    $ 24,647    $ 23,945   
Cloud software as a service and platform as a service revenues 
  
 
(12 )  
 
(17 )   
 
(45 )  
Software license updates and product support revenues 
  
 
(11 )  
 
(3)   
 
(14 )  
Hardware systems support revenues 
  
 
(4 )  
 
(11 )   
 
(14 )  
Product development 
  
 (4,812 )  
 (4,590 )   
 (4,321 )  
Marketing and partner program expenses 
  
 
(520 )  
 
(564)   
 
(591)  
Corporate, general and administrative and information technology expenses 
  
 (1,496 )  
 (1,384 )   
 (1,421 )  
Amortization of intangible assets 
  
 (2,149 )  
 (2,300 )   
 (2,385 )  
Acquisition related and other 
  
 
(211 )  
 
(41 )   
 
604   
Restructuring 
  
 
(207 )  
 
(183)   
 
(352)  
Stock-based compensation 
  
 
(928 )  
 
(795)   
 
(722)  
Interest expense 
  
 (1,143 )  
 
(914)   
 
(797)  
Non-operating income (expense), net 
  
 
106    
 
(141)   
 
11   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
Income before provision for income taxes 
  $  12,834    $  13,704    $  13,898   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  New software licenses and cloud software subscriptions revenues, software license updates and product support revenues and hardware systems support revenues for management 
reporting included revenues that would have otherwise been recorded by our acquired businesses as independent entities but were not recognized in the accompanying consolidated 
statements of operations for the periods presented due to business combination accounting requirements. Refer to footnote one to our business and operating segments summary results 
table above in this Note 16 for additional information. 
(1) 
(2) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
Geographic Information  
Disclosed in the table below is geographic information for each country that comprised greater than three percent of our total revenues for any of 
fiscal 2015, 2014 or 2013.  
   
   
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing net income for the period by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding 
during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing net income for the period by the weighted average number of common 
shares outstanding during the period, plus the dilutive effect of outstanding stock options, restricted stock-based awards and shares issuable 
under the employee stock purchase plan using the treasury stock method. The following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted 
earnings per share:  
   
   
Hewlett-Packard Company Litigation  
On June 15, 2011, Hewlett-Packard Company (“HP”) filed a complaint in the California Superior Court, County of Santa Clara against Oracle 
Corporation alleging numerous causes of action including breach of contract,  
   
134 
 
  
As of and for the Year Ended May 31, 
 
 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
(in millions) 
  
Revenues    
Long  Lived 
Assets 
   
Revenues    
Long  Lived 
Assets 
   
Revenues    
Long  Lived 
Assets 
 
United States 
  $ 17,325     $ 
3,341     $ 16,809     $ 
2,993     $ 16,003    $ 
2,921   
United Kingdom 
   
2,388      
309     
 
2,309     
 
236      
2,165    
 
203   
Germany 
   
1,466      
33     
 
1,483     
 
35      
1,308    
 
44   
Japan 
   
1,433      
338     
 
1,558     
 
414      
1,770    
 
428   
Canada 
   
1,286      
58     
 
1,190     
 
31      
1,232    
 
34   
France 
   
1,044      
33     
 
1,148     
 
28      
1,054    
 
17   
Other countries 
   13,284      
1,007     
 13,778     
 
879      13,648    
 
868   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total 
  $  38,226     $  5,119     $  38,275     $  4,616     $  37,180    $  4,515   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
 Long-lived assets exclude goodwill, intangible assets, equity investments and deferred taxes, which are not allocated to specific geographic locations as it is impracticable to do so. 
17. 
EARNINGS PER SHARE 
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(in millions, except per share data) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
 
Net income 
  
$  9,938     
$  10,955     
$  10,925   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Weighted average common shares outstanding 
  
 4,404     
 
4,528     
 
4,769   
Dilutive effect of employee stock plans 
  
 
99     
 
76     
 
75   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Dilutive weighted average common shares outstanding 
  
 4,503     
 
4,604     
 
4,844   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Basic earnings per share 
  
$
2.26     
$
2.42     
$
2.29   
Diluted earnings per share 
  
$
2.21     
$
2.38     
$
2.26   
Shares subject to anti-dilutive stock options and restricted stock-based awards excluded from 
calculation 
  
 
37     
 
76     
 
208   
  These weighted shares relate to anti-dilutive stock options and restricted stock-based awards as calculated using the treasury stock method and could be dilutive in the future. See Note 14 
for information regarding the exercise prices of our outstanding, unexercised options. 
18. 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 
(1) 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)  
May 31, 2015  
   
breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing, defamation, intentional interference with prospective economic advantage, and violation of 
the California Unfair Business Practices Act. The complaint alleged that when Oracle announced on March 22 and 23, 2011 that it would no 
longer develop future versions of its software to run on HP’s Itanium-based servers, it breached a settlement agreement signed on September 20, 
2010 between HP and Mark Hurd (the “Hurd Settlement Agreement”), who was both HP’s former chief executive officer and chairman of HP’s 
board of directors. HP sought a judicial declaration of the parties’ rights and obligations under the Hurd Settlement Agreement, and other 
equitable and monetary relief.  
Oracle answered the complaint and filed a cross-complaint, which was amended on December 2, 2011. The amended cross-complaint alleged 
claims including violation of the Lanham Act. Oracle alleged that HP had secretly agreed to pay Intel to continue to develop and manufacture the 
Itanium microprocessor, and had misrepresented to customers that the Itanium microprocessor had a long roadmap, among other claims. Oracle 
sought equitable rescission of the Hurd Settlement Agreement, and other equitable and monetary relief.  
The court bifurcated the trial and tried HP’s causes of action for declaratory relief and promissory estoppel without a jury in June 2012. The 
court issued a final statement of decision on August 28, 2012, finding that the Hurd Settlement Agreement required Oracle to continue to 
develop certain of its software products for use on HP’s Itanium-based servers and to port such products at no cost to HP for as long as HP sells 
those servers. Oracle has announced that it is appealing this decision. The issues of breach, HP’s performance, causation and damages, HP’s tort 
claims, and Oracle’s cross-claims will all be tried before a jury. As of April 8, 2013, the trial is stayed pending Oracle’s appeal of the court’s 
denial of its anti-SLAPP motion, which is fully briefed, although oral argument has not yet been scheduled. We cannot currently estimate a 
reasonably possible range of loss for this action. We believe that we have meritorious defenses against this action, and we will continue to 
vigorously defend it.  
SAP Intellectual Property Litigation  
On March 22, 2007, Oracle Corporation, Oracle USA, Inc. and Oracle International Corporation (collectively, Oracle) filed a complaint in the 
United States District Court for the Northern District of California against SAP AG, its wholly-owned subsidiary, SAP America, Inc., and its 
wholly-owned subsidiary, TomorrowNow, Inc., (the SAP Subsidiary, and collectively, the SAP Defendants) alleging that SAP unlawfully 
accessed Oracle’s Customer Connection support website and improperly took and used Oracle’s intellectual property.  
After lengthy judicial proceedings, including a jury verdict in Oracle’s favor, on August 2, 2012, Oracle and the SAP Defendants stipulated to a 
judgment of $306 million against the SAP Defendants. We recorded a $306 million receivable in our consolidated balance sheet and we 
recognized a corresponding benefit to our results of operations for the first quarter of fiscal 2013. After further proceedings, including an appeal, 
on November 14, 2014, final judgment was entered in Oracle’s favor in the amount of $356.7 million plus post-judgment interest of 
approximately $2.5 million. During the second quarter of fiscal 2015, Oracle received the total payment of approximately $359.2 million, of 
which $306 million was applied against the receivable recorded in the first quarter of fiscal 2013 and the excess of $53 million was recorded as a 
benefit to our results of operations. This action is now concluded.  
Other Litigation  
We are party to various other legal proceedings and claims, either asserted or unasserted, which arise in the ordinary course of business, 
including proceedings and claims that relate to acquisitions we have completed or to companies we have acquired or are attempting to acquire. 
While the outcome of these matters cannot be predicted with certainty, we do not believe that the outcome of any of these matters, individually 
or in the aggregate, will result in losses that are materially in excess of amounts already recognized, if any.  
   
135 

Table of Contents  
SCHEDULE II  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS  
   
   
136 
(in millions) 
  
Beginnning
Balance    
Additions 
Charged to 
Operations or 
Other Accounts    
Write-offs   
Translation 
Adjustments 
and  
Other 
   
Ending 
Balance  
Allowances for Doubtful Trade Receivables 
  
  
  
 
  
Year Ended: 
  
  
  
 
  
May 31, 2013 
  
$ 
323     
$ 
118     
$ (167)   
$ 
22     
$ 296   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
May 31, 2014 
  
$ 
296     
$ 
122     
$ (120)   
$ 
8     
$ 306   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
May 31, 2015 
  
$ 
306     
$ 
56     
$ 
(86 )   
$ 
9     
$ 285   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
  

Table of Contents  
SIGNATURES  
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be 
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.  
   
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed by the following persons on behalf of the 
Registrant and in the capacities and on the date indicated.  
   
   
137 
 
 ORACLE CORPORATION 
Date: June 25, 2015 
 
 By: 
 
/ S /    S AFRA A. C ATZ 
 
 
 
Safra A. Catz 
 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer and Director 
 
 
 
(Principal Executive and Financial Officer) 
Date: June 25, 2015 
 
 By: 
 
/ S /    M ARK V. H URD 
 
 
 
Mark V. Hurd 
 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer and Director 
 
 
 
(Principal Executive Officer) 
Name 
  
Title 
Date 
/ S /    S AFRA A. C ATZ 
Safra A. Catz 
  
Chief Executive Officer and Director (Principal Executive and Financial Officer) June 25, 2015 
/ S /    M ARK V. H URD 
Mark V. Hurd 
  
Chief Executive Officer and Director (Principal Executive Officer) 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    W ILLIAM C OREY W EST 
William Corey West 
  
Executive Vice President, Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer 
(Principal Accounting Officer) 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    L AWRENCE J. E LLISON 
Lawrence J. Ellison 
  
Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors, Chief Technology Officer and 
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    J EFFREY O. H ENLEY 
Jeffrey O. Henley 
  
Executive Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    J EFFREY S. B ERG 
Jeffrey S. Berg 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    H. R AYMOND B INGHAM 
H. Raymond Bingham 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    M ICHAEL J. B OSKIN 
Michael J. Boskin 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    B RUCE R. C HIZEN 
Bruce R. Chizen 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    G EORGE H. C ONRADES 
George H. Conrades 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    H ECTOR G ARCIA -M OLINA 
Hector Garcia-Molina 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    L EON E. P ANETTA 
Leon E. Panetta 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 
/ S /    N AOMI O. S ELIGMAN 
Naomi O. Seligman 
  
Director 
June 25, 2015 

Table of Contents  
ORACLE CORPORATION  
INDEX OF EXHIBITS  
The following exhibits are filed herewith or are incorporated by reference to exhibits previously filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission.  
   
   
138 
Exhibit 
No. 
 
Exhibit Description 
 
Incorporated by Reference 
 
Filed 
Herewith 
 
 
Form 
 
   File No.      Exhibit  Filing Date  
           Filed By              
 
 3.01  
 
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation 
of Oracle Corporation and Certificate of Amendment 
of Amended and Restated Certificate of 
Incorporation of Oracle Corporation 
 
8-K 12G3
 
000-51788 
 
3.1 
 
2/6/06 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 3.02  
 
Amended and Restated Bylaws of Oracle 
Corporation 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
3.02 
 
7/14/06 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.01   Specimen Certificate of Registrant’s Common Stock  S-3 ASR  333-166643  4.04  
5/7/10 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.02  
 
Indenture dated January 13, 2006, among Ozark 
Holding Inc., Oracle Corporation and Citibank, N.A.  
8-K 
 
000-14376 
 
10.34 
 
1/20/06 
 
Oracle Systems Corporation 
 
 4.03  
 
Form of Old 2016 Note, together with the Officers’ 
Certificate issued January 13, 2006 pursuant to the 
Indenture dated January 13, 2006, among Oracle 
Corporation (formerly known as Ozark Holding Inc.) 
and Citibank, N.A. 
 
8-K 
 
000-14376 
 
10.35 
 
1/20/06 
 
Oracle Systems Corporation 
 
 4.04   Form of New 5.25% Note due 2016 
 
S-4/A 
 333-132250  4.4 
 4/14/06 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.05  
 
First Supplemental Indenture dated May 9, 2007 
among Oracle Corporation, Citibank, N.A. and The 
Bank of New York Trust Company, N.A. 
 
S-3 ASR 
 
333-142796 
 
4.3 
 
5/10/07 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.06  
 
Forms of 5.75% Note due 2018 and 6.50% Note due 
2038, together with Officers’ Certificate issued 
April 9, 2008 setting forth the terms of the Notes 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
4.09 
 
4/8/08 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.07  
 
Forms of 3.75% Note due 2014, 5.00% Note due 
2019 and 6.125% Note due 2039, together with 
Officers’ Certificate issued July 8, 2009 setting forth 
the terms of the Notes 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
4.08 
 
7/8/09 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.08  
 
Forms of Original 2020 Note and Original 2040 
Note, together with Officers’ Certificate issued 
July 19, 2010 setting forth the terms of the Notes 
 
10-Q 
 
000-51788 
 
4.08 
 
9/20/10 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.09   Forms of New 2020 Note and New 2040 Note 
 
S-4 
 333-176405  4.5 
 8/19/11 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 

Table of Contents  
   
139 
Exhibit 
No. 
 
Exhibit Description 
 
Incorporated by Reference 
 
Filed 
Herewith 
 
 Form  
   File No.      Exhibit  
Filing Date  
           Filed By              
 
 4.10  
 
Forms of 1.20% Note due 2017 and 2.50% Note due 
2022, together with Officers’ Certificate issued 
October 25, 2012 setting forth the terms of the Notes  
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
4.10 
 
10/25/12 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.11  
 
Forms of 2.25% Note due 2021 and 3.125% Note 
due 2025, together with Officers’ Certificate issued 
July 10, 2013 setting forth the terms of the Notes 
 
8-K 
 
001-35992 
 
4.11 
 
7/10/13 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.12  
 
Forms of Floating Rate Note due 2019, 2.375% Note 
due 2019 and 3.625% Note due 2023, together with 
Officers’ Certificate issued July 16, 2013 setting 
forth the terms of the Notes 
 
8-K 
 
001-35992 
 
4.12 
 
7/16/13 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.13  
 
Forms of Floating Rate Note due 2017, Floating Rate 
Note due 2019, 2.25% Note due 2019, 2.80% Note 
due 2021, 3.40% Note due 2024, 4.30% Note due 
2034 and 4.50% Note due 2044, together with 
Officers’ Certificate issued July 8, 2014 setting forth 
the terms of the Notes 
 
8-K 
 
001-35992 
 
4.13 
 
7/8/14 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
 4.14  
 
Forms of 2.50% Notes due 2022, 2.95% Notes due 
2025, 3.25% Notes due 2030, 3.90% Notes due 2035, 
4.125% Notes due 2045 and 4.375% Notes due 2055, 
together with Officers’ Certificate issued May 5, 
2015 setting forth the terms of the Notes 
 
8-K 
 
001-35992 
 
4.13 
 
5/5/15 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.01* 
 
Oracle Corporation 1993 Deferred Compensation 
Plan, as amended and restated as of January 1, 2008 
 
10-Q 
 
000-51788 
 
10.01 
 
3/23/09 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.02* 
 
Oracle Corporation Employee Stock Purchase Plan 
(1992), as amended and restated as of October 1, 
2009 
 
10-K 
 
000-51788 
 
10.02 
 
7/1/10 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.03* 
 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 1993 
Directors’ Stock Plan, as amended and restated on 
September 4, 2013 
 
10-Q 
 
001-35992 
 
10.03 
 
12/20/13 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.04* 
 
Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity 
Incentive Plan, as approved on October 31, 2013 
 
10-Q 
 
001-35992 
 
10.04 
 
12/20/13 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.05* 
 
Form of Stock Option Agreement under the 
Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity 
Incentive Plan for U.S. Executive Vice Presidents 
and Section 16 Officers 
 
10-Q 
 
000-51788 
 
10.05 
 
12/23/11 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 

Table of Contents  
   
140 
Exhibit 
No. 
 
Exhibit Description 
 
Incorporated by Reference 
 
Filed 
Herewith 
 
 Form  
   File No.      Exhibit  
Filing Date  
           Filed By              
 
10.06* 
 
Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Oracle 
Corporation Amended and Restated 1993 Directors’ 
Stock Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
10.07* 
 
Form of Indemnity Agreement for Directors and 
Executive Officers 
 
10-Q 
 
000-51788 
 
10.07 
 
12/23/11 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.08  
 
Form of Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement 
relating to the $3,000,000,000 Commercial Paper 
Program 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
10.2 
 
2/9/06 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.09  
 
Issuing and Paying Agency Agreement between 
Oracle Corporation and JPMorgan Chase Bank, 
National Association dated as of April 23, 2013 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
10.09 
 
4/26/13 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.10* 
 
Offer letter dated February 2, 2010 to John Fowler 
and employment agreement dated February 2, 2010 
 
10-Q 
 
000-51788 
 
10.26 
 
3/29/10 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.11* 
 
Offer letter dated September 2, 2010 to Mark V. 
Hurd and employment agreement dated September 3, 
2010 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
10.28 
 
9/8/10 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.12*  Oracle Corporation Executive Bonus Plan 
 8-K  000-51788  10.29  10/13/10  
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.13* 
 
Sun Microsystems, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Incentive 
Plan 
 
10-Q 
 
000-15086 
 
10.1 
 
2/6/08 
 
Sun Microsystems, Inc. 
 
10.14 
 
$3,000,000,000 5-Year Revolving Credit Agreement 
dated as of April 22, 2013 among Oracle Corporation 
and the lenders and agents named therein 
 
8-K 
 
000-51788 
 
10.14 
 
4/26/13 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.15* 
 
Oracle Corporation Stock Unit Award Deferred 
Compensation Plan 
 
10-Q 
 
001-35992 
 
10.15 
 
9/23/14 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.16* 
 
Form of Performance-Based Stock Unit Award 
Agreement under the Amended and Restated 2000 
Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan for Section 16 
Officers 
 
10-Q 
 
001-35992 
 
10.16 
 
9/23/14 
 
Oracle Corporation 
 
10.17* 
 
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement 
under the Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 
1993 Directors’ Stock Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
12.01   Consolidated Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
21.01   Subsidiaries of the Registrant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
23.01  
 
Consent of Independent Registered Public 
Accounting Firm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
31.01  
 
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certification of Principal 
Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 

Table of Contents  
   
141  
Exhibit 
No. 
 
Exhibit Description 
 
Incorporated by Reference 
 
Filed 
Herewith 
 
 Form  
   File No.      Exhibit  
Filing Date  
           Filed By              
 
31.02  
 
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certification of Principal 
Executive and Financial Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
32.01  
 
Section 1350 Certification of Principal Executive 
Officers and Principal Financial Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
101 
 
Interactive Data Files Pursuant to Rule 405 of 
Regulation S-T: (i) Consolidated Balance Sheets as 
of May 31, 2015 and 2014, (ii) Consolidated 
Statements of Operations for the years ended 
May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, (iii) Consolidated 
Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years 
ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
(iv) Consolidated Statements of Equity for the years 
ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
(v) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the 
years ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, 
(vi) Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and 
(vii) Financial Statement Schedule II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
* 
Indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement 

Exhibit 10.06 
ORACLE CORPORATION  
DIRECTORS’ STOCK OPTION GRANT  
THIS OPTION IS NOT TRANSFERABLE  
   
   
   
Oracle Corporation, a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), hereby grants to the optionee named above (“Optionee”) a non-qualified 
stock option (this “Option”) to purchase the total number of shares of Common Stock of the Company set forth above (the “Shares”) at the 
exercise price per share set forth above (the “Exercise Price”), subject to all of the terms and conditions attached hereto (the “Option Terms and 
Conditions”) and incorporated herein by reference (which, together with this page, shall constitute the “Grant”), and subject to the terms and 
conditions of the Company’s Amended and Restated 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan (the “Plan”). Unless otherwise defined herein, capitalized terms 
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Plan or the Option Terms and Conditions.  
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and this Grant, this Option may be exercised in increments on or after each “Vest Date” 
specified below, provided that it must be exercised, if at all, on or before the Expiration Date specified above.  
Exercisable on or after:  
   
   
   
   
   
The Company and Optionee hereby agree to the terms of this Grant.  
   
Optionee: 
   
Number of Shares: 
   
Address: 
   
Exercise Price per Share: 
$  
   
Grant Date:    
Expiration Date: 
   
(“Vest Date”) 
But before: 
Number of Shares 
ORACLE CORPORATION 
OPTIONEE 
 
(Authorized Signature) 
 
(Optionee Signature) 
Name:    
Name:    
Title:    
Dated:    
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

DIRECTORS’ STOCK OPTION GRANT  
Terms and Conditions  
   
   
a) Termination of Status as a Director . If an Optionee ceases to serve as a Board Member, he or she may, but only within three (3) months 
after the date he or she ceases to be a Board Member of the Company, exercise his or her Option to the extent that he or she was entitled to 
exercise it at the date of such termination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may the Option be exercised after the Expiration 
Date. To the extent that Optionee is not entitled to exercise an Option at the date of such termination, or does not exercise such Option 
(which he or she is entitled to exercise) within the time specified herein, the Option shall terminate.  
b) Disability of Board Member . Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2(a) above, in the event Optionee is unable to continue his or 
her service as a Board Member with the Company as a result of his or her total and permanent disability (as defined in Section 22(e)(3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”)), Optionee may, within six (6) months from the date of such termination, 
exercise his or her Option to the extent such Optionee was entitled to exercise it at the date of such termination. Notwithstanding the 
foregoing, in no event may the Option be exercised after the Expiration Date. To the extent that Optionee is not entitled to exercise the 
Option at the date of termination, or if Optionee does not exercise such Option (which he is entitled to exercise) within the time specified 
herein, the Option shall terminate.  
c) Death of Optionee . In the event of the death of Optionee:  
(i) If Optionee dies during the term of the Option, is a Board Member at the time of death and has been in Continuous Status as a 
Director (as defined in the Plan) since the date of grant of the Option, the Option may be exercised at any time within six (6) months 
following the date of death by the Optionee’s estate or by a person who acquired the right to exercise the Option by bequest or inheritance, 
but only to the extent the Optionee is entitled to exercise the Option at the time of death. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may 
the Option be exercised after the Expiration Date.  
(ii) If Optionee dies within three (3) months after the termination of Continuous Status as a Director, the Option may be exercised at 
any time within six (6) months following the date of death by the Optionee’s estate or by a person who acquired the right to exercise the 
Option by bequest or inheritance, but only to the extent the Optionee is entitled to exercise the Option at the date of termination. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event may the Option be exercised after the Expiration Date. 
1. 
Restrictions on Exercise. This Option may not be exercised (i) unless such exercise is in compliance with the Securities Act of 1933, as 
amended (the “Securities Act”), and all applicable state securities laws as they are in effect on the date of exercise, and the requirements of 
any stock exchange or national market system on which the Company’s Common Stock may be listed at the time of exercise, and (ii) until 
the Plan, or any required increase in the number of Shares authorized under the Plan, is approved by the Stockholders of the Company. 
Notwithstanding anything else in this Grant or the Plan, this Option shall expire on the Expiration Date set forth on the first page of this 
Grant and must be exercised, if at all, on or before the Expiration Date. In addition, no part of this Option will become exercisable prior to 
six (6) months following the Date of Grant. 
2. 
Termination of Option . Except as provided below in this Section, this Option shall terminate and may not be exercised if Optionee ceases 
to be a member of the Board of the Company (a “Board Member”). The Committee shall have discretion to determine whether Optionee 
has ceased to serve as a Board Member and the effective date on which such service terminated (the “Termination Date”). 

   
   
   
   
   
3. 
Manner of Exercise. 
  
a) 
Exercise Agreement . This Option shall be exercisable by delivery to the Company of an executed written Directors Stock Option 
Exercise Agreement (the “Exercise Agreement”) in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A, or in such other form as may be 
approved by the Committee, which shall set forth Optionee’s election to exercise some or all of the Option, the number of Shares 
being purchased, any restrictions imposed on the Shares and such other representations and agreements regarding Optionee’s 
investment intent and access to information as may be required by the Company to comply with applicable securities laws. 
  
b) 
Payment . Payment of the exercise price upon exercise of any Option shall be made (i) by cash or check; (ii) provided that a public 
market for the Company’s stock exists, through a “same day sale” commitment from the Optionee and a broker-dealer that is a 
member of the National Association of Securities Dealers (an “NASD Dealer”) whereby Optionee irrevocably elects to exercise 
the Option and to sell a portion of the Shares so purchased to pay for the exercise price and whereby the NASD Dealer irrevocably 
commits upon receipt of such Shares to forward the exercise price directly to the Company; (iii) provided that a public market for 
the Company’s Stock exists, through a “margin” commitment from the Optionee and an NASD Dealer whereby the Optionee 
irrevocably elects to exercise the Option and to pledge the Shares so purchased to the NASD Dealer in a margin account as 
security for a loan from the NASD Dealer in the amount of the exercise price, and whereby the NASD Dealer irrevocably 
commits upon receipt of such Shares to forward the exercise price directly to the Company; (iv) where permitted by applicable 
law, by tender of a full recourse promissory note secured by collateral other than the Shares having such terms as may be 
approved by the Committee and bearing interest at a rate sufficient to avoid imputation of income under Section 484 and 1274 of 
the Code, provided that the portion of the exercise price equal to the par value of the Shares must be paid in cash or other legal 
consideration; or (v) in any combination of the foregoing. 
  
c) 
Withholding Taxes . Prior to the issuance of the Shares upon exercise of this Option, the Optionee shall pay in cash any applicable 
federal, state or local income and employment tax withholding obligations of the Company, if applicable. 
  
d) 
Issuance of Shares . Provided that such notice and payment are in form and substance satisfactory to counsel for the Company, the 
Company shall issue the Shares registered in the name of Optionee or Optionee’s legal representative. 
4. 
Transferability of Option. This Option may not be transferred in any manner other than (i) by will, or (ii) by the laws of descent and 
distribution, provided however, a U.S. Optionee may transfer a vested portion of the Option for no consideration to or for the benefit of one 
or more members of the Optionee’s Immediate Family (including, without limitation, to a trust for the benefit of the Optionee’s Immediate 
Family) (a “Transferee”), subject to such limits as the Committee may establish, and such Transferee shall remain subject to all the terms 
and conditions applicable to the Option prior to such transfer. The Optionee will continue to be treated as the holder of the Option for 
purposes of the Company’s record keeping and for other purposes deemed appropriate by the Company, including the right to consent to 
amendments to this Grant Notice; notwithstanding that the economic benefits and dispositive control has been transferred to the 
Transferee. Optionee agrees, on behalf of each Transferee, to exercise the Option upon the direction and arrangement of payment by such 
transferee and further agrees to forward all information provided by the Company (including but 

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
These terms and conditions apply to grants made on or after May 31, 2015. 
  
not limited to those required under the U.S. securities laws) with respect to the Option to the Transferee. In the discretion of the 
Committee, the foregoing right to transfer shall apply to the right to transfer ancillary rights associated with the Option. The term 
“Immediate Family” shall mean the Optionee’s spouse, qualified same-sex domestic partner, parents, children, stepchildren, adoptive 
relationships, sisters, brothers and grandchildren (and, for this purpose, shall also include the Optionee). Optionee acknowledges that the 
Optionee will continue to be liable for any taxes incurred in connection with the exercise of the Option. 
5. 
Changes in Capitalization; Change of Control . 
  
a) 
Adjustment of Shares . In the event that the number of outstanding Shares is changed by a stock dividend, stock split, reverse 
stock split, combination, reclassification or similar change in the capital structure of the Company without consideration, the 
number of Shares subject to this Option shall be proportionately adjusted, subject to any required action by the Board or 
stockholders of the Company and compliance with applicable securities laws; provided, however, that no certificate or scrip 
representing fractional Shares shall be issued and any resulting fractions shall be ignored. 
  
b) 
Change of Control . In the event of a dissolution or liquidation of the Company, a merger in which the Company is not the 
surviving corporation (other than a merger with a wholly-owned subsidiary or where there is no substantial change in the 
stockholders of the Company and the obligations of the Company under the Plan are assumed by the successor corporation), the 
sale of substantially all of the assets of the Company, or any other transaction described under Section 424(a) of the Code wherein 
the stockholders of the Company give up all of their equity interest in the Company (except for the acquisition of all or 
substantially all of the outstanding shares of the Company), this Option shall accelerate and become vested in full prior to the 
consummation of such dissolution, liquidation, merger or sale of assets. 
  
c) 
Acceleration Upon Unfriendly Takeover . Notwithstanding anything in Section 5(b) hereof to the contrary, if fifty percent 
(50%) or more of the outstanding voting securities of the Company become beneficially owned (as defined in Rule 13d-3 
promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission) by a person (as defined in Section 2(2) of the Securities Act and in 
Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) in a transaction or series of transactions expressly disapproved by the Board, then this 
Option shall automatically and immediately accelerate and become vested in full. 
6. 
Interpretation . Any dispute regarding the interpretation of this Grant shall be submitted by Optionee or the Company forthwith to the 
Board or the committee thereof that administers the Plan, which shall review such dispute at its next regular meeting. The resolution of 
such a dispute by the Board or committee shall be final and binding on the Company and on Optionee. 
7. 
Optionee Acknowledgments . Optionee hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Plan and the prospectus relating to the Plan, 
represents that Optionee has read and understands the terms and conditions thereof, and accepts this Option subject to all the terms and 
provisions of the Plan and this Grant. Optionee acknowledges that there may be adverse tax consequences upon exercise of this Option or 
disposition of the Shares and that Optionee should consult a tax advisor prior to such exercise or disposition. 
8. 
Entire Agreement. The Plan, the prospectus relating to the Plan and the Notice and Exercise Agreement are incorporated herein by 
reference. This Grant, the Plan and the Exercise Agreement constitute the entire agreement of the parties and supersede all prior 
undertakings and agreements with respect to the subject matter hereof. 

EXHIBIT A 
ORACLE CORPORATION  
STOCK OPTION EXERCISE NOTICE AND AGREEMENT  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
1. 
Exercise of Option . I, the undersigned “Optionee,” hereby elect to exercise my option to purchase                       shares of Common Stock 
(“Shares”) of Oracle Corporation (the “Company”) under and pursuant to the Company’s Amended and Restated 1993 Directors’ Stock 
Plan (the “Plan”), and the Stock Option Grant dated                     (the “Grant”). Exercise Price per Share:                      . 
2. 
Representation of the Optionee . I acknowledge that I have received, read and understood the Plan, the Grant and the prospectus relating to 
the Plan and agree to abide by and be bound by their terms and conditions. 
3. 
Compliance with Securities Laws . I understand and acknowledge that the exercise of any rights to purchase Shares is expressly 
conditioned upon compliance with the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and all applicable state securities laws. I agree to cooperate 
with the Company to ensure compliance with such laws. 
4. 
Tax Consequences . I understand that I may suffer adverse tax consequences as a result of my purchase or disposition of the Shares. I 
represent that I have consulted with any tax consultant(s) that I deem advisable in connection with the purchase or disposition of the Shares 
and that I am not relying on the Company for any tax advice. 
5. 
Delivery and Payment . I herewith deliver to the Company the aggregate purchase price of the Shares that are specified in the 
accompanying Oracle Corporation Stock Option Exercise Form, and I have made provision for the payment of any federal and state 
withholding taxes required to be paid or withheld by the Company. 
6. 
Insider Trading . I acknowledge that I have received, read and understood the Company’s policy against trading in Company stock while in 
the possession of inside information (i.e., material nonpublic information). I agree to sell or otherwise dispose of the Shares strictly in 
compliance with this Company policy and all related securities laws. 
7. 
Proceeds . I understand that it is my responsibility to instruct the broker where/how my proceeds should be distributed. 
8. 
Certificates . I understand that any certificate(s) representing shares sold must be delivered directly to the broker. 

   
   
9. 
Entire Agreement . I acknowledge the following: The Plan and the Grant are incorporated herein by reference; this Agreement, the Plan, 
the prospectus relating to the Plan and the Grant constitute my entire agreement with the Company and supersede all prior undertaking and 
agreements between us with respect to the subject matter hereof; this Agreement is governed by Delaware law except for that body of law 
pertaining to conflict of laws. Optionee agrees to institute any legal action or legal proceeding relating to the Grant, the Plan or this 
Agreement in state court in San Mateo County, California or in federal court in San Francisco, California. Optionee agrees to submit to the 
jurisdiction of and agrees that venue is proper in the aforesaid courts in any such action or proceeding. 
Optionee’s Name (please print): 
   
Optionee’s Signature: 
 Date:                       
          

Exhibit 10.17 
ORACLE CORPORATION  
DIRECTORS’ STOCK UNIT AWARD NOTICE  
THIS AWARD IS NOT TRANSFERABLE  
   
   
   
Oracle Corporation, a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), hereby grants to the Director named above (“Participant”) an award of stock 
units (this “Award”) pursuant to which the Participant may acquire the number of shares of Common Stock of the Company set forth above (the 
“Shares”), subject to all of the terms and conditions set forth in the attached Directors’ Stock Unit Terms and Conditions (“RSU Terms and 
Conditions”) and incorporated herein by reference (which, together with this page, shall constitute the “Award Terms”), and subject to the terms 
and conditions of the Company’s Amended and Restated 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan (the “Plan”). Unless otherwise defined herein, capitalized 
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Plan or the RSU Terms and Conditions.  
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Plan and the Award Terms, this Award shall vest and become payable in increments on each 
“Vest Date” specified below.  
Exercisable on or after:  
   
   
   
   
   
The Company and Participant hereby agree to the Award Terms.  
   
Participant:    
Number of Shares: 
   
Address: 
   
   
Grant Date:    
(“Vest Date”) 
 
Number of Shares   
ORACLE CORPORATION 
PARTICIPANT 
 
(Authorized Signature) 
 
(Participant Signature) 
Name:    
Name:    
Title:    
Dated:    
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

ORACLE CORPORATION  
AMENDED AND RESTATED  
1993 DIRECTORS’ STOCK PLAN  
DIRECTORS’ STOCK UNIT  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
1. 
Grant . Oracle Corporation (the “Company”) has granted to the Director (the “Participant”) named in the applicable Directors’ Stock Unit 
Award Notice (the “Notice”) the number of stock units set forth in the Notice (the “Award”) under the Company’s Amended and 
Restated 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan (the “Plan”). This Award is subject to the Award Terms and the Plan. In the event of a conflict 
between the terms of the Plan and the Award Terms, the terms of the Plan shall govern. All capitalized terms not defined herein shall 
have the meanings ascribed to them in the Plan or the Notice. 
2. 
Company’s Obligation to Pay . Each stock unit represents the right to receive a share of Common Stock (a “Share”) on the date the stock 
unit vests. Unless and until the stock units have vested in accordance with Section 3, Participant will have no right to settlement of any 
such stock units. Prior to the actual settlement of any vested stock units, such stock units will represent an unsecured obligation of the 
Company, payable (if at all) only from the general assets of the Company. 
3. 
Settlement of the Award . This Award will be settled on the date(s) the stock units vest or as soon thereafter as administratively 
practicable, but in any event within a period of sixty (60) days following the applicable vesting date. At the time of settlement, Participant 
will receive one whole Share for each vested stock unit. The Company may, at its sole discretion, substitute an equivalent amount of cash 
if the distribution of Shares is not reasonably practicable due to the requirements under applicable law, in which case, the amount of cash 
will be determined on the basis of the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock on the applicable vesting date. 
4. 
No Rights as Stockholder . The stock units underlying this Award do not carry voting rights or rights to cash dividends. Participant shall 
have no rights as a stockholder of the Company unless and until the stock units are settled by issuing Shares to the Participant. 
5. 
Termination of Award . Notwithstanding any contrary provision of these RSU Terms and Conditions, if Participant ceases to be a 
Director for any or no reason, any stock units that have not vested and Participant’s right to acquire any Shares hereunder will 
immediately terminate. The Committee shall have discretion to determine whether Participant has ceased to serve as a Director and the 
effective date on which such service terminated. 
6. 
Changes in Capitalization; Change of Control . 
  
a) 
Adjustment of Shares . In the event that the number of outstanding Shares is changed by a stock dividend, stock split, reverse 
stock split, combination, reclassification or similar change in the capital structure of the Company without consideration, the 
number of stock units subject to this Award shall be proportionately adjusted, subject to any required action by the Board or 
stockholders of the Company and compliance with applicable securities laws; provided, however, that no certificate or scrip 
representing fractional Shares shall be issued and any resulting fractions of a Share shall be ignored. 
  
b) 
Change of Control . In the event of a dissolution or liquidation of the Company, a merger in which the Company is not the 
surviving corporation (other than a merger with a wholly-owned subsidiary or where there is no substantial change in the 
stockholders of the Company 

   
   
   
   
The Company shall have the right but not the obligation to require the Participant to remit to the Company an amount of cash sufficient to 
satisfy any applicable federal, state or local income and employment tax withholding requirements prior to the delivery of the Shares.  
If the Company determines to withhold taxes, Participant agrees that the Company may satisfy such withholding by one or a combination 
of the following: (1) electing to have the Company withhold from Participant’s other cash compensation paid to Participant by the 
Company; (2) electing to have the Company withhold from proceeds of the sale of Shares acquired upon vesting of the Award, either 
through a voluntary sale or through a mandatory sale arranged by the Company (on 
  
and the obligations of the Company under the Plan are assumed by the successor corporation), the sale of substantially all of the 
assets of the Company, or any other transaction described under Section 424(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (the “Code”) 
wherein the stockholders of the Company give up all of their equity interest in the Company (except for the acquisition of all or 
substantially all of the outstanding shares of the Company), this Award shall accelerate and become vested in full prior to the 
consummation of such dissolution, liquidation, merger or sale of assets. 
  
c) 
Acceleration Upon Unfriendly Takeover . Notwithstanding anything in Section 6(b) hereof to the contrary, if fifty percent 
(50%) or more of the outstanding voting securities of the Company become beneficially owned (as defined in Rule 13d-3 
promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission) by a person (as defined in Section 2(2) of the Securities Act and in 
Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) in a transaction or series of transactions expressly disapproved by the Board, then this 
Award shall automatically and immediately accelerate and become vested in full. 
7. 
Compliance with Laws and Regulations . The issuance and transfer of Shares shall be subject to compliance by the Company and 
Participant with all applicable requirements of federal, state, local or foreign securities and other laws and with all applicable 
requirements of any stock exchange or national market system on which the Common Stock may be listed at the time of such issuance or 
transfer. 
8. 
Transferability of Award . This Award may not be transferred in any manner other than (a) by will, (b) by the laws of descent and 
distribution, or (c) by proof to the Company’s satisfaction, in the event of Participant’s death, that the beneficiary is entitled to receive the 
Award. 
9. 
Tax Withholding . Participant acknowledges that, regardless of any action taken by the Company, the ultimate liability for all income tax 
(including federal, state, local and foreign tax), social insurance, payroll tax, fringe benefits tax, payment on account or other tax-related 
items related to Participant’s participation in the Plan and legally applicable to Participant or deemed by the Company in its discretion to 
be an appropriate charge to Participant even if legally applicable to the Company (“Tax-Related Items”), is and remains Participant’s 
responsibility. Participant further acknowledges that the Company (a) makes no representations or undertakings regarding the treatment 
of any Tax-Related Items in connection with any aspect of this Award, including, but not limited to, the grant, vesting or settlement of 
this Award, the subsequent sale of Shares acquired pursuant to such settlement and the receipt of any dividends; and (b) does not commit 
to and is under no obligation to structure the terms of the grant or any aspect of this Award to reduce or eliminate Participant’s liability 
for Tax-Related Items or to achieve any particular tax result. Further, if Participant is subject to Tax-Related Items in more than one 
jurisdiction between the date of grant and the date of any relevant taxable or tax withholding event, Participant acknowledges that the 
Company may be required to withhold or account for Tax-Related Items in more than one jurisdiction. 

Participant’s behalf pursuant to this authorization); or (3) electing to have the Company withhold Shares otherwise issuable upon 
settlement of the Award. If the obligation for the Tax-Related Items is satisfied by withholding in Shares, the Company will withhold or 
account for Tax-Related Items by considering applicable minimum statutory withholding rates. If the Shares are sold to cover the Tax-
Related Items obligations, the Company may use other applicable withholding rates, including maximum applicable rates, in which case 
Participant will receive a refund of any over-withheld amount in cash and will have no entitlement to the common stock equivalent. 
Further, if the obligation for the Tax-Related Items is satisfied by withholding in Shares, for tax purposes, Participant is deemed to have 
been issued the full number of Shares subject to the vested stock units underlying this Award, notwithstanding that a number of the 
Shares are held back solely for the purpose of paying the Tax-Related Items due as a result of any aspect of Participant’s participation in 
the Plan.  
Finally, Participant shall pay to the Company any amount of Tax-Related Items that the Company may be required to withhold or account 
for as a result of Participant’s participation in the Plan that cannot be satisfied by the means previously described. The Company may 
refuse to deliver the Shares or the proceeds from the sale of Shares if Participant fails to comply with his or her obligations in connection 
with the Tax-Related Items as described in this section.  
   
   
   
   
10. 
Entire Agreement; Interpretation . These RSU Terms and Conditions, the Plan, the prospectus relating to the Plan and the Notice 
constitute the entire agreement of the parties and supersede all prior undertakings and agreements with respect to the subject matter 
hereof; these RSU Terms and Conditions are governed by Delaware law except for that body of law pertaining to conflict of laws. 
Participant agrees to institute any legal action or legal proceeding relating to these RSU Terms and Conditions or the Plan in state court in 
San Mateo County, California, or in federal court in San Francisco, California, United States of America. Participant agrees to submit to 
the jurisdiction of and agrees that venue is proper in the aforesaid courts in any such action or proceeding. 
11. 
Electronic Delivery . The Company may, in its sole discretion, decide to deliver any documents related to current or future participation 
in the Plan by electronic means or to request Participant’s consent to participate in the Plan by electronic means. Participant hereby 
consents to receive such documents by electronic delivery and, if requested, to agree to participate in the Plan through an on-line or 
electronic system established and maintained by the Company or any third party designated by the Company. 
12. 
Severability . The provisions of these RSU Terms and Conditions are severable and if any one or more provisions are determined to be 
illegal or otherwise unenforceable, in whole or in part, the remaining provisions shall nevertheless be binding and enforceable. 
13. 
409A Disclaimer . These RSU Terms and Conditions shall be interpreted in accordance with, and incorporate the terms and conditions 
required by, Section 409A of the Code. The Company reserves the right, to the extent the Company deems necessary or advisable in its 
sole discretion, to unilaterally amend or modify these RSU Terms and Conditions or adopt other policies and procedures (including 
amendments, policies and procedures with retroactive effect), or take any other actions, including amendments or actions that would 
result in a reduction in benefits payable under the Award, as the Company determines are necessary or appropriate to ensure that this 
Award qualifies for exemption from, or complies with the requirements of, Code Section 409A or mitigate any additional tax, interest 
and/or penalties or other adverse tax consequences that may apply under Section 409A of the Code; provided, however, that the Company 
makes no representation that this Award will be exempt from, or will comply with, Section 409A of the Code, and makes no undertakings 
to preclude Section 409A of the Code from applying to this Award or to ensure that it complies with Section 409A of the Code. For the 
avoidance of doubt, Participant 

   
   
These terms and conditions apply to grants made on or after May 31, 2015.  
  
hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Company will have no liability to Participant or any other party if the grant, vesting or 
settlement of this Award and the issuance of Shares or cash or any other transaction under these RSU Terms and Conditions are not 
exempt from, or compliant with, Code Section 409A, or for any action taken by the Company with respect thereto. 
14. 
Additional Terms . The Company reserves the right to impose other requirements on Participant’s participation in the Plan to the extent 
the Company determines it is necessary or advisable for legal or administrative reasons, and to require Participant to sign any additional 
agreements or undertakings that may be necessary to accomplish the foregoing. 
15. 
Waiver . Participant acknowledges that a waiver by the Company of breach of any provision of these RSU Terms and Conditions shall 
not operate or be construed as a waiver of any other provision of these RSU Terms and Conditions, or of any subsequent breach by 
Participant or any other participant. 

Exhibit 12.01 
ORACLE CORPORATION  
CONOSOLIDATED RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES  
(Unaudited)  
   
   
We do not report any shares of preferred stock outstanding in our consolidated financial statements because our outstanding preferred stock is 
owned by one or more of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. Our ratio of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred dividends for any given 
period is equivalent to our ratio of earnings to fixed charges.  
 
  
Year Ended May 31, 
 
(Dollars in millions) 
  
2015 
   
2014 
   
2013 
   
2012 
   
2011 
 
Earnings (1) 
  
  
  
  
  
Income before provision for income taxes 
  $ 12,834     $13,704    $ 13,898     $ 12,962    $ 11,411   
Add: Noncontrolling interests 
   
113      
98     
112      
119     
97   
Add: Fixed charges 
   1,190      
968     
850      
827     
875   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total earnings 
$ 14,137   $14,770  
$ 14,860   $ 13,908  
$ 12,383   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Fixed Charges (2) 
Interest expense 
$ 1,143   $
914  
$ 
797   $ 
766  
$ 
808   
Estimate of interest in rent expense 
 
47   
 
54  
 
53   
 
61  
 
67   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Total fixed charges 
$ 1,190   $
968  
$ 
850   $ 
827  
$ 
875   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges 
 
12x   
 
15x  
 
17x   
 
17x  
 
14x   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
(1) 
The term “earnings” means the amounts resulting from the following: (a) our income before provision for income taxes, plus (b) the 
noncontrolling interests in the net income of our majority owned subsidiaries, plus (c) our fixed charges. 
(2) 
The term “fixed charges” means the amounts resulting from the following: (a) our interest expensed, plus (b) our estimate of the interest 
component of rent expense. 

Exhibit 21.01 
ORACLE CORPORATION  
Subsidiaries of the Registrant  
   
Name of Subsidiary 
  
Place of Incorporation 
Oracle International Corporation 
  
California 
Oracle Global Holdings, Inc. 
  
Delaware 
Oracle America, Inc. 
  
Delaware 
Oracle Technology Company 
  
Ireland 
OCAPAC Holding Company 
  
Ireland 
OCAPAC Research Partner 
  
Ireland 
OCAPAC Distributor Partner 
  
Ireland 
OCAPAC Hardware Partner 
  
Ireland 

Exhibit 23.01 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the following Registration Statements:  
   
Form S-8     333-202870     DataLogix Holdings, Inc. 2009 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended, Connection Engine, Inc. 2010 Equity Incentive 
Plan 
Form S-8  
333-199617 
1706045 Ontario Limited Stock Option Plan, LiveLOOK, Inc. 2008 Equity Incentive Plan, MICROS Systems, Inc. 
1991 Stock Option Plan, as amended, TOA Technologies, Inc. Fourth Amended and Restated 2003 Incentive Plan 
Form S-8 
333-195502 
Blue Kai, Inc. 2007 Stock Plan, TrackSimple, Inc. 2008 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-8 
333-194705 
Responsys, Inc. 1999 Stock Plan, as amended, Responsys, Inc. 2011 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-8  
333-193006 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan, Bitzer Mobile Inc. 2011 Stock 
Incentive Plan, as amended 
Form S-8 
333-187924 
Acme Packet, Inc. 2006 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-3 
333-187919 
Form S-8  
333-186971 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan, Eloqua Limited 2006 Stock Option Plan, 
Eloqua, Inc. 2012 Stock Option and Incentive Plan 
Form S-8  
333-184062 
Vitrue, Inc. 2006 Stock Option and Incentive Plan, as amended, Vitrue, Inc. 2011 Stock Option and Incentive Plan, 
Xsigo Systems, Inc. 2004 Stock Plan 
Form S-8 
333-181023 
Taleo Corporation 2004 Stock Plan, Taleo Corporation 2009 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-8  
333-179586 
RightNow Technologies, Inc. 2004 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended and restated, RightNow Technologies, Inc. 
Amended and Restated 1998 Long-Term Incentive and Stock Option Plan 
Form S-8  
333-179132 
Endeca Technologies, Inc. 2009 Stock Incentive Plan, Endeca Technologies, Inc. Amended and Restated 1999 
Stock Incentive Plan, GoAhead Software, Inc. 2002 Stock Plan 
Form S-8  
333-176986 
FatWire Corporation 2007 Stock Option Plan, as amended , FatWire Corporation Second Amended 1999 Stock 
Option Plan, as amended, InQuira, Inc. Amended and Restated 2002 Stock Plan, InQuira, Inc. Amended and 
Restated 2002 Stock Plan for Officers and Directors 
Form S-4 
333-176405 
Form S-8  
333-171939 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan Art Technology Group, Inc. 
Amended and Restated 1996 Stock Option Plan, Art Technology Group, Inc./Primus Knowledge Solutions, Inc. 
1999 Stock Incentive Compensation Plan 
Form S-8  
333-169089 
Phase Forward Incorporated Amended and Restated 2004 Stock Option and Incentive Plan, Convergin, Inc. Israeli 
2001 Stock Option Plan, as amended 

Form S-8     333-164734     Sun Microsystems, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Incentive Plan, Sun Microsystems, Inc. 1990 Long-Term Equity Incentive 
Plan, Sun Microsystems, Inc. Equity Compensation Acquisition Plan, Sun Microsystems, Inc. 1988 Directors’ 
Stock Option Plan, Sun Microsystems, Inc. 1997 French Stock Option Plan, Afara Websystems, Inc. 2000 Equity 
Incentive Plan, Cobalt Networks, Inc. Amended and Restated 1997 Employee Stock Plan, Forte Software, Inc. 1996 
Stock Option Plan, Forte Software, Inc. 1997 Stock Option Plan, Gridware, Inc. 2000 Equity Incentive Plan, 
HighGround Systems, Inc. Stock Option Plan, InnoSoft International, Inc. 1992 Stock Incentive Plan, InnoSoft 
International, Inc. 1999 Equity Incentive Plan, Isopia Inc. Stock Option Plan, Kealia, Inc. Amended and Restated 
2001 Stock Plan, Large Storage Configurations, Incorporated 1992 Stock Option Plan, MySQL AB Global Share 
Option Plan 2005, Neogent, Inc. 2001 Stock Incentive Plan, Pirus Networks, Inc. 2000 Stock Option Plan, 
SeeBeyond Technology Corporation 1998 Stock Plan, SevenSpace, Inc. Amended and Restated 2000 Stock 
Incentive Plan, Star Division Corporation 1998 Stock Plan, Amended and Restated Storage Technology 
Corporation 1995 Equity Participation Plan, Storage Technology Corporation 2004 Long Term Incentive Plan, 
Tarantella, Inc. 2002 Incentive Stock Option Plan, Tarantella, Inc. 2003 Stock Option Plan, Waveset Technologies, 
Inc. Amended and Restated 2000 Stock Plan, Silver Creek Systems, Inc. 2003 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-8 
333-163147 
GoldenGate Software, Inc. 2002 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended 
Form S-8 
333-157758 
Primavera Software, Inc. Amended and Restated 2006 Stock Option Plan 
Form S-8 
333-153660 
AdminServer, Inc. 2003 Stock Option Plan 
Form S-8  
333-151045 
BEA Systems, Inc. 1995 Flexible Stock Incentive Plan, BEA Systems, Inc. 1997 Stock Incentive Plan, BEA 
Systems, Inc. 2000 Non-Qualified Stock Incentive Plan, BEA Systems, Inc. 2006 Stock Incentive Plan, The Theory 
Center Amended and Restated 1999 Stock Option/Stock Issuance Plan, Plumtree Software, Inc. 1997 Equity 
Incentive Plan, Plumtree Software, Inc. 2002 Stock Plan 
Form S-8 
333-147400 
Bridgestream 1999 Stock Plan, Logical Apps, Inc. 2003 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-8  
333-145162 
Agile Software Corporation 1995 Stock Option Plan, Agile Software Corporation 2000 Nonstatutory Stock Option 
Plan, The Digital Market, Inc. 1995 Stock Plan 
Form S-8  
333-142776 
Hyperion Solutions Corporation 2004 Equity Incentive Plan, Hyperion Solutions Corporation 1999 Stock Option 
Plan, Hyperion Solutions Corporation 1995 Stock Option/Stock Issuance Plan, Hyperion Solutions Corporation 
1992 Stock Option Plan, Hyperion Software Corporation 1991 Stock Plan, Hyperion Software Corporation 1991 
Stock Plan, Decisioneering, Inc. 1997 Stock Option Plan, SQRIBE 1995 Stock Option Plan, Hyperion Software 
Corporation 1991 Non-Employee Director Stock Option Plan, Brio Software, Inc. 2000 Non-Executive Director 
Stock Option Plan, Brio Software, Inc. 1998 Stock Option Plan, Brio Software, Inc. 1998 Directors’ Stock Option 
Plan, Brio Software, Inc. 1998 Non-Executive Stock Option Plan, Arbor Software Corporation 1995 Stock 
Option/Stock Issuance Plan 
Form S-8  
333-142225 
Hyperion Solutions Corporation 2004 Equity Incentive Plan, Hyperion Solutions Corporation 1995 Stock 
Option/Stock Issuance Plan and the Arbor Software Corporation 1995 Stock Option/Stock Issuance Plan 

Form S-8     333-139901     Stellent, Inc. 1994-1997 Stock Option and Compensation Plan, InfoAccess, Inc. 1990 Stock Option Plan as 
amended September 29, 1999, InfoAccess, Inc. 1995 Stock Option Plan as amended September 29, 1999, Stellent, 
Inc. 1999 Employee Stock Option and Compensation Plan, Stellent, Inc. 2000 Stock Incentive Plan, Stellent, Inc. 
Amended and Restated 2000 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, Stellent, Inc. Amended and Restated 1997 Directors 
Stock Option Plan, Optika Imaging Systems, Inc. 1994 Stock Option /Stock Issuance Plan, Amendment to Optika 
Imaging Systems, Inc. 1994 Stock Option/Stock Issuance Plan, Optika Inc. 2000 Non-Officer Stock Incentive Plan, 
Optika Inc. 2003 Equity Incentive Plan, Amendment to Optika Inc. 2003 Equity Incentive Plan, Stellent, Inc. 2005 
Equity Incentive Plan, French Annex to the Stellent, Inc. 2000 Stock Incentive Plan 
Form S-8 
333-139875 
MetaSolv, Inc. 1992 Stock Option Plan, MetaSolv, Inc. Long-Term Incentive Plan 
Form S-8 
333-138694 
SPL WorldGroup Holdings, LLC 2005 Option Plan, SPL WorldGroup Holdings, LLC 2004 Equity Incentive Plan 
Form S-8  
333-136275 
Portal Software, Inc. 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, Portal Software, Inc. 2000 Supplemental Stock Option Plan, Portal 
Software, Inc. 1995 Stock Option/Stock Issuance Plan (as amended and succeeded by the 1999 Stock Incentive 
Plan) 
Form S-4 
333-132250 
Form S-8  
333-131988 
Siebel Systems, Inc. 1996 Equity Incentive Plan, Siebel Systems, Inc. 1996 Supplemental Stock Option, Siebel 
Systems, Inc. 1998 Equity Incentive Plan, InterActive WorkPlace, Inc. 1996 Stock Option Plan, Janna Systems Inc. 
Amended and Restated Share Compensation Plan, nQuire Software, Inc. 1997 Employee Stock Option and 
Compensation Plan, OnLink Technologies, Inc. 1998 Stock Option Plan, OnTarget, Inc. 1999 Stock Award Plan, 
OpenSite Technologies, Inc. 1998 Stock Option Plan, Sales.Com, Inc. 1999 Equity Incentive Plan, Options Granted 
Outside of Sales.com, Inc. 1999 Equity Incentive Plan, SalesRepsOnline.com, Inc. 2000 Stock Option/Stock 
Issuance Plan, Scopus Technology, Inc. 1991 Stock Option Plan, Scopus Technology, Inc. 1995 Director Option 
Plan 
Form S-8  
333-131427 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan, Oracle Corporation Amended 
and Restated 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan, Oracle Corporation 1991 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended, Oracle 
Corporation Employee Stock Purchase Plan (1992), as amended and restated, ProfitLogic, Inc. Second Amended 
and Restated 1999 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended, Peoplesoft, Inc. Amended and Restated 1989 Stock Plan, 
Peoplesoft, Inc. 2001 Stock Plan, Peoplesoft, Inc. 2000 Nonstatutory Stock Option Plan, Peoplesoft, Inc. 1992 
Directors’ Stock Option Plan, Peoplesoft, Inc. 2003 Directors Stock Plan, Intrepid Systems, Inc. 1992 Stock Option 
Plan, J.D. Edwards & Company 1992 Incentive Stock Option Plan, J.D. Edwards & Company 1992 Nonqualified 
Stock Option Plan, J.D. Edwards & Company 1997 Equity Incentive Plan, J.D. Edwards & Company 2003 Equity 
Incentive Plan, Red Pepper Software Company 1993 Stock Option Plan, Skillsvillage 1999 Stock Plan, Teamscape 
Corporation 1998 Stock Plan, Trimark Technologies, Inc. 1993 Stock Option Plan, The Vantive Corporation 
Amended and Restated 1991 Stock Option Plan, The Vantive Corporation 1997 Nonstatutory Stock Option Plan, 
Oracle Corporation 1993 Deferred Compensation Plan, Oracle Corporation 401(k) Savings and Investment Plan 
Form S-4 
333-129139 

of our reports dated June 25, 2015, with respect to the consolidated financial statements and schedule of Oracle Corporation and the 
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting of Oracle Corporation included in this Annual Report (Form 10-K) of Oracle 
Corporation for the year ended May 31, 2015.  
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP 
San Jose, California  
June 25, 2015  

Exhibit 31.01 
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER PURSUANT TO  
EXCHANGE ACT RULE 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)  
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
I, Mark V. Hurd, certify that:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
1. 
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Oracle Corporation; 
2. 
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period 
covered by this report; 
3. 
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material 
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report; 
4. 
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have: 
  
a) 
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our 
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us 
by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared; 
  
b) 
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under 
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial 
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
  
c) 
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about 
the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such 
evaluation; and 
  
d) 
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s 
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is 
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and 
5. 
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial 
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the Finance and Audit Committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the 
equivalent functions): 
  
a) 
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are 
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and 
  
b) 
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s 
internal control over financial reporting. 
Date: June 25, 2015 
 
    By:    / S /    M ARK V. H URD 
 
 
 
Mark V. Hurd 
Chief Executive Officer and Director  
(Principal Executive Officer) 

Exhibit 31.02 
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE AND FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO  
EXCHANGE ACT RULE 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)  
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
I, Safra A. Catz, certify that:  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
1. 
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Oracle Corporation; 
2. 
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period 
covered by this report; 
3. 
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material 
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report; 
4. 
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as 
defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have: 
  
a) 
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our 
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us 
by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared; 
  
b) 
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under 
our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial 
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
  
c) 
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about 
the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such 
evaluation; and 
  
d) 
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s 
most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is 
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and 
5. 
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial 
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the Finance and Audit Committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the 
equivalent functions): 
  
a) 
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are 
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and 
  
b) 
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s 
internal control over financial reporting. 
Date: June 25, 2015 
 
    By:    / S /    S AFRA A. C ATZ 
 
 
 
Safra A. Catz 
Chief Executive Officer and Director  
(Principal Executive and Financial Officer) 

Exhibit 32.01 
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND  
PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350  
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the report on Form 10-K of Oracle Corporation for the purpose of 
complying with Rule 13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the 
United States Code.  
Safra A. Catz, the Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer) of Oracle Corporation, and Mark V. 
Hurd, the Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) of Oracle Corporation, each certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge:  
   
   
   
1. 
the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and 
2. 
the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of Oracle 
Corporation. 
Date: June 25, 2015 
 
    By:    / S /    S AFRA A. C ATZ 
 
 
 
Safra A. Catz 
Chief Executive Officer and Director  
(Principal Executive and Financial Officer) 
Date: June 25, 2015 
 
    By:    / S /    M ARK V. H URD 
 
 
 
Mark V. Hurd 
Chief Executive Officer and Director  
(Principal Executive Officer) 
